                                                    Edit Distance in Near-Linear Time: it’s a Constant Factor∗
                                                                     Alexandr Andoni                        Negev Shekel Nosatzki
                                                                   Columbia University                       Columbia University
                                                                 andoni@cs.columbia.edu                     ns3049@columbia.edu

                                                                                             July 18, 2022
arXiv:2005.07678v2 [cs.DS] 14 Jul 2022




                                                                                                Abstract
                                                   We present an algorithm for approximating the edit distance between two strings of length n in
                                               time n1+ up to a constant factor, for any  > 0. Our result completes a research direction set forth
                                               in the recent breakthrough paper [CDG+ 18], which showed the first constant-factor approximation
                                               algorithm with a (strongly) sub-quadratic running time. The recent results [KS20b, BR20] have shown
                                               near-linear time algorithms that obtain an additive approximation, near-linear in n (equivalently,
                                               constant-factor approximation when the edit distance value is close to n). In contrast, our algorithm
                                               obtains a constant-factor approximation in near-linear time for any input strings.
                                                   In contrast to prior algorithms, which are mostly recursing over smaller substrings, our algorithm
                                               gradually smoothes out the local contribution to the edit distance over progressively larger substrings.
                                               To accomplish this, we iteratively construct a distance oracle data structure for the metric of edit
                                               distance on all substrings of input strings, of length ni for i = 0, 1, . . . , 1/. The distance oracle
                                               approximates the edit distance over these substrings in a certain average sense, just enough to estimate
                                               the overall edit distance.




                                            ∗
                                              An extended abstract of this submission appeared in the Proceedings of the 61st Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations
                                         of Computer Science. Research supported in part by NSF grants (CCF-1617955 and CCF-1740833), and Simons Foundation
                                         (#491119). Also, this research was supported in part by a grant from the Columbia-IBM center for Blockchain and Data
                                         Transparency, and by JPMorgan Chase & Co. Any views or opinions expressed herein are solely those of the authors listed,
                                         and may differ from the views and opinions expressed by JPMorgan Chase & Co. or its affiliates.
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                                 2
  1.1 Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       2
  1.2 Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         3

2 Preliminaries: Setup and Notations                                                                           3
  2.1 Intervals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
  2.2 Interval distances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     4
  2.3 Operations on sets and the ∗ notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          4

3 Technical Overview                                                                                           4
  3.1 Prior work and main obstacles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          4
  3.2 Our high-level approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        6
  3.3 Interval matching algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        7
  3.4 Imperfect neighborhoods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       11
  3.5 The metrics adw . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       13

4 Top Level Algorithm                                                                                         15
  4.1 Main guarantees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       16
  4.2 Proof of Theorem 1.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17

5 Interval Matching Algorithm                                                                                 18
  5.1 Components of MatchStep: setup and notations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                19
  5.2 Components of MatchStep: main coloring procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                22
  5.3 MatchStep algorithm: main levels loop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           29

6 Correctness Analysis of the Interval Matching Algorithm                                                     30
  6.1 Bounding corruption growth per level: two key lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            32
  6.2 Proof of Lemma 6.1 from key correctness lemmas: corruption growth per level . . . . . .                 33

7 Proof of Key Correctness Lemmas 6.4, 6.5                                                                    39
  7.1 Controlling average ϕ corruption: proof of Lemma 6.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            41
  7.2 Controlling balance of colors: proof of Lemma 6.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         47

8 Runtime Complexity of the Interval Matching Algorithm                                                       53
  8.1 Sparsity of colors in colorings: proof of Lemma 6.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         53
  8.2 Algorithm runtime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       54

9 Alignment Distance Algorithm for ad: Proof of Theorem 4.3                                                   57
  9.1 Large distance algorithm: adw,w/γ metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          58
      9.1.1 Lower and upper bounds on Γ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             58
  9.2 Not large distance regime: adw,t for t ≤ w/γ 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        60
      9.2.1 Fast computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        61
      9.2.2 Lower bound on adw,t . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          61
  9.3 adw align-approximates ed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       62
  9.4 adw,c are metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     66

10 Fast Data Structures                                                                                       68


                                                       1
1     Introduction
Edit distance is a classic distance measure between sequences that takes into account the (mis)alignment
of strings. Formally, edit distance between two strings of length n over some alphabet Σ is the number
of insertions/deletions/substitutions of characters to transform one string into the other. Being of key
importance in several fields, such as computational biology and signal processing, computational problems
involving the edit distance were studied extensively.
    Computing edit distance is also a classic dynamic programming problem, with a quadratic run-time
solution. It has proven to be a poster challenge in a central theme in TCS: improving the run-time from
polynomial towards close(r) to linear. Despite significant research attempts over many decades, little
progress was obtained, with a O(n2 / log2 n) run-time algorithm [MP80] remaining the fastest one known
to date. See also the surveys of [Nav01] and [Sah08]. With the emergence of the fine-grained complexity
field, researchers crystallized the reason why beating quadratic-time is hard by connecting it to the Strong
Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH) [BI15] (and even more plausible conjectures [AHWW16]).
    Even before the above hardness results, researchers started considering faster algorithms that approxi-
                                     √
mate edit distance. A linear-time n-factor approximation follows immediately from the exact algorithm
of [Ukk85, Mye86, LMS98], which runs in time O(n + d2 ), where d is the edit distance between the
input strings. Subsequent research
                                 √
                                       improved the approximation factor, first to n3/7 [BJKK04], then to
n1/3+o(1) [BES06], and to 2Õ( log n) [AO12] (based on the `1 embedding of [OR07]). In the regime of
O(n1+ )-time algorithms, the best approximation is (log n)O(1/) [AKO10]. Predating some of this work
was the sublinear-time algorithm of [BEK+ 03] achieving n approximation when d is large.
    In a recent breakthrough, [CDG+ 18] showed that one can obtain constant-factor approximation in
O(n12/7 ) time. Subsequent developments [KS20b, BR20] give O(n1+ )-time algorithms for computing
edit distance up to an additive n1−g() term and f (1/)-factor approximation, for some non-decreasing
functions f, g, and any  > 0.
Our main result is a n1+ algorithm for computing the edit distance up to a constant approximation.
Theorem 1.1. For any  > 0, n ≥ 1, and alphabet Σ, there is a randomized algorithm that, given two
strings x, y ∈ Σn , approximates the edit distance between x and y in O(n1+ ) time up to f (1/)-factor
approximation, where f (1/) depends solely on .
   While we do not derive the function f (1/) explicitly, we note that it is doubly exponential in 1/.
We present a technical overview of our approach in Section 3, after setting up our notations in Section 2.
The proof of the main theorem will follow in subsequent sections, in particular the top-level algorithm
and its main guarantees are in Section 4.

1.1   Related work
A quantum algorithm for edit distance was introduced in [BEG+ 18]. Some of the basic elements of the
algorithmic approach are related to [CDG+ 18] (and the algorithm in this paper). Another recent related
paper is [GRS20], who obtain 3+ approximation in Õ(n1.6 ) time; independently, the first author obtained
a slightly worst time for the same approximation [And18]. Similarly, independently, [CDK19] and [And18]
extended the constant-factor edit distance algorithm from [CDG+ 18] to solve the text searching problem.
    Sublinear time algorithms have drawn renewed attention [GKS19, KS20a, BCR20, BCFN22, GKKS22];
see also earlier [BEK+ 03, BJKK04, AO12]. Another related line of work has been on computing edit
distance for the semi-random models of input [AK12, Kus19]. Parallel (MPC) algorithms were developed
in [BEG+ 18, HSS19].
    Progress on edit distance algorithms also inspired the first non-trivial algorithms for approximating
the longest common subsequence (LCS) [HSSS19, RSSS19, RS20, BCAD21], leading to a linear time,

                                                     2
no(1) -approximation algorithm [ANSS22, Nos21]. Also of note is [RS20] which shows that a O(1)-factor
approximation to edit distance implies a 2 − Ω(1) factor approximation to LCS over a binary alphabet
in (essentially) the same time.

1.2    Acknowledgements
We would like to thank FOCS and SICOMP anonymous reviewers for helpful comments and suggestions
that helped improve this paper.


2     Preliminaries: Setup and Notations
Fix a pair of strings (x, y) ∈ Σn × Σn for which we care to estimate the edit distance. We define edn (x, y)
as half the number of insertions/deletions to transform one string into the other. Note that the standard
edit distance (allowing substitutions) can be reduced to this case (see, e.g., [Tis08]). When length n is
clear from the context, we omit the subscript.
    Sw is the set of integer powers of 2 up to w: namely, Sw = {1, 2, 4, 8 . . . w} ∪ {1/2, 1/4 . . . 1/2n}.
    [n] denotes the set {1, 2, 3, . . . n} throughout the paper except where stated explicitly otherwise (no-
tably, in Section 9).
    When describing intuitive parts, we sometimes use O∗ (f (n)) to denote f (n) · nO() (where  is the
small constant from the algorithm).
    Finally, we use the standard notion of with high probability (whp), meaning with probability at least
1 − n−C for large enough constant C > 1.

2.1    Intervals
An interval is a substring x[i : j] , xi xi+1 . . . xj−1 , for i, j ∈ [n], where i ≤ j (i.e., starting at i and ending
at j − 1, of length j − i).
    For i ∈ [n], let Xi,w (Yi,w ) denote the interval of x (y) of length w starting at position i. Let Xw , Yw
the set of all such Xi,w and Yj,w strings respectively. We use Iw = Xw ∪ Yw to denote all x and y axis
intervals. When clear from context, we drop subscript w.
    By convention, if i 6∈ [1, n − w], we pad Xi /Yi with a default character, say, $. Also Y⊥,w is a string of
unique characters. In particular, for all distance functions τw (·, ·) on two length-w strings in this paper,
we define τw (Xi,w , Y⊥,w ) = w; e.g., edw (Xi,w , Y⊥,w ) = w.
    Usually, by I ∈ Iw we refer not only to the corresponding substring but also to the “meta-information”,
in particular the string it came from, start position, and length (e.g., for I = Xi,w , the meta-information
is x, i, w). This difference will be clear from context or stated explicitly.
    In particular, the notation I + j, for an interval I and integer j, represents the interval j positions to
the right; e.g., if I = Xi,w , then I + j = Xi+j,w .
Alignments. An alignment between x and y is a function π : [n] → [n] ∪ {⊥}, which is injective
and strictly                   −1
        P monotone on π ([n]). The set of all such alignments is called Π. Note that ed(x, y) =
minπ∈Π i∈[n] ed1 (xi , yπ(i) ) (recall that, by convention, ed1 (c, y⊥ ) = 1 for all c ∈ Σ).
   It is convenient for us to think of π as function from I → I, via the following extension. For a given
input alignment π : X → Y ∪ {⊥}, its extension π     b : I → I ∪ {⊥} is:
                                                   (
                                                    π[I]     I∈X
                                            π
                                            b[I] =    −1
                                                                     ,
                                                    π [I] I ∈ Y




                                                          3
where π                             b[Yj,w ] means Xπ−1 (j),w , with π −1 (j) = ⊥ if there’s no i with π(i) = j.
       b[Xi,w ] means Yπ(i),w , and π
Throughout this paper, we overload notation to use π for the extension π        b as well. We also define ← −(i)
                                                                                                            π
as the minimum π(j), j ≥ i, which is defined (6= ⊥).
    Finally, we also define π(i) , i when i < 1 and i > n for convenience.

2.2     Interval distances
Our algorithms will use distances/metrics over intervals in Iw . One important instance is the alignment
distance, denoted adw (·, ·). At a high level, adw (·, ·) is a distance metric that approximates edit distance
on length-w intervals. We discuss ad(·, ·) metric in Section 4 as well as 9.
Definition 2.1 (Neighborhood). Fix c ≥ 0 and I ∈ Iw . The c-neighborhood of I is the set Nc (I) =
{J ∈ Iw | ad(I, J) ≤ c}, i.e. all x and y intervals which are c-close to I in terms of their alignment
distance.
Definition 2.2 (Ball of intervals). A ball of intervals is a set of consecutive intervals in either Xw or Yw
(i.e., it’s a ball in the metric where distance between Xi and Xj is |i − j|). The smallest enclosing ball of
a set S is the minimal ball B ⊇ S.

Average approximation for an optimal alignment. A common theme in our algorithm is con-
structing metrics on Iw approximating edw in a certain “average sense”. In particular, this differs from
the standard notion of approximation in that the upper bound holds only on average, and for an optimal
alignment π ∈ Π. Formally, we define:
Definition 2.3 (Align-approximation). Fix space (Iw , d) over Iw (which is often a metric space, but
need not be). We say d T -align-approximates ed if the following holds:
    1. For all I, J ∈ Iw : d(I, J) ≥ edw (I, J).

    2. minπ∈Π i∈[n] w1 d(Xi , Yπ(i) ) ≤ T · ed(x, y).
               P


2.3     Operations on sets and the ∗ notation
By convention, applying numerical functions to a set refers to the sum over all set items; e.g., f (S) =
P
   i∈S f (i). When applying set operators on other sets, we use the union; e.g., π(S) = ∪I∈S π(I) and
Nc (S) = ∪I∈S Nc (I). Abusing notation, we use f (S) even when S is not fully contained in the domain of
f — in which case, we simply ignore elements outside the domain. Any exception to the above will be
clearly specified.
    We also use the notation ∗ as argument of a function, by which we mean a vector of all possible
entries. E.g., f (∗) is a vector of f (i) for i ranging over the domain of f (usually clear from the context).
Similarly, f (∗R ) means a vector of f (i) for i satisfying property R. Overloading notation, sometimes
f (∗R ) will also mean a vector of f (i) for all i in the domain, with coordinates i ∈/ R being zeroed-out.


3     Technical Overview
3.1     Prior work and main obstacles
As our natural starting point is the breakthrough O(n12/7 )-time algorithm of [CDG+ 18] (and related [BEG+ 18]),
we first describe their core ideas as well as the challenges to obtaining a near-linear time algorithm. In
particular, we highlight two of their enabling ideas. At a basic level, their algorithm computes edit dis-
tance edn (x, y) by computing edw between various length-w intervals (substrings) of x, y recursively, and

                                                        4
then uses edit-distance-like dynamic programming on intervals to put them back together. The main
algorithmic thrust is to reduce the number of recursive edw computations: e.g., if the intervals are of
length w, and we only consider non-overlapping intervals, there are still n/w × n/w calls to edw , each
taking at best Ω(w) time. Hence, [CDG+ 18] employ two ideas to do this efficiently: 1) use the triangle
inequality to deduce distance between pairs of intervals for which we do not directly estimate edw , 2) two
nearby x-intervals (e.g., consecutive) are likely to be matched into two nearby y-intervals (also consecu-
tive) under the optimal edit distance alignment π. (The earlier quantum result [BEG+ 18] employed the
first idea already, but relied on a quantum component instead of the second idea.) Indeed, these ideas
are enough to reduce the number of recursive calls from (n/w)2 to ≈ (n/w)1.5 .
     One big challenge in the above is that, in general, one has to consider all, overlapping intervals from
x, y, of which there are n — since, in an optimal edn alignment, an x-interval might have to match to a y-
interval whose start position is far from an integer multiple of w. An alternative perspective is that if one
considers only a restricted set of interval start positions, say every s ≤ w positions in y, then one obtains
an extra additive error of about s · n/w from the “rounding” of start positions in y. That’s the reason that
a bound of (n/w)1.5 recursive calls did not transform into n1.5 runtime in [CDG+ 18]: to compute edit
distance when ed < n1−Ω(1) , they employ a standard (exact) Õ(n + ed2 (x, y)) algorithm [Ukk85, Mye86].
     Recent improvements by [KS20b, BR20] showed how to reduce the number of recursive calls to ≈ n/w,
but some fundamental obstacles remained. The linear number of recursive calls was leveraged to obtain
near-linear time but with an additive approximation only: when ed(x, y) ≥ n1−δ , the overall runtime is
n1+f (δ) for some increasing function f .
     In particular, in addition to the aforementioned challenge, a new challenge arose: to be able to reduce
to near-linear number of recursive edw calls, the algorithms from [KS20b, BR20] might miss a large
fraction of “correct” matches. In particular this fraction is ≈ n−δ , which results in an additive error of
                                                    √
≈ n1−δ . To put this into perspective, for w = n, if we allow an additive error n1−δ , then it suffices
to analyze b = n0.5+O(δ) intervals (which barely overlap) and misclassify b · n−δ of them. We use the
following example to showcase the challenges:

A running example illustrating the challenges
Consider an instance where ∆ = n−0.01 fraction of intervals in Xw are “sparse” — have a single
cheap match in Yw — and the rest of the intervals are dense (they are close to many other intervals).
Assume further that such sparse intervals are spread around in multiple “sparse sections” (sequences of
consecutive sparse intervals).

    Note that if we can afford large additive errors, we can simply ignore all these sparse intervals (cer-
tifying them at max cost w) and output the distance based on the dense intervals only, with at most
n∆ = n0.99 additive approximation. To avoid this, one must first identify some sparse intervals (since
the dense intervals do not provide sufficient information about the sparse sections). Even if we manage
to find some of the sparse intervals efficiently, we still need to apply knowledge of the location of such
intervals to deduce information on other intervals which might be in completely different areas in the
string. We will return to this example later.
    Below we describe the high-level approach to our algorithm, including how we overcome these obsta-
cles. We note that, while our algorithm is based on the two key ideas from [CDG+ 18], the high-level
algorithm departs from the general approach undertaken in [CDG+ 18, KS20b, BR20]. That said, some
algorithmic steps are similar to those developed in [KS20b, BR20]. We do not rely on previous results
(for any distance regime) such as [Ukk85].




                                                     5
3.2   Our high-level approach
While there are many ideas going in overcoming the above challenges, one common theme is averaging
over the local proximity of intervals. In particular, the algorithm proceeds by, and analyzes over, “average
characteristics” of various intervals of x, y, in a “smooth” way. For example decisions for a fixed interval
I ∈ Iw , such as whether something is close, or something is matched, are done by considering the statistics
collected on nearby intervals (to the left/right of I in the corresponding string). While we expand on our
technical ideas below, this is the guiding principle to keep in mind.
     Addressing the first challenge, we consider intervals (of fixed length w) at all n starting positions,
i.e., the entire set Iw . Note that recursion becomes prohibitive: we can’t perform even n edit distance
evaluations each taking Ω(w) time (w is set to be ≈ n1− ). Instead, our top-level algorithm iterates
bottom–up over all interval lengths w = γ, γ 2 , . . . n, where γ = n , and for each w computes a good-
enough approximation to the entire metric (Iw , edw ). Recall that Iw = Xw ∪ Yw consists of all w-length
intervals (substrings); i.e., |Iw | = 2n. The metric, termed Dw (·, ·), will be accessible via a distance oracle
(fast data structure), with n query time, and will approximate the distance between most of the pairs
(an x-interval, y-interval) that participate in an optimal alignment in an average sense. Specifically, for
π ranging over all alignments, we will have that minπ w1 Dw (Xi,w , Yπ[i],w ) = Θ(ed(x, y)). Formally, we say
Dw O(1)-align-approximates ed (see Def. 2.3).
     In each iteration, we build Dw using Dw0 , where w0 = w/γ. Conceptually we do so in two phases.
First, we build another metric on w-length strings, (Iw , adw ), accessible via a fast distance oracle, that
uses γ O(1) = nO() time and Dw0 oracle calls. Crucially, adw will similarly align-approximate ed. Second,
equipped with a fast oracle for adw (itself using Dw0 ), we build an “efficient representation” for the entire
metric (Iw , adw ), while using only n1+O() calls to adw oracle. Naturally, this “efficient representation”
will not be able to capture the entire adw metric (that would require  n query complexity), but it will
capture just enough to preserve the edit distance between x and y—again, formally, align-approximate
ed. Then we build an efficient distance oracle for this efficient representation, which will yield the
desired metric Dw . Note that the final approximation to ed(x, y) is computed by (essentially) querying
Dn (X1,n , Y1,n ).
     In particular, the “efficient representation” of adw is a weighted graph Gw with vertex set Iw and n1+
edges, such that the shortest path between I, J ∈ Iw approximates adw (I, J), again, in an average sense
for an optimal alignment. In particular, the shortest path distance is non-contracting, and non-expanding
for interval pairs that “matter”, i.e., which are part of the optimal alignment π corresponding to ed(x, y).
An edge (I, J) of the graph Gw will always correspond to an explicit call to adw (I, J); and the main
question in constructing Gw is deciding which n1+ pairs to compute adw for.
     Once we have the graph Gw , we build a fast distance oracle data structure on it to obtain the metric
Dw . In particular, our fast distance oracle is merely an embedding of the shortest path metric on Gw
into `d∞ , where d = |I| , incurring an approximation of O(1/), via [Mat96]. We note that we cannot use
some other common distance oracle, such as, e.g., [TZ05, Che14], because they do not guarantee that
the resulting output is actually a metric, and in particular, that it satisfies the triangle inequality, which
is crucial for us (as mentioned above). We remark that this particular step is somewhat reminiscent of
the approach from [AO12], who similarly build an efficient representation for the metric (Iw , edw ) using
metric embeddings. However, the similarity ends here: first [AO12] used Bourgain’s embedding into `1 ,
which incurs Θ(log n) distortion, and second, more importantly, the construction of Gw was altogether
different (incurring a much higher approximation).
     Computing the graph Gw itself is the most algorithmically novel part of our approach, and is termed
Interval Matching Algorithm, as it corresponds to matching intervals that are close in adw distance. This
algorithmic part should be thought of as the analogue of the algorithm deciding for which pairs of intervals
to (recursively) estimate the edit distance in [CDG+ 18].


                                                       6
    We sketch the Interval Matching Algorithm next in this technical overview. We also sketch how to
compute the adw distance in nO() time, which presents its own new challenges, especially to guarantee
its metric properties.

3.3    Interval matching algorithm
The main task here is to efficiently compute a graph Gw that approximates adw , in an average sense over
an optimal alignment π. Specifically, to generate Gw , we iterate over all costs c ∈ Sw (powers of 2), and
for each such cost, we then generate a (sub-)graph Gw,c , with edges of weight Θ(c). The following is the
main guarantee: for any fixed alignment π, for any pair (I, π[I]) ∈ Iw2 at a distance ad(I, π[I]) ≤ c, we
generate a 1- or 2-hop path for it in Gw,c —except for O(kc ) such pairs (I, π[I]) where kc is the number
of pairs with ad(I, π[I]) > c (i.e., the “error” increases by at most a constant factor). The union1 of such
graphs Gw,c yields the final graph Gw . Below we focus on a single scale graph Gw,c , which is supposed
to capture nearly all pairs (I, π[I]) where adw (I, π[I]) ≤ c. We refer to such a pair as a π-matchable pair
(I, π[I]).
    At its core, our algorithm can be thought of as a partitioning algorithm, where we partition Iw into
sets of intervals, such that for nearly all π-matchable pairs (I, π[I]), both intervals belong to the same set.
We start with a single set of intervals and we iteratively partition the set into progressively more refined
partitions (consisting of smaller parts), with the goal of keeping π-matchable pairs I, π[I] together. (This
algorithm will use a significant amount of notation, and, while this high-level overview will mention only
a fraction of them, the reader may refer to the Table 2 in Sec. 6 for some important definitions and
formulas.)
    In particular, the matching algorithm proceeds in ≈ 1/ steps. In each step t, for λ = n , we generate
λ parts, each of size . n/λt . To construct a part, we sample a random interval A, termed anchor, and
  t

estimate adw (A, I) for all other intervals I in its part, generating a cluster of intervals at distance O(c)
from the anchor. The main desideratum is that the two intervals from a π-matchable pair I, π[I] are
either both close to A or both far from A, and hence always remain together (this is related to the triangle
inequality idea from [CDG+ 18]). However, this cannot be guaranteed, and ensuring this desideratum is a
major challenge for us, which we will address later. For now, in order to build intuition, we first develop
our ideas under the following the assumption, that the desideratum holds:

                                 Perfect Neighborhood Assumption (PNA):
               any two intervals are at distance either ≤ c or ω(c); hence NO(c) (I) = Nc (I).

    Every anchor will generate precisely one part, of target size. Notice that if the cluster is sufficiently
large (i.e., & n/λt ), we are basically done, and in fact, is where our algorithm “converges” (as will
be described later). Otherwise, we use the cluster to construct one part (set) by taking the clustered
intervals together with their local extensions: intervals around the clustered intervals (to the left/right of
the clustered ones). The parameters are set up such that the resulting part has size . n/λt . Note that
the iterative nature of the process helps ensure the runtime: As the size of parts decreases with step t,
we can afford to use more anchors. In particular, at step t, we start with λt−1 partitions, each of size
about n/λt−1 , and hence, for each of λt anchors, we need to estimate ad distance to n/λt−1 intervals (in
its part), for an overall of nλ distance computations.
    A direct implementation of partitions as above however runs in various issues, yielding additive errors.
In particular, it only guarantees to correctly partition “any fixed π-matchable pair with some probability”;
instead of the needed “with some probability, all except a few π-matchable pairs are partitioned correctly”
   1
    When there are multiple edges (I, J) from different c’s, we naturally take the minimum-weight edge—i.e., the smallest
distance certificate.



                                                           7
                                 Figure 1: High Level Algorithm Scheme (Section 4)


(akin to the “for each” vs “for all” guarantees). For the latter goal, bounding the “except a few” so that
it’s only a O(1)-factor approximation, we use the notion of corruption, defined later.

Colorings. To describe a partition, we use the slightly generalized concept of a coloring: a coloring κ
is a mapping from each interval I ∈ I to a distribution of colors in a color-set ν, where a fixed color
should be thought of as a part. We denote the mapping by µκ : I × ν → [0, 1]. For each interval I, we
require kµκ (I, ∗)k1 = 1, i.e., we think of the interval I as being split into fractions each assigned to a
part: fraction µκ (I, χ) > 0 is assigned to color χ. While under the “perfect neighborhood assumption”,
standard partitions are sufficient (i.e., µκ ∈ {0, 1})), fractional colorings will be crucial for removing the
assumption later.
    Most of the colors χ ∈ ν correspond to a part constructed from a fixed anchor (i.e., its cluster of
intervals together with the local extension) with the exception of two special “colors”: ν = [λt ] ∪ {⊥, u}.
First, the color ⊥ that corresponds to the already-matched intervals, i.e., intervals for which we’ve already
added a short path to their π-match in the graph Gw,c (typically “dense” intervals that have already
“converged”). Second, the u-color (“uncolored”) consists of intervals which so far have failed to be
captured in a part and remain “tbd” (here, the progress will be that such intervals gain a certain “sparsity”
properties, improving the chances to be colored later).

Coloring construction via potentials. To construct a new, more refined step-t coloring (from the
step-(t − 1) coloring), our algorithm assigns potential scores to clustered intervals. Using these potential
scores, we assign colors2 to other nearby intervals in their proximity, as suggested above. The main
intuition is that a π-matchable pair (I, π[I]) typically has a large set of other π-matchable (J, π[J]) in its
respective proximity (i.e., to the left/right).
    How large of a “proximity” a cluster can color depends on the size of the ad-neighborhood of A (its
  2
      We’ll often just use the verb “color” to describe that process.



                                                                8
cluster size). To quantify this, we introduce the notion of density of an interval I of color χ, termed
d(I, χ): the measure µ of its ad-neighborhood Nc (I) that share the color χ. If an interval I (and hence
its aligned π[I]) is “dense” (large Nc ), then we have a higher probability to cluster such a pair to an
anchor; but we can only afford a small extension for each one (i.e., each clustered interval is used to color
few other proximal intervals). In contrast, “sparse” matches will be clustered with a small probability,
but can be used to generate large extensions in their proximity.
    In particular, to compute the new step-t coloring, we color the intervals gradually in levels, indexed
by l = 0, 1, . . . , 1/, each level taking care of a density scale. In each level l, we define potentials φ and ϕ.
                                                                                               n
First, for each anchor A corresponding to color χ, we allocate potential φ(I, χ) ≈ d·λ           t to each clustered
                                                                        3
interval I (i.e., I at distance O(c) from A in the same “part” as A) of density d. Next, we define a
derivative potential ϕ(∗, χ) by splitting the allocated potential φ(I, χ) across the u-colored intervals in
a proximity ball of radius ζ = ζ(l) ≈ nl around each clustered interval I. At the end of each level, we
augment µκ (I) by replacing some of the u-color mass with other colors, proportional to the potential
vector ϕ(I, ∗) (to be discussed further later). Overall, the following is a high-level diagram of algorithm
computation from a (l − 1)-level coloring κ to an “amended” l-level coloring κ̂ (all at the same step t):

               clustering           extension: splitting in the proximity ball        minhash (under PNA)
        µκ    −−−−−−→       φκ    −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→                     ϕκ   −−−−−−−−−−−−−−→       µκ̂

    A more detailed diagram and a step-by-step coloring example (both require more detailed technical
setup) are presented, respectively, in Section 5, Figure 2 and Figure 3.
    In each level l ≥ 1, our goal is to color all intervals of density in a certain range [n− , 1] · dl , where
          t
dl ≈ n/λ
       βl
            , for β = n , as long as there are sufficiently many intervals of that density range overall4 . At
level l = 0, corresponding to the highest density for step t, we generate a 2-hop path for each pair of
intervals in A’s cluster by “planting a star” in G; i.e., adding an edge between the anchor A and each
corresponding clustered interval I. Then, we mark (fraction of) I as “already-matched” with the color
⊥. In other levels, we color intervals found through extensions of clusters using ϕ.
    The remaining case — “sparse” intervals that we did not yet color via an anchor cluster extension as
above — will be addressed by the careful use of u-color, described next. We remark that, at the end of
step t, there may be left some pairs of small densities which we still could not color, and are left u-colored,
and we will show a bound on those as well. We now expand on the latter.

Controlling sparse sections: the u-color. In order to carry out the level-by-level coloring, we use
the special color u (for un-colored). This color should be thought of as a “part” in the partition as well.
At the beginning of a step, at level l = 0, all (fractions of) intervals which are not “already-matched” are
assigned the u color, and (fractions of) intervals are moved from u-color to “standard” colors ∈ [λt ] as
levels progress. The u-color helps with three aspects. First, it provides a way to track sparse intervals
which cannot yet be colored and hence left pending for future levels. Second, if some sparse sections of
intervals are never colored in the current step, then these intervals will remain u-colored (and hence, at
the end of the current step, form a part that is also bounded in size). Third, and more nuanced, it allows
us to “group together” sparse sections of intervals that are far apart (in their starting index).
    In particular, such grouping of far intervals is done using the aforementioned “proximity balls”,
formally defined via Λ-balls: Λζκ (I) is the smallest interval ball around I containing ζ ≈ β l u-colored
`1 -mass on both left and right of I. Note that Λ-balls can contain a significantly larger set of intervals
than ζ (if the in-between intervals are mostly colored 6= u). At the same time, the ball contains at
most 2ζ mass of u-colored intervals, meaning that the potential φ(I) is distributed to a mass µ ≤ 2ζ
   3
    More precisely, to the fraction of I that shares a specific sampled color χ with A.
   4
    Notice there can be multiple matches in a ball, hence the quantity we care about (and bound) is the relative density
which is the ratio between “global” and ”local” densities.


                                                              9
of intervals, ensuring that, were I to be “corrupted” (e.g., π[I] = ⊥, or the pair (I, π[I]) happens to be
already separated), we will incur only an O(1) factor of total corrupted potential to ϕ’s of intervals in the
Λ-ball of I.
    To showcase the use of u-color, consider again the running example introduced in Section 3.1. In the
early steps t, our algorithm will first color the dense intervals (i.e., via clustering/proximity balls, at lower
levels l), leaving the sparse sections mostly unaffected, all colored in u (during such early steps, the dense
intervals are partitioned into progressively smaller parts while most of the sparse ones remain u-colored).
Now consider a step t where the part sizes so far are . n/λt−1 ≈ ∆n and we sample & 1/∆ anchors. At
the lower levels l, the dense intervals will be partitioned further (continuing the process from the previous
steps) and assigned a color χ ∈ [λt ]. However, when we reach the high levels l, and ζ ≈ β l = nl is close
to ∆n, some fraction of the sparse intervals will be clustered. Furthermore, since at that point the dense
intervals are already colored (and have little u-color), the Λ-balls around the clustered sparse intervals
will be wide and cover most of the u-colored sparse intervals. That allows us to finally partition the
sparse intervals into smaller parts as well.

Keeping track of errors in analysis: Corruption. To measure and bound errors, in particular,
π-matched interval that are separated, we use a formal notion of corruption. First we define what it
means for a (interval, color) pair to be corrupted. Below, F  1 is a “distortion” factor (used for the
non-PNA case), which one can think of being F = 2 for now.

Definition 3.1 (Corrupted pairs). Fix alignment π ∈ Π, interval I ∈ I, distortion F ≥ 1, and graph G
on I. For a color χ ∈ ν, we say (I, χ) is a (F, π, G, c, κ)-corrupted pair if any of the following holds:
  1. π[I] = ⊥;
  2. ad(I, π[I]) > c;
  3. χ 6= ⊥ and µκ (I, χ) > F · µκ (π[I], χ); or
  4. χ = ⊥ and (I, π[I]) are at hop-distance > 2 in G.

   For each interval I ∈ I, we also define corruption parameter ξFκ,π,G,c (I) ∈ [0, 1] as follows:

                             ξFκ,π,G,c (I) =
                                                               X
                                                                                       µκ (I, χ).            (1)
                                               χ:(I,χ) is (F,π,G,c,κ)-corrupted pair

     In particular, an interval I is fully corrupted (in a coloring κ) if it does not have its π-matchable
counterpart; and otherwise I is corrupted by the total `1 color-mass of µκ (I, ∗) where there is insufficient
corresponding mass in µκ (π[I], ∗) (intuitively, the distribution of colors is too different). While our
statements hold for any alignment in Π, we only care about a fixed optimal alignment π, a single graph
G = Gw,c and a fixed cost c. Hence, for ease of exposition, we say I is F -corrupted and the corruption is
ξFκ (I) , ξFκ,π,G,c (I). Our main goal is to bound the total corruption ξFκ , ξFκ (I), and in particular show
it grows by at most a constant factor in any level/step. Our algorithm runs for a constant number of
levels/steps, and hence finishes with corruption which is proportional to the number of intervals without
a π-matchable counterpart (starting corruption), upper-bounded by O( wc · ed(x, y)). Also, at the end of
the interval matching algorithm, all intervals are “already matched”, i.e., all mass is on µκ (I, ⊥), and
hence the un-corrupted intervals have a 2-hop path to their π-match.
     To bound the corruption growth, we also introduce the parameter ρ(I), which measures the “local
amount of corruption” of an u-colored interval, based on the nearby corrupted intervals. In particular,
ρ(I) is defined for a Λ-ball around I as the ratio of the corruption to the u-mass inside the Λ-ball (formally
defined in Section 6.1). One can observe that for any fixed ζ radius of Λ, the sum of ρ over u-colored
intervals is proportional to the total sum of corruption.



                                                             10
Completing the algorithm under the perfect neighborhoods assumption (PNA). Once we
compute the palettes ϕ of all intervals (as a function of the sampled anchors), we then use them to
update µ for the next level. For illustrative purposes, we now complete the algorithm under the PNA,
although our general algorithm will differ significantly from the PNA one. Recall that under PNA, all
intervals are either at ad-distance ≤ c or  c, and hence the intervals form equivalence classes according
to their c-neighborhood.
    Under PNA, we are guaranteed that the uncorrupted π-matchable pairs will get similar potentials
—in fact, φ(I) and φ(π[I]) are precisely equal (and non-zero whenever they are clustered by an anchor).
More importantly, if we consider the ϕ palettes of I, π[I], which gather the contributions from clusters
containing I, π[I] in their proximity ball, then one can prove that (the average) `1 distance between the
two ϕ palettes is bounded as a function of the “local corruption”, namely ρ(I) and ρ(π[I]).
    Using the `1 -distance property of ϕ, we can assign a single color χ ∈ ν to each interval (i.e., µκ (I, ∗)
has support one), obtaining disjoint partitions. To generate such a color (for each interval) we can use
a random weighted min-wise hash function h ∼ H for Rν (say, using [Cha02]) and use it to partition
the vectors ϕ(I, ∗) of all u-colored intervals I. Specifically, sample a minhash h : Rν → ν and set the
updated coloring to be µκb (I, h(ϕ(I))) ← 1 (the rest are 0) for all I for which µκ (I, u) = 1 at the end of
the previous level.
    For a glimpse of the analysis, recall that our overall goal is to make each part of the partition smaller
(for runtime complexity) with only a constant-factor corruption growth (for correctness); also, we care
only to partition areas with large mass of intervals with density in some range [n− , 1] · dl (in a fixed
level l). To control the size of parts, we cannot afford to assign the same color to too many intervals;
hence we drop from ϕ all colors of potential below some fixed threshold o(n− ), ensuring that each color
                                            1+O()
appears in the ϕ palettes of at most n λt−1 intervals. For bounding the corruption, we note that minhash
gives us a bound proportional to the Jaccard distance between ϕ(I) and ϕ(π[I]), while the ρ bound we
have is in `1 distance. Showing these bounds are close is where the u-color plays a central role. First,
consider an interval I such that Ω() portion of its proximity ball Λ is composed of intervals of density
∈ [n− , 1] · dl , where Λ is of radius ζ. Then the palette ϕ(I) has `1 mass Ω() whp after thresholding since:
1) some intervals in Λ will be clustered whp (they are dense enough), and 2) once clustered, the generated
potential is large enough to pass the threshold (since they are not too dense). In this case, we are done
(without using the color u): the Jaccard distance is proportional to the `1 distance between ϕ(I) and
ϕ(π[I]), and hence the probability of separating I from π[I] is bounded by the “local corruption” (which
overall is bounded by the total corruption). Second, consider the case when 1 − o() portion of intervals
in the Λ ball are outside the aforementioned density range. Then we add mass to ϕ(·, u) of intervals in
the ball Λ, filling it up to reach kϕ(I)k1 = Ω() — this will increase the probability that such intervals
are mapped (again) to u (this increases corruption by a factor ≤ 2). This process also guarantees Λ balls
                                                                                          t
at the next level l have (1 − o(l)) · ζ mass of sparse intervals, i.e., of density . n/λ
                                                                                       βl
                                                                                            . One can then prove
that, after running this process for ≈ 1/ levels, the set of intervals corresponding to each color, including
u, is of size . n/λt only.
    Since we could not directly extend the minhash construction to the general non-PNA case, we do not
present this construction in the paper, but rather use it as an intuition for its “robust” version as we
describe next.

3.4   Imperfect neighborhoods
To eliminate the perfect neighborhood assumption (PNA), we must rely on the weaker form of transitivity
instead, from the triangle inequality: Nc (I) ⊆ N2c (J) ⊆ N3c (I) for any J ∈ Nc (I). Note that the usual
ideas to deal with such “weaker transitivity” do not seem applicable here. For instance, if we pick
the threshold of “close” in the cluster construction to be uniformly random ∈ [c, O(c)], there’s still a

                                                      11
constant probability of separating I from π[I]. One could instead apply the more nuanced metric random
partitions, such as from [MN07], which would partition the metric (Iw , adw ) (thus putting us back into
the perfect neighborhood assumption), with the probability of I, π[I] ending up in the same part being
≥ n− — which has been useful in other contexts by repeating such partition ≈ n times. However,
such a process results in a random partition retaining only n1− π-matched pairs, which is not enough to
reconstruct even those matched pairs (intuitively, the strings are “too corrupted”, as if the edit distance
is (1 − o(1)) · n), making it inapplicable for our algorithm (here again, this challenge would be more
manageable if additive approximation were allowed). Overall, dealing with imperfect neighborhoods
proved to be a substantial challenge for us, and we develop several first-of-a-kind tools specifically to deal
with it.
     Eventually, we still sample a cost ci from some ordered set Ec = {c1 , c2 , . . .} ⊂ [c, O(c)]. Since we
want that the cost ci satisfies that Nci (Nci (I)) ⊆ Nci+1 (I), we set Ec of costs to be exponentially-growing,
i.e., ci = Θ(c) · 3i . The formal definition is in Section 5.

Distortion Resilient Distance. Relying purely on triangle inequality forces us to assign somewhat
different potential scores to I and π[I], hence we will quantify the ratio between the two, referring to it
as “distortion”.
    While it may be tempting to try to keep the distortion to a constant, it turns out one cannot do that
without introducing super-constant factor corruption growth (number of pairs with a large distortion),
which is prohibitive for us. To control corruption, we allow the distortion (i.e., the multiplicative dif-
ference) between φ(I) and φ(π[I]) for π-matchable pairs can be as high as nα for some small constant
α > 0. However, such a distortion makes it impossible to obtain a bound on `1 distance between ϕ’s of
a π-match, which is proportional to ρ. Instead, we deal with such distortion by employing a distortion
resilient (robust) version of `1 .
Definition 3.2. Fix p, q ∈ Rk+ . We define the F -distortion resilient distance,
                                                        X
                                         ddF (p, q) =         pi
                                                            i:pi >F ·qi
.
    This function allows us to define and control corruption of (interval, color) pairs by differentiating
distortion (which captures multiplicative errors) from corruption (which captures additive ones). As
part of our analysis, we will show several basic properties of the dd distance and develop dd-preserving
soft-transformations, which will replace the hard thresholds from the minhash construction. Intuitively,
dd replaces the use of the `1 /Jaccard metric on the vectors φ and ϕ, which was a key enabler for using
minhash under PNA. However, dd is not a metric in any reasonable sense (it’s not even symmetric),
rendering the minhash construction obsolete (e.g., it is unreasonable to expect any kind of LSH under
dd).

Assigning potential to (interval, color) pairs. Since maintaining equivalence classes is essential for
our construction, we analyze pairs of interval and colors in I × ν (which, combinatorially, can be thought
of as “fractions of intervals”). Thus, when we increase the φ-potential of a clustered pair (I, χ0 ), we do
so proportionally to its µ mass, meaning we set the potential to ≈ µ(I, χ0 ) d·λ n
                                                                                   t . Similarly, splitting the φ
potential to u-colored-pairs in Λ balls (i.e., assigning ϕ) is done in a pro-rated fashion, weighted according
to respective µ(·, u) masses.

Assigning u potential: pivot sampling. Having so far discussed assigning of the non-u colors in ϕ of
(fractions of) intervals, we now discuss how to assign u-color in ϕκ and, eventually, amended coloring µκb .
It may be tempting to merely subtract the assigned fraction of non-u-color from the u-color mass, but

                                                       12
this would result in additive errors (for the color u), while dd only allows for multiplicative distortion.
In particular, we need u colors to agree up to a fixed distortion as well (to avoid more corruption),
and hence we compute the new u-color mass directly, via a different technique for explicitly measuring
sparseness (which is the central purpose of u-color). To accomplish this measurement, we developed a
procedure called pivot sampling, which somewhat resembles the way we assign potentials for the non-u
colors. First, we downsample I × ν into a smaller set of pivots V. Second, we approximate the density
of each pivot in V, for each possible cost in Ec , thus generating θ-potential scores for each pivot. Third
and last, such θ potential is split among the intervals in a Λ-ball in a similar fashion to how we split φ,
generating ϕ(·, u) potentials to intervals in sparse areas. This rather involved process, specific to dealing
with imperfect neighborhoods, requires much care to be able to control: (1) corruption of u-colors; (2)
balance of palettes ϕ (as we describe next); (3) sparsity guarantees for u-color (part) at the end of the
step t; and (4) computational efficiency of such sampling mechanism.

Amending a coloring in a level, using ϕ. While dd is a convenient analytical tool for bounding
corruption, it lacks the basic properties to allow coordinated sampling between π-matchable pairs. Instead
of sampling a color from ϕ(I, ∗) (as was done under PNA), we add all colors in ϕ(I, ∗) to the amended
coloring µκb (I, ∗). To maintain a distribution of colors, we first combine ϕ with pre-existing non-u-colors
in µ, and then normalize to have `1 -mass of µκ (I, u), i.e., what “remains to be colored”, thus ensuring that
the overall amended µκ̂ (I, ∗) is a distribution. As in the PNA case, we need to bound extra corruption
from normalization by ensuring that the palettes ϕ have constant norms. While this analysis for the
PNA solution is immediate (by construction), here, instead, we employ several combinatorial arguments
that analyze mass of pairs with certain density over certain set of costs, eventually showing that in each
level, we either add sufficient regular colors (corresponding to anchors/clusters) or u-colors to all intervals
while maintaining guarantees (1)–(4) above.

Controlling the growth of distortion. Our arguments require that throughout the matching phase,
the dd distortion F is bounded by no() (in particular, to maintain control over the aforementioned soft-
transformations). Many of our algorithmic steps generate extra distortion. To control both distortion
(multiplicative error) and corruption (additive error), we parametrize maximum distortion F = F (t, l) for
each step/level a priori, and bound corruption ξFκ at each step/level using the pre-determined distortion
parameter F = F (t, l). The final approximation factor is a function of the maximum cost in 1c Ec (which
is further determined by the “base distortion” F (1, 0) = nα ), together with the corruption factor we show
in each step. At the end of the day, a distortion F bounded by no() allows us to carry out the above
arguments (i.e., some of the above arguments can only work under small distortion F ).

3.5      The metrics adw
We now briefly discuss the algorithm for computing the adw (I, J) distance, using oracle calls to Dw/γ
metric. This metric is used to compute distances when building the graph Gw , in the Interval Matching
algorithm. Note that the latter makes n1+O() oracle calls to ad, and hence the algorithm has to run in
time nO() = poly(γ).
    Intuitively, adw (I, J) is meant to capture the following distance, which should be thought of as an
extension of the edit distance over an alphabet with the metric (Iw0 , Dw0 ) where w0 = w/γ:5
                                           X
                                               1
                                      min      w0 Dw (I + i, J + π(i)),
                                                    0
                                                π
                                                    i∈[w]

where π ranges over all alignments of indexes of I to indexes of J. One can show that essentially, if
  5
      I + i means the interval starting i positions to the right of the start of I.


                                                                 13
D(I, J) = ed(I, J), then, for I = Xi,w , J = Yj,w , the above distance is between Ω(ed(Xi,w , Yj,w )) and
O(ed(Xi,2w , Yj,2w )).6
    However, this distance function is hard to compute fast: not only it is as hard as computing edit
distance on w-length strings, but even linear time (in w  poly(γ)) is too much for us. In particular, it
does not use the fact that Dw0 (I + i, J + π(i)) captures the information of blocks of length w0 . Hence, it
is natural to approximate the above by considering a “rarefication” of the above sum as follows:
                                         X
                                             1             0         0
                                   min       w0 Dw (I + iw , J + π(iw )).
                                                   0                                                    (2)
                                            π
                                                 i∈[γ]

However, the latter will not satisfy the triangle inequality — which is crucial in the Interval Matching
Algorithm — and in fact is not even symmetric: e.g., if the optimal π(i) = i + 1, the adw (J, I) would
be using D on completely different arguments. This is especially an issue since D may substantially
over-estimate ed on some of the pairs (and hence “shift by one” can change the distance a lot).
    Indeed, ensuring triangle inequality is the main challenge for defining and computing adw here. We
manage to define an appropriate distance ad, satisfying triangle inequality for “one scale only” metrics
adw,c , designed for distances in the range ≈ [c, γc], which turns out to be enough for the Interval Matching
algorithm.
    First, we note that we have two different algorithms, corresponding to two distinct distance formula-
tions: (i) for large distance regime, where c > w/γ; and (ii) for small distance regime, where c ≤ w/γ.
The reason there’s a big difference between the two cases is that when c > w/γ, the alignment π may have
a large displacement |i − π(i)| ≥ w/γ, bigger than the length of “constituent” intervals for which we have
the base metric Dw0 . Hence, for the “large distance” regime, when c ≥ w/γ, we uses a slightly different
(and simpler) algorithm that runs in time ≈ poly(w/c), and hence is only good when c is sufficiently
large.
    Finally, we sketch the harder, poly(γ)-time algorithm, for not-so-large c. The idea is to allow alignment
shifts in both intervals. More formally, let T = γ 3 and let A be the set of functions A = (Ax , Ay )
where Ax , Ay : [−γ, γ] → {0, 1, . . . , T − 1} are non-decreasing functions with Ax [−γ] = Ay [−γ] = 0
and Ax [γ] = Ay [γ]. We define the distance adw,c (I, J), to be, where θ is essentially ≈ c/w and Si =
{0, 1, . . . , 3T − Ax [i] − Ay [i] − 1}:
       adw,c (I, J) , min
                      A∈A
                                   X            X
       (Ax [γ] + Ay [γ]) θw0 +              1
                                                       Dw0 I + w0 (i + θ(∆ + Ax [i])), J + w0 (i + θ(∆ + Ay [i])) .
                                                                                                                 
                                            T
                                 i∈[−γ,γ)       ∆∈Si

    Intuitively, ignoring ∆-sum (i.e., think ∆ = 0), we obtain an alignment of I to J where the starting
positions (of w0 -length intervals) are close to multiples of w0 in both strings (as opposed to only one
string, as in Eqn. (2)). While allowing such an alignment is enough for ensuring symmetry, it is still not
enough to ensure triangle inequality. Consider intervals I, J, K ∈ I where we want to guarantee that
ad(I, K) ≤ ad(I, J) + ad(J, K). Apriori, there is no way to ensure an optimal alignment between ad(I, J)
and ad(J, K) will use the same shifts and hence makes it hard to offset the distance of large blocks in
ad(I, K). To solve the inconsistencies between the shifts, we use the ∆-sum over all possible shifts (this
is yet another instance of “averaging it out”). The last definition can also be computed in poly(γ) time
by a standard dynamic programming.
    Nonetheless, the following issue remains: think of the case when ad(I, J) and ad(J, K) use the
maximally-allowed values of the alignment (namely γ 2 ), in which case ad(I, K) cannot use the natu-
ral composition of the two alignments (since it’s out of bounds). To solve this issue, we upper bound each
   6
   While we are not aware of an explicit proof of this statement, it is in the spirit of statements that appeared in, e.g.,
[OR07, Lemma 5], [AK12, Lemma 3.2], [AKO10, Theorem 3.3].


                                                                14
adw,c with a maximal value  c (which solves the triangle inequality issue), and define the (non-metric)
distance adw (·, ·) as the summation over all costs c ∈ Sw which can be upper-bounded by adw,c (formal
definition in section 9).
    Finally, we remark that, at the end of the day, we cannot guarantee a per-pair upper bound on ad(I, J),
but only on average, and only when comparing Xi,w against Yπ(i),w (although the triangle inequality is
true everywhere). This is, nonetheless, just enough for estimating ed(x, y).


4    Top Level Algorithm
We now describe our “top-level” algorithm. We assume here that the first (1 − o(1))n positions of x and y
are equal; we can remove this assumption by padding x, y with some fixed unique character $, increasing
the size of x, y by a factor of, say, O(log n).
    Our algorithm consists of logγ n iterations, where γ = n . For each w = γ i , i ∈ [logγ n], we construct
the metric (Iw , Dw ), which align approximates the metric (Iw , edw ) (see Def. 2.3). Each iteration consists
of two components: the alignment distance algorithm, and the interval matching algorithm, described in
later sections. Below we assume that n is a power of γ, which is without loss of generality (as we can
increase n appropriately by padding the strings).

Alignment Distance algorithm. Assuming oracle access to (Iw/γ , Dw/γ ), the metric constructed
at the previous iteration, our alignment algorithm is an oracle for computing the distance adw (·, ·) on
w-length intervals. In fact, we have O(log n) such distance measures, adw,c , one for each target cost
scale c ∈ Sw = {1, 2, 4, . . . w} ∪ {1/2, 1/4, . . . , 1/2n}. Each such function adw,c (·, ·) evaluation is an edit-
distance-like dynamic programming of size poly(γ), and overall can be computed using poly(γ) = nO()
time and oracle calls to Dw/γ .
    Note that this algorithm does not run directly, but instead is used as an oracle inside the matching
algorithm described next.

Interval Matching algorithm. We construct a weighted graph Gw on Iw , such that the shortest path
distance in Gw approximates the adw distance on intervals. Again, this won’t be achieved for all pairs
of intervals, but only for interval pairs that “matter”, i.e., that are in an optimal alignment for ed(x, y).
The graph Gw is the union of edges of the graphs Gw,c , for c ∈ Sw , each of them align approximating
adw,c at “scale c”. Constructing the graphs Gw,c is the heart of the matching algorithm.

    Once we have the graph Gw , we build a fast distance oracle data structure on it, using the `∞
embedding of [Mat96], and whose output is the desired metric Dw . Overloading the notation, we call
Dw both the distance oracle data structure as well as the metric it produces. In particular, [Mat96]
shows how one can embed any n-point metric into `∞ of dimension d = O( 1 n log n) while incurring
O(1/) distortion only. Once we have such an embedding, we can compute distance between two points
by evaluating `∞ distance in dimension d. Furthermore the embedding itself can be computed by running
d single-source shortest path (SSSP) computations. Hence, we obtain the following Theorem 4.1 as an
immediate corollary of [Mat96] together with a standard Õ(m)-time SSSP algorithm.

Theorem 4.1 (corollary of [Mat96]). For any constant  > 0, given any weighted graph G on n nodes
and m edges, we can build a distance oracle data structure with the following properties:

    • supports distance queries: given u, v, output DG (u, v) which is a O(1/)-factor approximation to
      the shortest path distance between u, v in the graph;

    • DG (u, v) is a (n-point) metric;


                                                        15
      • runtime per query is Õ (n );

      • data structure uses Õ (n1+ ) space, and pre-processing time is Õ (mn ).

Top-level algorithm is described in Algorithm 1. At the beginning, when w = γ, we use the metric
(I1 , D1 ), which is just the metric on all positions in x and y, where two positions are at distance 0 iff
the positions contain the same character, and 1 otherwise. At the end, when w = n, we can extract the
distance between x and y, which is our final approximation. The algorithm MatchIntervals, described
in Section 5, returns an unweighted graph Gw,c . The full graph Gw for the scale w, is obtained by union
of the graph edges of Gw,c each scaled by Cm c, over all c ∈ Sw , together with some extra edges.

Algorithm 1 EstimateEditDistance(x, y, , n)
 function EstimateEditDistance(x, y, , n)
    Fix Cm to be the constant from Theorem 4.2.
    γ ← n .
    D1 is a data structure that, given two positions into x and/or y, outputs 0 iff the characters in
 those positions are equal and 1 otherwise.
    for w ∈ {γ, γ 2 , . . . , n} do
        Let Xw , Yw be sets of all w-length intervals on x-axis and y-axis respectively, with Iw = Xw ∪Yw .
        for c ∈ Sw do
           Gw,c ← MatchIntervals(Dw/γ , c).
        end for
        Gw ← ∪c∈Sw Cm · c · Gw,c and add edges (Xi,w , Xi+1,w ), (Yi,w , Yi+1,w ) with unit cost for all i.
        Dw ← data structure from Theorem 4.1 on graph Gw for approximation 10/.
    end for
    return Dn (Xi,n , Yi,n ) for a randomly chosen i ∈ [n].
 end function


4.1      Main guarantees
The guarantees of the algorithm follow from the following two central theorems.

Theorem 4.2 (MatchIntervals; see Sections 5, 6, 7, 8). Fix  > 0, w, n ∈ N, and cost c ∈ Sw .
Suppose (Iw , adw,c ) is a metric, for which we have query access running in time Tad . Then, the algorithm
MatchIntervals builds an undirected graph Gw,c , over intervals Iw , such that:

  1. For all edges (I, J) ∈ Gw,c , we have adw,c (I, J) ≤ Cm · c, where Cm = Cm () is a constant.

  2. For any alignment π ∈ Π, with high probability: |{i | distGw,c (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ) > 2}| ≤ Cm · |{i |
     adw,c (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ) > c}|7 , where distGw,c is the hop-distance in Gw,c .

  3. The runtime of the algorithm is O(Tad · n1+O() ) whp.

    As described above, using the algorithm from the above theorem, we build a graph Gw , which is the
union of scale graphs Gw,c . Then we take Dw to be the fast distance oracle of the shortest path on the
graph Gw , using Theorem 4.3.
    Next theorem says that, given access to Dw/γ , we can compute adw,c (I, J) for any two intervals
I, J ∈ I, which corresponds to the “natural extension” of D from length-w/γ to length-w substrings.
  7
      Recall from the preliminaries that adw,c (Xi , Y⊥ ) = w.


                                                                 16
Theorem 4.3 (alignment distance ad; see Section 9). Fix w and w0 = w/γ, and suppose we have
a data structure for a metric Dw0 that C-align-approximates ed for some constant C ≥ 1, while also
Dw0 (Xi,w0 , Xi+1,w0 ) ≤ C for all i ∈ [n] (and same for Y intervals). Then, for any c ∈ Sw , the algorithm
from Section 9 defines a function adw,c (·, ·) on Iw × Iw with the following properties:
   1. (Iw , adw,c ) is a metric;
                                                                     √
   2. For all Xi , Yj ∈ Iw , adw,c (Xi , Yj ) ≥ min{edw (Xi , Yj ), c γ};
                              P
   3. Define adw (Xi , Yj ) , c∈Sw c · 1 [adw,c (Xi , Yj ) ≥ c]. Then, adw O(C)-align-approximates ed.

   4. For all I, J ∈ Iw , adw,c (I, J) can be computed using Õ(γ O(1) ) time and queries to Dw0 .
   We remark that adw is not guaranteed to be a metric, which is the reason why we use adw,c in the
theorem statement. Also, the algorithm from Section 9 requires no further preprocessing.

4.2    Proof of Theorem 1.1
To prove Theorem 1.1, we just combine the above two theorems, 4.2 and 4.3. In particular, the inductive
hypothesis is that, for w = γ i , where i ∈ [logγ n], the distance oracle data structure Dw outputs a metric
Dw with the following properties, for some constant Cw = C(, logγ w), whp:
   1. Dw Cw -align-approximates ed;

   2. Dw (Xi,w , Xi+1,w ) ≤ 10/ (and same for Y intervals).
    Base case: for w = 1, this is immediate by construction of D1 .
    Now assume the inductive hypothesis for w0 = w/γ and we need to prove it for w. By inductive
hypothesis, Dw0 satisfies hypothesis of Theorem 4.3, and hence we can apply it to obtain             P an oracle query
to metrics adw,c ; each oracle query takes O(γ O(1) ) time. Let π be optimizer for minπ i adw (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w )
(guaranteed to align-approximate ed).
    Define τ (·, ·) to be the distance in the graph Gw constructed in the algorithm. We will prove below
that τ is a metric satisfying the above properties. Hence, once we build a fast distance oracle Dw on the
graph Gw (using Theorem 4.1), its output metric Dw satisfies τ ≤ Dw ≤ O(τ /), and hence the inductive
hypothesis.
    To prove the first property of the inductive hypothesis, consider any two intervals I, J, and the
shortest path v1 , . . . vk between them, where v1 = I and vk = J. We have that (vi , vi+1 ) is an edge
in some graph  P Gw,ci , or is an extra edge of cost 1; call E the set of the latter i’s. Hence the cost
τ (I, J) =       i6∈E Cm ci + |E|. For i 6∈ E, by Theorem 4.2 and Theorem 4.3, we have that                    C c ≥
                                                                                                            √ m i
adw,ci (vi , vi+1 ) ≥ edw (vi , vi+1 ) (note that the other part of the min cannot happen as Cm  γ). Also,
for i ∈ E, we have that P     1 = τ (vi , vi+1 ) ≥ edw (vi , vi+1 ) as edw (Xi , Xi+1 ) ≤ 1 (and same for Y ’s). Hence
D(I, J) ≥ τ (I, J) = Cm i6∈E ci + |E| ≥ edw (v1 , v2 ) + . . . + edw (vk−1 , vk ) ≥ edw (I, J).
                                                                                 P                                
    Next, we noteP that τ (I,    J) is upper bounded
                                                     by 2Cm minc∈Sw c+ c∈Sw 4·Cm c·1 distGw,c (I, J) > 2 =
Cm /n + 4Cm c∈Sw c · 1 distGw,c (I, J) > 2 . Hence:
                    X                                     X X                                           
                       τ (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ) ≤ Cm + 4Cm                c · 1 distGw,c (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ) > 2 .
                i∈[n]                                 c∈Sw i∈[n]

    For fixed c ∈ Sw , we have that, by Theorem 4.2:
                 X                                          X                            
                      1 distGw,c (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ) > 2 ≤ Cm ·  1 adw,c (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ) > c .
                  i∈[n]                                            i


                                                         17
Therefore,
                                                                                                                     
X                                      X X                                                     X
        τ (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ) ≤ O 1 +                c · 1 adw,c (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ) > c  ≤ O 1 +   adw (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ) .
i∈[n]                                  c∈Sw i∈[n]                                                           i∈[n]

Since π is the optimizer for the right-hand-side, using Theorem 4.3 again, together with the inductive
hypothesis for w0 = w/γ, we conclude (where constant depends on  and logγ w):
                                                                                                                     
              X                                    X                                         X
                      Dw (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ) ≤ O            τ (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ) ≤ O 1 +             adw (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w )
              i∈[n]                                i∈[n]                                     i∈[n]
                                                                                      !
                                                               X
                                            ≤ O min                edw (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ) ,
                                                           π
                                                               i

since we can assume wlog that ed(x, y) ≥ 1 (checking the opposite is immediate), thus completing the
proof of the inductive hypothesis.
    The second property is immediate by construction of the graph Gw and the fact that approximation
of the distance oracle Dw is taken to be 10/.
    Now we argue that the final output produced by the top-level algorithm is a constant factor approx-
imation. Consider the Dw guarantees for w = n, and fix the minimizing π, and constant Cn = Cw . For
a random index i ∈ [n], with probability at least 0.9, we have that: 1) i ∈ [1, n − o(n)], 2) π(i) 6= ⊥,
and D(Xi,n , Yπ(i),n ) ≤ O(Cn ) · ed(x, y). Furthermore note that |i − π(i)| ≤ Cn · ed(x, y), and hence,
D(Xi,n , Yi,n ) ≤ D(Xi,n , Yπ(i),n ) + 10
                                         · |i − π(i)| ≤ O(Cn /) · ed(x, y). Also, since i ≤ n − o(n), we have
that D(Xi,n , Yi,n ) ≥ ed(Xi,n , Yi,n ) = ed(x, y).
    Concluding, the algorithm produces a O(Cn /) approximation to ed(x, y), with probability ≥ 0.9.
Note that Cn is a constant, depending on , as we have only a constant number of iterations, each
incurring a constant factor approximation.
    The runtime guarantee follows from time guarantees of Theorems 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3. In particular,
by Theorems 4.1 and 4.3, the runtime Tad is Õ(γ O(1) ) · nO() = nO() . Hence runtime in the matching
algorithm, for every fixed w, is n1+O() . Thus the graph Gw has size n1+O() and the preprocessing time
of Theorem 4.1 is n1+O() as well. Overall, we have a constant number of w’s to consider, and thus we
obtain a runtime of n1+O() .


5       Interval Matching Algorithm
In this section we describe our main interval matching algorithm, used to prove Theorem 4.2. The
correctness and runtime complexity analysis will follow in Sections 6 and 8 respectively.
    Our matching algorithm iterates over a constant number of steps t, each iterating over a constant
number of levels l. The following MatchIntervals algorithm is the main loop over steps. We note
that, in order to maintain high probability statements, in each step we output O(log n) output coloring
for each input coloring.




                                                                     18
   Algorithm 2 Matching Algorithm
       Input: Base cost c
       Output: A matching graph G = Gw,c .
    1: function MatchIntervals(c)
    2:    K0 ← {initialize a new coloring of a single color u assigned with mass 1 to all I}.
    3:    G ← unweighted and undirected graph with nodes I ∈ Iw and no edges.
    4:    for t = 1, 2, . . . do
    5:       Kt ← ∅.
    6:       for {κ0 ∈ Kt−1 | µκ0 (I, ν \ ⊥) > 0} do
    7:           for O(log n) times do
    8:               (G, Kt ) ← (G, Kt )]a MatchStep(c, κ0 , t).
    9:           end for
   10:       end for
   11:       break if Kt = ∅.
   12:    end for
   13:    return G.
   14: end function

      a
          By ], we refer to the coordinate-wise union, meaning we add the output edges to G and coloring κ to Kt .

    It remains to describe the MatchStep algorithm, which iterates over a constant number of levels.
In each such level, the algorithm updates the coloring κ under construction, to obtain the “amended”
         b, while also using the “step input coloring” κ0 , obtained at the end of the previous step. At
coloring κ
the end of the iteration over the levels, the algorithm MatchStep produces a number of edges to add to
the graph as well as a coloring. The pseudo-code for MatchStep is presented in Alg. 8, after a detailed
description of the mechanisms and subroutines of MatchStep.

5.1    Components of MatchStep: setup and notations
We first introduce basic notions used in our algorithm. To help the reader keep track of the many
definitions and notations, we summarize them in Table 1 and Table 2 for quick reference (the latter table
is in Section 6). To avoid confusion, we use c to denote c from the theorem statement. Also, to simplify
notation, we refer to the oracle adw,c simply as ad. Note that ad algorithm uses the data structure Dw/λ ,
which we assume all our algorithms in this section have access to.

The set of costs Ec . For each fixed base cost c ∈ Sw , we use a fixed set of costs Ec ⊂ c · [1, O(1)]. The
                                                          c
set Ec is defined as {c1 , c2 , . . . c1/η }, where ci = ·α · 3i , for small constants α, η > 0 (to be fixed later).

Colorings. Recall our definition of coloring κ over color-set ν as a mapping from intervals to distribution
of colors in ν, denoted by µκ : I × ν → [0, 1].
    Our construction analyzes pairs of intervals and colors (I, χ) ∈ IP
                                                                      × ν. For a set R ⊆ I × ν of (interval,
color) pairs, µκ (R) is the `1 mass of colors in R, i.e. µκ (R) ,      (I,χ)∈R µκ (I, χ). We often use the
shorthand pairs when referring to (interval, color) pairs.
    We use colorings to partition I into smaller (overlapping) parts. For a color χ, we denote its part by
Pκχ , {I ∈ I | µκ (I, χ) > 0}.
    Finally, we equip each µκ with a data structure that allows efficient sampling from it (Theorem 8.1).
The reader should henceforth consider that sampling takes time proportional to the output size, up to
poly(log n) factors.


                                                            19
Proximity balls Λ. For coloring κ and ζ ∈ N, we define Λζκ (I) as the largest interval ball around I
containing at most ζ u-colored `1 -mass on each of left and right of I, where µκ (I, u) is counted on both
sides. An exception to the above is for ζ = 0, when Λ0κ (I) = {I}. We note that for all I ∈ I, ζ ≥ 1, we
have µκ (Λζκ (I), u) ≤ 2ζ.
    Extending the data structure for µκ above, we also use the data structure from Theorem 8.2 to be
able to compute the boundaries of any Λζκ (I), given I, ζ, in poly(log n) time.

Interval and Pair densities. For I ∈ I, κ, color χ ∈ ν and interval set S ⊆ I, we define a density
parameter dκ (I, χ, S)ĉ , µκ (Nĉ (I) ∩ S, χ). We use the shorthand dκ (I, χ)ĉ , dκ (I, χ, I)ĉ . We also define
the density vector dκ (I, χ, S) ∈ RE   c
                                     + such that:

                                           dκ (I, χ, S) , [dκ (I, χ, S)ĉ ]ĉ∈Ec

      We also define relative density as follows:

Definition 5.1 (Relative density.). Fix I ∈ I, κ, color χ and an interval set S 3 I. The relative density
rdκ (I, χ, S) ∈ [1, ∞)Ec is the density of I w.r.t. each cost ĉ ∈ Ec , divided by such density restricted to the
set S, i.e., rdκ (I, χ, S) , dκ (I, χ) dκ (I, χ, S).8

    By convention, we set the relative density of empty colors to 1 (or ∞ if empty in S only). Note that
rdκ (I, χ, S) ≥ 1 and is monotonically decreasing in S. Both are important properties that will be used
when we bound density mass in “growing balls of intervals”.

    Our main matching algorithm uses estimates of densities of (intervals, color) pairs. In order to
estimate the densities fast, we use standard sampling, as implemented by algorithms ApproxDensity
and ApproxRelativeDensity (Alg. 3), whose guarantees are as follows.

Lemma 5.2 (Approximating Densities, proof in Section 7). Fix interval I ∈ I, interval ball S ⊆ I, color
χ in coloring κ, and cost c ∈ Ec . Then, recalling that Tad is the runtime of a ad(·, ·) oracle call:

  1. For any given minimal density dm > 0, the algorithm           ApproxDensity
                                                                                         d ∈ [Ω(1), 1] ·
                                                                                  outputs b
                                                           µκ (S,χ)
     max{dκ (I, χ, S)c , dm } whp, in time TD = Tad · Õ     dm     +1 .

  2. Assume I ∈ S. For any given minimal relative density rdm ≥ 1, the algorithm ApproxRelativeDensity
              b ∈ [Ω(1), 1] · max{rdκ (I, χ, S)c , rdm } whp, in time
     outputs rd
                                                                               
                                   TRD = Tad · Õ rd1m · µµκκ(I,χ)
                                                               (I,χ) + µκ (S,χ)
                                                                       µκ (I,χ) .
  8
        denotes the Hadamard coordinate-wise division.




                                                            20
                           Table 1: Summary of matching algorithm setup notations.
 Notation                 Description
                                                      Intervals
 X , Xw                   space of all w-length intervals of x.
 Y, Yw                    space of all w-length intervals of x.
 I, Iw                    space of all w-length intervals = X ∪ Y.
                                                     Distances
 (I, adw ), (I, adw,c )   alignment-distances. adw align-approximates ed. adw,c is a metric.
 (Rd+ , ddF )
                                                                                       P
                          distortion resilient distance for F > 1. ddF (p, q) = i:pi >F ·qi pi
                                              Costs, Neighborhood
 c                        the current base cost for which we are building the current graph Gw,c
 Sw                       set of possible base costs {1/2n, . . . 1/2, 1, 2, 4, . . . w}
                                 c
 Ec , ci                  ci = α· · 3i and Ec = {c1 , . . . c1/η }, for a small constant η, dependent on  only
 Nc (I)                   neighborhood of radius (cost) c: the set of all J ∈ I with ad(I, J) ≤ c
                                                     Colorings
 ν                           t
                          [λ ] ∪ {u, ⊥} color set
 κ0                       input coloring obtained from the step t − 1
 κ                        current state of output coloring (at step t, level l)
 µκ (I, χ)                mass of (I, χ) in κ; µκ (I, ∗) is a probability distribution
 Pκχ                      the support of µκ (∗, χ) (is a set of intervals).
                                          Densities, Proximity Balls
 dκ (I, χ, S)ĉ           = µκ (Nĉ (I) ∩ S, χ) is the ĉ-density of (I, χ) in interval set S
 dκ (I, χ, S)             = dκ (I, χ, S)∗ is a vector of densities, where ∗ ranges over all costs in Ec
 rdκ (I, χ, S)            = dκ (I, χ, I) dκ (I, χ, S) is a vector obtained by coordinate-wise division
 Λζκ (I)                  largest interval ball around I containing < ζ u-colored `1 -mass on each side of I


Algorithm 3 Matching Phase: Approximating Densities
    Input: interval I, color χ, interval set S, cost c, additive parameter dm / rdm and access to µκ
    Output: Θ(max{dκ (I, χ, S)c , dm }) and Θ(max{rdκ (I, χ, S)c , rdm }) respectively
 1: function ApproxDensity(I,
                                χ, S, dm , c, µκ )
               log n
 2:    γ ← O dm
 3:    S 0 ← Sample each I 0 ∈ S independently with probability min{γ · µκ (I 0 , χ), 1}.
 4:    S ∗ ← Nc (I) ∩ S 0 by computing ad(I, I 0 ) for all I 0 ∈ S 0 and keeping all c-matches.
 5:    f∗ ← {I 0 ∈ S ∗ | γ · µκ (I 0 , χ) > 1}.
       S                n                                     o
 6:    return Θ max µκ (S      f∗ , χ) + 1 · |S ∗ \ S f∗ |, dm .       . Θ ← rescaling to get [Ω(1), 1]-approx.
                                            γ
 7: end function
 8: function ApproxRelativeDensity(I, χ, S, rdm , c, µκ )
 9:    dˆ ← ApproxDensity(I, S, µκ (I, χ), c, µκ ).
10:    D̂ ← ApproxDensity(I,
                        n           o I, rdm ·µκ (I, χ), c, µκ ).
                           D̂
11:    return Θ max ˆ , rdm .                                          . Θ ← rescaling to get [Ω(1), 1]-approx.
                           d
12: end function




                                                        21
Soft transformations. We define a couple of “soft” transformations used by the algorithm: soft
thresholding, and soft quantile. Their purpose is to replace “hard” thresholds, thus balancing complexity
vs correctness.
    The soft thresholding transformation helps us with preserving sparsity of palettes. For δ ∈ (0, 1] and
                q
γ > 0, define Tδ,γ : Rd+ → Rd+ to be the transformation:
                                                
                                                xi
                                                           xi ≥ γ
                                       q
                                     Tδ,γ (x)i , 0          xi < δγ
                                                       xi q
                                                
                                                  γ · ( γ ) otherwise.
                                                

                                 q
    The basic intuition is that Tδ,γ softens the threshold at about γ to decay (polynomially) between γ and
δγ, when it becomes 0. Our algorithms use a few thresholding transformations with different parameters.
    Also, define the soft quantile transformation Qδ,s,F : Rd+ → R, for parameters δ, s ∈ [0, 1], and F ≥ 1:
                                                                  
                                                                  1
                                                                              i≥s·d
                   Qδ,s,F (x) , max a|J| · min xj ;   where ai = 0             i < (s − δ)d
                                J⊆[d]      j∈J                    
                                                                  
                                                                    1/F  sd−i  otherwise.

   We use one such transformation: Ql (x) , Q 
                                              (l+1) O(α2 ) (x). The intuition is that Ql is a smoothing
                                                 4 ,1−
                                                 2 ,n
between 2 fractional rank element from x (in sorted order), to (l+1)
       (l+1)
                                                                   2   + /4 fractional rank.
   We discuss and prove the properties of these soft transformations in Section 7.

5.2   Components of MatchStep: main coloring procedure
To amend the coloring κ, we compute a set of potential scores, φ, ϕ, and θ. In particular, we sample
anchor intervals to define φ potential scores. Then, such scores are divided over Λ-balls centered at the
anchors and ad-close intervals, to generate ϕ palettes to all other intervals. We also sample pivots to
define θ potential scores, and use it to augment ϕ. Lastly, we use ϕ palettes to amend coloring κ → κ   b
for the next level. We describe this procedure in detail next.
Steps and levels. In each step t ∈ [logλ n], where λ = n , for a given input coloring κ0 , we produce
O(log n) output colorings. The goal for step t is that for each interval I ∈ I, either: (1) we cluster it
together with π[I] and mark them as “already matched”, or (2) color I similarly to π[I] up to some bounded
distortion (while also ensuring the color parts are decreasing with t). Here, our goal is to efficiently assign
colors to intervals in I (which can be thought of as overlapping parts in a partition), so that we can
compare sampled anchors to some limited number of other intervals that share the same color. Overall,
as t increases, the number of colors in the coloring grows and the size of each color (number of intervals
of that color) becomes smaller, allowing us to increase the number of sampled anchors.
    We maintain the following set of coloring properties for a coloring κ at a step t, which uses the color-set
ν = [λt ] ∪ {u, ⊥}, analyzed and proved in later sections:

   • Sparsity: Each color χ ∈ ν \ {⊥} will be non-zero for (i.e., shared by) few intervals: |Pκχ | =
     O(n1+O() /λt ). See Lemma 6.3.

   • Correctness: Coloring κ will have bounded corruption (as per Eqn. (1)), meaning “accumulated
     error” is bounded by O(1) times the “original error”, O(ed(x, y)). See Lemma 6.1.

    At each step, our algorithm iterates over levels l ∈ {0, . . . , logβ n}, where β = n . Intuitively, each
level takes case of different density regimes of pairs: lower levels will correspond to high-density pairs and

                                                         22
high levels to low-density pairs. At the lowest level l = 0, our goal will be to cluster and match high
density pairs, and mark them as already-matched. In the subsequent levels, our goal is to color balls of
intervals which have large mass of pairs of the corresponding densities.
Anchor Sampling. In each level l ≥ 0, for each output color χ ∈ νt \ {u, ⊥}, we sample an anchor,
                                                                                 µ (∗,∗)
which is an interval, color pair (A, χ0 ) ∈ I × νt−1 \ {⊥}, from the distribution κ0|I| (if sampled χ0 = ⊥,
                                                                                           0
we skip this anchor/χ). Each such anchor is compared to all other intervals in Pκχ0 to form a family of
O (1) clusters Cχ . In level l = 0, we add a graph-G edge from A to each clustered interval, and mark
such intervals as already-matched with ⊥-color. In the other levels l ≥ 1, such clusters are extended to
other intervals in the clusters’ proximity, adding χ to their palettes ϕ, as described in detail below.
Clustering. For each sampled pair (A, χ0 ), we estimate the ad distance between A and all other intervals
        0
I ∈ Pκχ0 , using the ad oracle. We also sample a cost ĉ ∼ Ec uniformly at random. Next consider subsets
           0                                   0
Aj ⊆ Pκχ0 defined as Aj = Nĉ+c·j (A) ∩ Pκχ0 , for j ∈ {0, . . . , jmax } where jmax = O(1/α) (α is still tbd).
While the use of such sampling process will be shown later, the important clustering property to note here
                                              0
is that for j < jmax , we have Nc (Aj ) ∩ Pκχ0 ⊆ Aj+1 . The formal clustering algorithm ClusterAnchor
is presented in Alg. 4.

Algorithm 4 Matching Phase: Clustering around random anchors
    Input: Anchor pair (A, χ0 ), interval set R, base cost c
    Output: “slowly-growing” clusters around A: {(Aĉ+cj , ĉ + cj, j, dA )}j for a random cost ĉ ∼ Ec .
               where dA is an upper-bound for {dκ0 (I, χ0 )ĉ+cj | (I, j) ∈ I × [jmax ]}
 1: function ClusterAnchor(A, R, χ0 , c)
 2:    Sample ĉ ∼ Ec uniformly at random.
 3:    For all I ∈ R, compute cA,I , ad(A, I).
 4:    Below, for a parameter τ , we use notation Aτ = {I : cA,I ≤ τ }.
 5:    return {(Aĉ+cj , ĉ + cj, j, µκ0 (A3ĉ , χ0 )) | j = 0, 1, . . . , jmax }.
 6: end function


Coloring: assigning φ potential to clusters. Next we assign potentials φ to the clustered intervals
in Cχ . Later, using potentials φ, we will assign ϕ potential to other nearby intervals in the proximity of
the clustered intervals (as described in Section 3.3).
    From the above clustering algorithm, for a fixed output color χ, and corresponding, sampled A, χ0 , ĉ,
we get a family of clusters Cχ , {(Aj , cAj , j, dA )}j holding the clustering invariant as described above.
We then define potential φκ (I, χ) in new coloring κ for all intervals I ∈ ∪j Aj , using Alg. 5.
    Intuitively, for sampled (A, χ0 , ĉ), we would like to distribute n/λt potential credits “equally” among
        0                                       µκ0 (I,χ0 )
I ∈ Pκχ0 ∩ Nĉ (A), namely φκ (I, χ) = 2n                                                   t
                                          λt · dκ0 (A,χ0 )ĉ (note that this sums up to 2n/λ over all I, and to 2n
over all anchors/χ’s). This method however does not satisfy the necessary φ properties, requiring couple
adjustments. Before describing the adjustments, we state these necessary properties, termed φ scoring
invariants, which we will guarantee:

Claim 5.3 (φ Invariants, proved in Section 7). Fix step t and level l. Fix a color χ in an output coloring
κ, for which we have sampled an anchor pair (A, χ00 ) ∈ I × νt−1 \ {⊥} where χ00 is some color in κ0 , and
a sampled cost ĉ ∈ Ec . The φ scores from Alg. 5 satisfy the following invariants:

  1. Correctness: For any I ∈ I and distortion F ≥ 1, if (I, χ0 ) is not F -corrupted pair (for some fixed
     alignment π), then ddO(F ·n2α ) (φκ (I, χ), φκ (π[I], χ)) ≤ n−10 .



                                                       23
  2. Maximal Contribution: For all (I, χ0 ) ∈ I × νt−1 \ {⊥}, the expected potential contribution of (I, χ0 )
     to φκ (I, χ) satisfies:
                                                                      µ (I,χ0 )
                                                                               
                             EA,χ00 ,ĉ φκ (I, χ) · 1[χ0 = χ00 ] = O κ0 λt
                                                               
                                                                                  .

  3. Minimal Contribution/Balance: For all (I, χ0 ) ∈ I × νt−1 \ {⊥}, the expected potential contribution
     of (I, χ0 ) to φκ (I, χ) at least equals its mass µκ0 (I, χ0 ) on almost all costs in Ec : in particular, for
     all but O(η/α) fraction of costs ĉ ∈ Ec :
                                                                        µ (I,χ0 )
                                        EA,χ00 φκ (I, χ) · 1[χ0 = χ00 ] ≥ κ0 λt .
                                              


    The first invariant ensures uncorrupted pairs (A, χ0 ) add uncorrupted φ potential, in particular that
I and π[I] get similar potential φ. To guarantee the invariant, we use the weaker transitivity property,
                                                   0
namely the clustering property that Nc (Aj )∩Pκχ0 ⊆ Aj+1 , and hence that for uncorrupted pairs, I ∈ Aj ⇒
π[I] ∈ Aj+1 (this is the reason we have multiple clusters Aj to start with). In addition, we approximate
densities with a threshold lower-bounded by a factor nO(α) from the maximum density of the cluster, so
that all approximated densities are within a nO(α) bound (this treshold also helps maintaining efficiency
constraints). An additional caveat is that we cannot use this argument for j = jmax . To fix this, our
algorithm multiplies the potential of each Aj by an exponentially decreasing coefficient γj = n−jα , which
ensures that each meaningful potential added to I generates a similar potential in π[I].
    The second invariant ensures that we do not assign too much mass to any pair (notably a corrupted
one). The naı̈ve assignment of φ would jeopardize this invariant because the corrupted intervals may
be “ad-centers”, i.e., slightly denser than their neighbors (for every cost), and hence receive more φ in
expectation. To overcome this issue, we estimate the density dκ0 (I, χ0 )cA of each I ∈ A, denoted dd I,χ0 ,
and add potential proportional to 1/dd                               0
                                        I,χ0 (instead of 1/ dκ0 (A, χ )ĉ ).
    The third invariant guarantees we assign enough potential overall at each step and its importance will
become clear later once we discuss the balance of colors.
    The formal algorithm AssignPhiPotential appears in Alg. 5.

Algorithm 5 Matching Phase: assign potential to Intervals in X , Y
    Input: Output color χ, cluster (A, χ0 ), density bound dA , cost c, and a “decaying” parameter j.
    Output: Assign φ potential to all I ∈ A.
 1: function AssignPhiPotential(χ, A, dA , χ0 , c, j, µκ0 )
 2:    γ ← n−α·j .
 3:    for I ∈ A do
                                          0             −α , c, µ 0 ).
 4:        I,j ← ApproxDensity(I, χ , I, dA · n
          dd                                                     κ
                                           µ    (I,χ 0)
                                      2n     κ0
 5:       φκ (I, χ) ← φκ (I, χ) + γ · λt · d .
                                              dI,j
 6:    end for
 7: end function


Coloring: assigning ϕ scores to intervals. Given φ potentials, we assign ϕ scores to other non-
clustered intervals in the proximity of the clustered ones. Intuitively, we would like to assign potential
ϕ to each interval within the ball (in index distance) of fixed radius centered at any clustered interval.
However, sometimes we need to group together far sections, and hence we define ball radiuses with respect
to fixed u-color mass (in the current coloring κ).
    Specifically, let Zl = β l · {1, 2, 4, 8, . . . , n/β l } be an exponentially growing set of radiuses. Then for
each ζ ∈ Zl , we define potential score vector ϕζκ (·, ·) : I × [λt ] ∪ {u} → [0, 1] as follows. For χ ∈ [λt ], we
define:

                                                        24
                                                                 2l         ζ        
                                   ϕζκ (I, χ) = T c µκ (I, u) · βζ 2 · φκ (Λβκ (I),χ)
                                                                               l                                 (3)
               Θ(−1 )
where T c = Tβ −1 ,β −3 . We define ϕ(·, u) later (using potentials θ).
    We will guarantee the following ϕ scoring properties for all I ∈ I except for intervals whose proximity
is sufficiently corrupted (and hence do not need guarantees):

   • Correctness: for any ζ ∈ Zl , the contribution of φ-potential from F -uncorrupted pairs to ϕζκ (I, ∗6=u )
                                                                       0
     matches, up to F O(1/) factor distortion, the contribution to ϕζκ (π[I], ∗6=u ), for slightly larger ζ 0 , up
     to an extra additive error n−10 . See Lemma 6.4.
                                                                                            O(1)
   • Complexity: For any color χ, the number of I ∈ I with ϕζκ (I, χ) 6= 0 is nβλt . This will follow
     from the fact that thresholding T c ensures that ϕζκ (I, χ) = 0 whenever µκ (I, u) · φκ (Λζκ (I), χ) <
     ζ 2 /β l+O(1) . Implicitly in Lemma 6.3.

Coloring: assigning the u-colored ϕ(·, u). We recall that the u-color is used to 1) efficiently partition
intervals of any density together with their corresponding matches in π, and 2) “group” together sparse
sections that might be far apart.
    We assign ϕ(·, u) in a slightly different manner than ϕ(·, ∗6=u ). First, we sample a number of random
pairs V termed pivots, directly estimate their densities, and assign sparsity θ scores. We then use θ scores
to assign ϕ(·, u) scores to nearby intervals in a similar manner to how we used φ to assign ϕ(·, ∗6=u ). Our
u-coloring procedure will have the following u-coloring guarantees:

   • Correctness: The distortion between uncorrupted (I, u) and (π[I], u) is bounded (as for the non-u
     colors). See Lemma 6.4.
                                                                           l
   • Sparsity: At level l, for any interval I ∈ I, for δ = ϕβκ (I, u), there is a set of pairs Q in the
                     l
     proximity of Λβκ (I) with µκ0 (Q) = Ω(δβ l ) such that all pairs in Q are sparse on majority of possible
     costs ∈ Ec . The exact property will be described in the proof of Claim 7.11.

   • Balance: for every interval I ∈ I, we will have kµκ (I, ∗6=u ) + ϕκ (I, ∗)k1 = Ω (1). This ensures
     that we can re-normalize the coloring at level l with only O(1)-factor corruption blow-up. See
     Lemma 6.5.

    The high-level idea is as follows. Consider an interval I. If there is a set of pairs (J, χ0 ) in I’s proximity
                                                                                    l
of total mass δβ l , where for each such pair the relative density rdκ0 (J, χ0 , Λβκ (J))c is at most Θ∗ ( λtn·β l ),
for sufficiently many costs c ∈ Ec , then we have the “sparsity guarantee” we need for keeping I u-colored
for the next level with δ mass. However, if δ is small enough, then we expect to find sufficiently many
intervals of the “right” density to color I with non-u colors to obtain the “balance” guarantee as above.
    We assign ϕ(·, u) in three stages. First, we randomly sample a multi-set V consisting of O∗ ( βnl ) pivot
pairs by including a pair (I, χ0 ) ∈ I × ν \ {⊥} with probability µκ0 (I, χ0 ) · β −l , independently, k = β O(1)
times (i.e., a sample (I, χ0 ) can have multiplicity up to k). Second, for each pivot (V, χ0 ) ∈ V, for each
possible radius ζ ∈ Zl , we generate potential sparsity score θlζ (V, χ0 ), which can be thought of as “the
mass of colors which V is relatively sparse on, for many costs”. To obtain that, we iterate over all
                                                      V




costs ĉ ∈ Ec and estimate an upper bound on rdκ0 (V, χ0 , Λζκ (V ))ĉ , using the approximation algorithm
ApproxRelativeDensity.
    To maintain near-linear runtime overall, we can afford at most O∗ (β l ) time for ApproxRelative-
Density per pivot (on average), and hence we set the “min threshold” rdm parameter to Θ∗ ( λtn·β l ). Also

                                                           25
for the runtime bound, we would need that the local color-mass µκ0 (Λζκ (V ), χ0 ) is at most O∗ (β l )·µκ0 (V, χ0 ).
When the latter condition doesn’t hold, we do not need to do any testing as the relative density will be
lower than the bound we care about on average across all potential local (V, χ0 ) pairs.
    We use the estimate of relative density to generate σV,χ0 ∈ [0, 1] based on the number of costs with
sparse relative density, using the soft transformations:

                                                   σV,χ0 = Ql (T θ Γl,ζ (V, χ0 ) ),
                                                                                

                                                                                                     −1
                                                                                         V
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                             4α
where Γl,ζ (V, χ0 ) is a vector of dimension |Ec | with Γl,ζ (V, χ0 )c = min rdκ0 (V, χ0 , Λζκ (V ))c · n·n
                                                                                                        β l ·λt
                                                                                                                , 1
             O(1/)
and T θ = T1/√β,1 .
    Then we define the sparsity potential score θκζ (V, χ0 ) for sampled pivots V ∈ V. As mentioned above,
for pivot pairs where we cannot efficiently estimate σV,χ0 , we set the score to 1. In particular, for mV (V, χ0 )
denoting the multiplicity of (V, χ0 ) in V:
                                                    (
                                                     σV,χ0 µκ0 (Λζκ0 (V ), χ0 ) ≤ λ · β 6 · β l
                       θκζ (V, χ0 ) = mV (V, χ0 ) ·
                                                     1     otherwise.

    The algorithm for computing the θ potential, AssignThetaPotential, is presented in Alg. 6.
    Finally, we assign ϕκ (I, u) as a function of the estimated sparsity potential from Λζκ (I), using the
following formula, for each ζ ∈ Zl :
                                                                                      
                                     β 2l                 1   X                        
                  ϕζκ (I, u) = T u  2 · µκ (I, u) · min     ·     θκζ (Λζκ (I), χ0 ), 1  ,           (4)
                                     ζ                   k 0                           
                                                                             χ ∈ν\{⊥}

                      1/
    where T u = T1/β,Ω (1) , and k = β O(1) is a coefficient which guarantees concentration for all potential
scores not omitted by the transformation T u as above.

Algorithm 6 Matching Phase: assign θ potential to pivot pair V, χ0 .
    Input: Pivot (V, χ0 ), multiplicity m, and level l
    Output: Assign θ potential to (V, χ0 )
 1: function AssignThetaPotential(V, χ0 , m, l, µκ0 )
 2:    rdm ← n4α · β ln·λt .
 3:    for ζ ∈ Zl do
 4:       if µκ0 (Λζκ (V ), χ0 ) > λ · β 6 · β l then
 5:           θκζ (V, χ0 ) ← m.
 6:       else
 7:           for ĉ ∈ Ec do
                  V




 8:                   rdκ0 (V, χ0 , Λζκ (V ))ĉ ← ApproxRelativeDensity(V,
                                                        V
                                                                           Λζκ (V ), rdm , ĉ, µκ0 ).
 9:                   Γl,ζ   (V, χ0 )   ĉ ← min   rdm /rdκ0 (V, χ0 , Λζκ (V ))ĉ , 1 .
10:          end for
11:          θκζ (V, χ0 ) ← m · Ql (T θ (Γl,ζ (V, χ0 ))).
12:       end if
13:    end for
14: end function




                                                                   26
Amending the measure µκ (I, ∗) to get µκ̂ (I, ∗). At the end of each level l, we update each measure
µκ (I, ∗) by moving some of the µκ (I, u) mass according to the ϕ(I, ∗) potential. We need to ensure that
we still obtain a distribution at the end, and hence we do a certain normalization (rescaling) on ϕ. Since
such a rescaling can increase the corruption, we need to ensure that the renormalization rescales the
vector by a constant factor only. There is a caveat though, that the renomalization factor is small only
when the added ϕ(I, ∗) potential is large, which we can only guarantee when µ(I, ∗6=u ) is small. As a
result, we recolor using the sum of µ and ϕ according to the following formula9 :

                                                                         µκ (I,∗6=u )+ ζ∈Z ϕζκ (I,∗)
                                                                                      P
                             µκb (I, ∗) = µκ (I, ∗6=u ) + µκ (I, u) ·                     l
                                                                                                       .
                                                                        kµκ (I,∗6=u )+ ζ∈Z ϕζκ (I,∗)k1
                                                                                      P
                                                                                            l



Algorithm 7 Matching Phase: Color Intervals
    Input: Coloring κ and level l
    Output: Amended coloring κ     b computed from µκ ,φκ and θκ .
 1: function AmendColoring(κ, l)
 2:    Compute the balls Λζκ (I) for all I ∈ I and ζ ∈ Zl (using algorithm from Thm. 8.2).
 3:    Compute ϕζκ (I, u) as per Eqn. (4),(6) for all I ∈ I, ζ ∈ Zl (using data structure from Thm. 8.2).
 4:    Compute ϕζκ (I, ∗6=u ) as per Eqn. (3),(5) for all I ∈ I, ζ ∈ Zl (using algorithm from Thm. 8.3).
                                                              µκ (I,∗6=u )+ ζ∈Z ϕζκ (I,∗)
                                                                           P
 5:       Compute µκb (I) = µκ (I, ∗6=u ) + µκ (I, u) ·                        l
                                                                                                for all I ∈ I.
                                                              µκ (I,∗6=u )+ ζ∈Z ϕζκ (I,∗)
                                                                           P
                                                                                 l          1
 6:       return κ
                 b.
 7: end function


                                   Figure 2: The flow of coloring intervals at level l




  9
      Note that in the formula, the vector µκ (I, ∗6=u ) is considered to be the vector with u-coordinate zero-ed out.




                                                               27
Figure 3: A step by step coloring example at level l. For simplification, all intervals start as u-colored,
we use one ζ = 2 radius, and omit the pivot sampling, density estimation, and thresholding processes.




          Step 1: Anchor sampling (λt = 3).                       Step 2: Clustering around anchors.




      Step 3: Assigning φ scores to each cluster.              Step 4: Assigning ϕ to Λζ balls (ζ = 2).




   Step 5: Coloring µκb by “adding” normalized ϕ.
                 Gray color is for u.


Initial level (l = 0): marking as “already matched” ⊥. For each step t, at level l = 0, we assign φ
and θ potential as above and use them to mark intervals as “already matched” (with color ⊥), instead of
“regular coloring”. Hence for any step t, we only have the colors u and ⊥ in κ at the end of level l = 0,
and the rest of colors come into play later, starting with level l = 1. We use the following potentials,
where Z0 = {0}:


                               ϕ0κ (I, ⊥) = T c (µκ (I, u) · φκ (I, ν \ {u, ⊥})) .                        (5)
                                                             0
                                                                         
                               ϕ0κ (I, u) = T u µκ (I, u) · θκ (I,ν\{⊥})
                                                                   k        .                             (6)

   Overall, the idea here is similar to the general case: any matching from uncorrupted (I, χ0 ) pairs in
κ0 will generate a 2-hop path in G between I and π[I], and hence by projecting all of φ potential to ⊥,
we do not over-corrupt interval I (in expectation), and maintain the u-coloring guarantees. We also note
that the T c transformation at level 0 is not required for correctness, but rather enables a more uniform
analysis across levels.
   The overall algorithm for computing amended coloring, AmendColoring, is presented in Alg. 7.


                                                       28
5.3   MatchStep algorithm: main levels loop
Finally, we describe the overall MatchStep algorithm, using the ingredients presented earlier. The main
algorithm is MatchStep from Alg. 8. It uses couple more functions: InitColoring, in Alg. 9, and
Adjust-u in Alg. 10.
Choice of Parameters. We fix the following parameters, as a function of n and .

   • β, λ ← n , ensuring convergence in constant number of rounds while allowing sparse partitions.

   • k ← Õ(β 3 ), an oversampling factor for concentration in pivot sampling.

   • α ← 5/ , sufficiently small constant to control the blow-up of the distortion F (noting that the
     starting distortion is F0 = nα ).

   • η ← α2 3 , to ensure our set of costs is sufficiently large, avoiding blow-up from Q transformations.


Algorithm 8 Matching Step Algorithm
    Input: base cost c, input coloring κ0 , step t.
    Output: a matching graph G and an output colorings κ.
 1: function MatchStep(c, κ0 , t)
 2:    Initialize κ ← InitColoring(κ0 , t).
 3:    G ← unweighted and undirected graph with nodes I ∈ I and no edges.
 4:    for l = 0, 1, . . . do
 5:        Break if l > 0 and min{µκ (X , u), µκ (Y, u)} < β l ;
 6:        φκ , θκ ← ~0.
 7:        for χ ∈ [λt ] do
                                                       µ (∗,∗)
 8:             Sample (A, χ0 ) from the distribution κ0|I| .
                      (                          0
                          ClusterAnchor(A, Pκχ0 , χ0 , c), if χ0 6= ⊥
 9:             Cχ ←
                          ∅,                                if χ0 = ⊥
10:             for (A, cA , j, dA ) ∈ Cχ do
11:                Add edge (A, I) to G for each I ∈ A.                         . Only important for level 0.
12:                AssignPhiPotential(χ, A, dA , χ0 , cA , j, µκ0 ).
13:             end for
14:        end for
                                                                          µ (V,χ0 )
15:        V ← Subsample each (V, χ0 ) ∈ I × ν \ {⊥} with probability κ0 β l , independently k times.
16:        AssignThetaPotential(V, χ0 , mV ((V, χ0 )), l, µκ0 ) for all (V, χ0 ) ∈ supp(V).
17:        κ ← AmendColoring(κ, l).
18:    end for
19:    Set µκ (I, χ) = 0 whenever µκ (I, χ) ∈ (0, n−10 ) and renormalize each µκ (I, ∗) to a distribution.
20:    κ ← Adjust-u(κ).
21:    return (G, κ).
22: end function


    The function InitColoring initializes an output coloring. It keeps all ⊥ potentials from the input
coloring κ0 intact, since those are already matched, and sets the rest to u.




                                                     29
Algorithm 9 Matching Phase - Init Coloring
    Input: Input coloring κ0 , step t
    Output: a new output coloring κ where all 6= ⊥ mass is set to u.
 1: function InitColoring(κ0 , t)
 2:    Let ν ← [λt ] ∪ {u, ⊥}.
 3:    Initialize new coloring κ over ν by setting µκ = 0.
 4:    µκ (I, ⊥) ← µκ0 (I, ⊥) for I ∈ I.
 5:    µκ (I, u) ← µκ0 (I, ν \ ⊥) for I ∈ I.
 6:    return κ.
 7: end function


    The function Adjust-u ensures the color u will have the same sparsity guarantees as the rest of colors
in the end of step t. Such guarantees will be discussed in Section 8.1.

Algorithm 10 Matching Phase - Adjust u
    Input: Coloring κ at the end of step t with bounded u-mass (in `1 sense).
    Output: Adjusted coloring κ with bounded u-support (in `0 sense).
 1: function Adjust-u(κ)
 2:    if µµκκ(X ,u)
              (Y,u) ∈/ [1/β, β] then
 3:         µκ (I, ⊥) ← µκ (I, ⊥) + µκ (I, u) for I ∈ I.
 4:         µκ (I, u) ← 0 for I ∈ I.
 5:    end if
                                     (µκ (I,∗ ),T u (µκ (I,u)))
 6:    (µκ (I, ∗6=u ), µκ (I, u)) ← µ (I,∗ 6=u),T u (µ (I,u))    for I ∈ I.
                                   k( κ 6=u           κ      )k1
 7:    return κ.
 8: end function



6    Correctness Analysis of the Interval Matching Algorithm
In this section, we prove correctness of the interval matching algorithm, namely Theorem 4.2, items 1
and 2. Item 3 (runtime) is proven in Section 8 later. Note that item 1 is immediate from the algorithm
(as we only add edges if ad distance is ≤ O(c)). Hence we focus on item 2. To help the reader in the
ensuing proofs, we collect important notations and definitions in Table 2 for quick reference.
    Our central correctness lemma shows that the “corruption” in each level/step grows by at most a con-
stant factor. Recall the notion of corruption from Def. 3.1: (I, χ) is F -corrupted pair if either: (1) π[I] =
⊥; (2) ad(I, π[I]) > c; (3) χ 6= ⊥ and ddF (µκ (I, χ), µκ (π[I], χ)) > 0; P
                                                                          or (4) χ = ⊥ and distG (I, π[I]) > 2.
                                                                  κ
Also, recall from Eqn. (1) corruption per interval parameter ξF (I) = χ:(I,χ) is F -corrupted pair µκ (I, χ) and
the total corruption is defined as ξFκ = ξFκ (I).
    The following central lemma bounds corruption growth per level/step:
Lemma 6.1 (Corruption growth per level). Fix , δ ∈ [0, 1], and alignment π ∈ Π. Fix step t, level l,
input coloring κ0 (built at the previous step) and output coloring κ0 (being built in the current step). Then,
                                                                    κ
                                                                   ξ +ξ    κ
                                             b such that ξ κbb = O F2/ ·δF + Õ n−8 with probability 1 − δ,
                                                                                         
AmendColoring at level l amends κ → κ
                                                           F
                  2
where Fb = F O(1/ ) .
                         0
   Recalling that ξFκ is the corruption at the end of the previous step, and ξFκ is the corruption at the
end of the previous level (in the current step), the above lemma bounds the multiplicative growth of the

                                                      30
corruption of the amended coloring κ̂, modulo a very small additive term. While the rest of the section
is devoted to proving this lemma, we first complete the proof of Lemma 4.2, item 2, which requires the
following fact for preserving dd-distance on summations :
Fact 6.2. For any a1 , . . . am , b1 . . . bm ∈ Rd+ , we have that:
                                              X X                  X
                                       dd2F (     ai ,    bi ) ≤ 2   ddF (ai , bi ).
                                                           i            i                  i
                                                                                   P           P
Proof. For j ∈ [d], let Lj ⊆ [m] be the set of coordinates where ai,j > F bi,j . If i∈Lj ai,j ≤ i∈[m]\Lj ai,j ,
     P           P                    P                        P        P
then i ai,j ≤ 2 i∈[m]\Lj ai,j ≤ 2F i bi,j , and hence dd2F ( i ai,j , i bi,j ) = 0. Otherwise,
                           X         X          X          X           X
                     dd2F (   ai,j ,   bi,j ) ≤   ai,j < 2    ai,j = 2     ddF (ai,j , bi,j ).
                                    i          i                    i              i∈Lj                 i

    Summing over all j ∈ [d], we get:

                 X          X            X            X                 X                  XX                                 X
        dd2F (       ai ,       bi ) =       dd2F (            ai,j ,       bi,j ) ≤               2 ddF (ai,j , bi,j ) = 2       ddF (ai , bi )
                 i          i            j             i                i                  j   i                              i

    as needed.

   We also state the following complexity statement, bounding the size of parts Pκχ0 , the set of intervals
I with µκ (I, χ) > 0 (in “step input” coloring κ0 ). Its proof appears in Section 8.1.
                                                                                                                                                        0
Lemma 6.3 (Size of color parts). At each step t, for each color χ0 ∈ ν \ {⊥}, we have that |Pκχ0 | =
n · O (β 5 · λ1−t ) whp.
  An immediate corollary of Lemma 6.3 is that the total number of steps is bounded by 1/ + O(1)
whp.
                                                                                                                                                   3t
Proof of Lemma 4.2, item 2 using Lemma 6.1. Fix step t with input coloring κ0 . Fix Ft = nα/Θ() . We
first show that for each output coloring κ generated at each MatchStep call, we have with probability
1/2, at the end of step t:
                                                                             2         0
                                                   ξFκt+1 = −O(1/ ) · ξFκt + Õ (n−8 ).
    To do that, we use Lemma 6.1, to obtain that in each level l ≤ logβ n we have −2/ · 4−1 factor
                                                                                                        2
growth in corruption with probability 1− 4 , and by the union bound we get overall blow-up −O(1/ ) with
probability 3/4 (as we have 1/ levels). Observe also that removing pairs with mass < n−10 in Line 19
introduces at most F · nO()−9 < n−8 additive corruption, since there are n1+O() total non-zero pairs and
each pair removed can generate at most F · n−10 corrupted mass. Finally, notice that by Fact 6.2, the
excess corruption introduced by InitColoring in any new step is bounded by 2.
    Now, notice we generate O(log n) i.i.d colorings in each step t for each input coloring κ0 , hence, we
must generate a “good” coloring κ with high probability as long as we started with at least one “good”
coloring from the previous step. Now, for a fixed c, define kc , |{i | adw,c (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ) > c}| and notice
we start the MatchIntervals algorithm with ξFκ1 = kc and generate O (1) blow-up per step.
    Finally, since MatchIntervals halts when µκ (I, ⊥) = 2n (this is the halting condition from, Line 6),
and by the corollary above the total number of steps is O (1), we have ξFκt = O (kc ) for any “good” coloring
κ. Furthermore, for any π-matchable pair I, π[I] with adw,c (I, π[I]) ≤ c, if the hop-path between I, π[I]
in G is more than 2, then this pair contributes 1 to ξFκt = O (kc ). We conclude that all but O (kc )
π-matchable pairs have a 2-hop path in G as needed.

                                                                             31
6.1   Bounding corruption growth per level: two key lemmas
To prove our central correctness Lemma 6.1, we introduce the following two key Lemmas. We refer the
reader to Table 2 for a quick recap of important quantities and formulas from our algorithm.
   In particular, note that the amended coloring is obtained via the following formula:
                                                                     µκ (I,∗6=u )+ ζ∈Z ϕζκ (I,∗)
                                                                                  P
                         µκb (I, ∗) = µκ (I, ∗6=u ) + µκ (I, u) ·                     l
                                                                    kµκ (I,∗6=u )+ ζ∈Z ϕζκ (I,∗)k1
                                                                                  P
                                                                                       l

                                                                                                         0
    Thus, in order to bound the growth of ξ κbb , we need to bound the quantities: dd(ϕζκ (I, ∗), ϕζκ (π[I], ∗)),
                                              F
for some ζ, ζ 0 , as well as the `1 normalization from above. These two goals correspond to the two key
lemmas.
    To state the key lemmas, we introduce the following measures ρ of the corruption of intervals from
nearby intervals. First, define Bπ (S) for S ⊆ I as the smallest enclosing ball around π[S]. Now, fix an
interval I ∈ I, output coloring κ, and arbitrary coloring κ0 (which can be either input or output coloring).
                                                                                                         0
Fix distortion F , and set S ⊆ I with µκ (S, u) > 0. We define “local” corruption measures ρκ,κ        F (I, S)
     g0
and ρκ,κ
      F (I, S) as follows:


                                            0       µκ (I,u)           0
                                        ρκ,κ                    κ
                                         F (I, S) = µκ (S,u) · ξF (S),
                                        g0          µκ (I,u)    κ0
                                        ρκ,κ
                                         F (I, S) = µκ (S,u) · ξF (Bπ (S)).

                                                                                                     0
    The first lemma below bounds the expected distortion-resistant corruption of ϕζκ (I, ·), ϕζκ (π[I], ·) for
a fixed interval I, as a function of its ρ scores of the neighborhoods of I, π[I]. The lemma considers
arbitrary ζ (radius around I), and a convenient ζ 0 (radius around π[I]) as a function of π.
Lemma 6.4. Fix step t, level l ≥ 0, and alignment π ∈ Π. Fix input coloring κ0 (obtained at the end of
step t − 1), and the current coloring κ (obtained at the end of level l − 1 or from InitColoring). Fix
F ∈ [nα , β o() ]. Consider I ∈ I, where (I, u) is not F -corrupted pair. For ζ ∈ Zl , define BI = Λζκ (I),
                                                                 ζ 0 /2
BI+ζ = Λ2ζ                 0                           3ζ
         κ (I), and let ζ ∈ Zl be such that π[Λκ (I)] ⊆ Λκ (π[I]). Let ζ+ = max{ζ, 1}, and similarly
 0 = max{ζ 0 , 1}. Then, for F
ζ+                             b , F Θ(1/2 ) (ζ 0 /ζ+ )Θ(1/) :
                                                +

  1. For l ≥ 1, in expectation over the random choices of A, χ0 , c in the algorithm, we have
                                                                            0
                        h                      0
                                                              i   l                       
                      E ddFb ϕζκ (I, ∗6=u ), ϕζκ (π[I], ∗6=u ) = O βζ · ρκ,κ
                                                                         F    (I, BI ) + 1
                                                                                         n9   .              (7)

  2. For l ≥ 0, with high probability,
                                                                       0
                                             0
                                                            l                           
                          ddFb ϕζκ (I, u), ϕζκ (π[I], u) = O ζβ+ · ρκ,κ
                                                                    F    (I, BI
                                                                               +ζ
                                                                                  ) + 1
                                                                                      n 9   .                (8)

    The second key lemma argues that normalizing each vector µ(I, ∗) does not add more than constant
corruption in each level.

Lemma 6.5. At the end of level l ≥ 0, for each coloring κ, we have µκ (I, ∗6=u ) + ζ∈Zl ϕζκ (I, ∗) =
                                                                                  P
                                                                                                             1
(Ω())l+1 for each I ∈ I with high probability.
   The proofs of Lemmas 6.4 and 6.5 are involved and appear in Section 7. We prove Lemma 4.2 using
these two key lemmas in Section 6.2 after introducing a few useful facts.

                                                          32
6.2      Proof of Lemma 6.1 from key correctness lemmas: corruption growth per level
Before continuing with the correctness analysis, we establish some auxiliary statements.
Distortion Resilient Distance Properties.
                                       P         We show some properties of Distortion Resilient Distance
from Def. 3.2. Recall that ddF (p, q) = i:pi >F ·qi |pi |. First, we show multiplication by scalars.
Fact 6.6. Fix p, q ∈ Rn+ and scalars a, b ∈ R+ . We have ddF (a · p, b · q) = a · dd                                     b (p, q)
                                                                                                                       F·a

Proof.                                                     X                         X
                           ddF (a · p, b · q) =                     |api | = a                   |pi | = a · dd  b (p, q)
                                                                                                               F·a
                                                          ap                          p    bF
                                                       i: bq i >F                  i: q i > a
                                                            i                           i




      We also show a bound on the `1 normalization of vectors.
Fact 6.7. Fix p, q ∈ Rn+ . We have,
                                                                                    
                             p     q               q    p            F (p,q)     F (q,p)
                   dd2·F 2 kpk , kqk   + dd2·F 2 kqk , kpk   ≤ 4 · ddkpk     + ddkqk
                                         1         1                       1        1                      1            1


Proof. By fact 6.6, we have that,
                                             
                 p      q               q    p       1                                                            1
       dd2·F 2 kpk  , kqk   + dd2·F 2 kqk , kpk   = kpk · dd                                        kpk (p, q) + kqk · dd        kqk (q, p)
                       1     1                         1       1               1            2·F 2 · kqk1            1    2·F 2 · kpk1
                                                                                                    1                               1

                                             kpk
    Now, consider a case where kqk1 ∈ [1/2F, 2F ], then we have that, using the observation that ddF (a, b)
                                   1
is decreasing in F :
                                                    
                        p      q               q    p       1                  1
               dd2·F 2 kpk , kqk   + dd2·F 2 kqk , kpk   ≤ kpk · ddF (p, q) + kqk · ddF (q, p)
                                 1       1                          1      1                 1                     1

                                         kpk
   Otherwise, assume w.l.o.g kqk1 > 2F , then on one hand we have that ddF (p, q) ≥ 0.5 kpk1 , and hence
                                 1                                               
                                                                           p
the RHS of the claim is at least 4 · 0.5 = 2. On the other hand, dd2F 2 kpk    , v ≤ 1 for any v, and
                                                                             1
similarly for q, and hence the LHS is at most 2 and the claim follows.



Alternative Counting for Λ balls. When bounding certain parameters, we use the following simple
combinatorial claim:
Claim 6.8. Fix coloring κ, parameter ζ ≥ 1 and function f : I → R+ . Then,
                             X                                          X
                                     µκ (I, u) · f (Λζκ (I)) =                µκ (Λζκ (I), u) · f (I) ≤ 2ζf (I).
                             I∈I                                        I∈I

Proof. The proof follows immediate by counting the contribution of each f (I) to elements in Λζκ (I).
Formally:

  X                                  X                       X                     XX
         µκ (I, u) · f (Λζκ (I)) =           µκ (I, u) ·                f (J) =                   1[µ(SEB(I, J)10 , u) ≤ ζ] · µκ (I, u)f (J)
  I∈I                                I∈I                   J∈Λζκ (I)                I∈I J∈I

 10
      SEB(I, J) = smallest enclosing ball containing both intervals


                                                                          33
    Now, by change of summation, such quantity equals

   XX                                                            X                  X                       X
             1[µ(SEB(I, J), u) ≤ ζ] · µκ (I, u)f (J) =                  f (J) ·               µκ (I, u) =         µκ (Λζκ (J), u) · f (J).
   J∈I I∈I                                                       J∈I              I∈Λζκ (J)                 J∈I


    And since µκ (Λζκ (J), u) ≤ 2ζ, we conclude:
                          X                                    X
                                µκ (I, u) · f (Λζκ (I)) =             µκ (Λζκ (I), u) · f (I) ≤ 2ζf (I).
                          I∈I                                   I∈I
    as needed.


   We now proceed to the proof of Lemma 6.1. Recall
                                                  that     Lemma 6.1 states that, in a fixed level, the
                                                    κ0 +ξ κ
                                                            
                                                  ξF
             b (amended from κ) satisfies ξ b = O 2/ ·δF + Õ n−8 with probability 1 − δ, where
                                           κ
                                                                     
new coloring κ                             b
                                                           F
            2
Fb = F O(1/ ) . For reader’s convenience, we include a summary table of notations.

Proof of Lemma 6.1 using Lemmas 6.4, 6.5. Fix distortion F , level l, and consider an interval I ∈ I \
π −1 [⊥] with ad(I, π[I]) ≤ c. Let mI = µκ (I, u) and mπ[I] = µκ (π[I], u). If either (I, u) or (π[I], u) are
corrupted — meaning ddF (mI , mπ[I] ) + ddF (mπ[I] , mI ) > 0 and hence ddF (mI , mπ[I] ) + ddF (mπ[I] , mI ) ≥
                                                   m +m
max{mI , mπ[I] } — then ξFκ ({I, π[I]}) ≥ I 2 π[I] (merely from u-color). The new coloring κ
                                                                                           b, obtained
at the end of level l, updates at most mI + mπ[I] total mass. Hence, we have:

                                            X
  κ
 ξ2F
  b
     ({I, π[I]}) − ξFκ ({I, π[I]}) ≤                    dd2F (µκb (I 0 , ∗6=⊥ ), µκb (π[I 0 ], ∗6=⊥ )) + (µκb (I 0 , ⊥) − µκ (I 0 , ⊥)) (9)
                                        I 0 ∈{I,π[I]}
                                            X
                                    ≤                   ddF (µκ (I 0 , ∗6=⊥ ), µκ (π[I 0 ], ∗6=⊥ )) + 3mI 0                              (10)
                                        I 0 ∈{I,π[I]}

                                    ≤ O(ξFκ ({I, π[I]})).                                                                                (11)

    For the rest we consider intervals I such that both (I, u) and (π[I], u) are not F -corrupted, i.e.,
 mI
mπ[I] ∈ [1/F, F ].
    To bound the new corruption ξF̂κb (I), we analyze two cases: the base case of level l = 0, where our
main goal is to match intervals and the corruption added is for already matched pairs (colored ⊥) without
a short path in G, and the general case of l ≥ 1, and our goal is to move µ-mass from u-color to χ ∈ [λt ]
color, in similar proportion for both I and π[I]. In both cases, we analyze the expectation of ξ κbb as a
                                                                                                                                     F
                 0
function of ξFκ , ξFκ .
                                                                                                                   µκ (I,∗6=u )+ ζ∈Z ϕζκ (I,∗)
                                                                                                                                P
    Recall our coloring update procedure replaces the u-mass of I by vector µκ (I, u)·                                              l
                                                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                   µκ (I,∗6=u )+ ζ∈Z ϕζκ (I,∗)
                                                                                                                                P
                                                                                                                                     l           1


Base case of level l = 0. At the beginning of the step, we have that µκ (I, ⊥) = µκ0 (I, ⊥) and
µκ (I, u) = µκ0 (I, ν \ ⊥). Furthermore, at level 0, we amend only the u and ⊥ color potentials. For u, we
invoke Lemma 6.4 (2) and obtain (whp) that
                                                         0
                                                                               0            
                  ddFb ϕ0κ (I, u), ϕ0κ (π[I], u) = O ρκ,κ              1           κ        1
                                                
                                                      F    (I, {I}) + n10   = O  ξ F (I) + n10   .

For ⊥, observe that ϕ0κ (I, ⊥) ≤ φκ (I, ν \ {u, ⊥}) at level 0. Now, consider an F -uncorrupted pair
(I, χ0 ) ∈ I × ν \ {⊥} that has been clustered by the anchor at color χ. By Claim 5.3 (1), we have

                                                                   34
                      Table 2: Summary of main notations and their definitions.
                                                   Parameters
      Arbitrary small constant; complexity is n 1+O() .   α = 5/ . We define F0 = nα .
           
 λ = n . Sample size growths by factor λ each step. η          = α2 3 . The set of costs Ec has size 1/η.
 β = n . Base radius growths by β factor each level. k        = Õ(β 3 ), a pivot “oversampling” factor.
                                                Transformations
                                                                  Θ(1/)
                                                         Tc
                      
                      xi
                                    xi ≥ γ                   = T1/β,1/β 3
 q                                                                O(1/)
Tδ,γ (x)           = 0               xi < δγ             Tθ   = T1/√β,1
                        γ · ( xγi )q Otherwise
                      
                                                                  O(1/)
                                                         Tu
                      
                                                              = T1/β,Ω (1)
                                                             
                                                             1
                                                                          i≥s·d
Qδ,s,F (x)        = maxJ⊆[d] a|J| · minj∈J xj     where ai = 0             i < (s − δ)d
                                                             
                                                             
                                                              1/F sd−i     Otherwise
Ql (x)            = Q  (l+1) α2 (x)
                         4 ,1−   2       ,n
                                                           Potentials
                                         Pjmax n−αj
φκ (I, χ)           = µκ0 (I, χ0 ) 2n
                                   λt   j=0 d
                                                                                                     0
                                                d , is the basic potential from matching anchor (A, χ , ĉ)
                                               I,j

dd
 I,j                = Θ (max{d(I, χ )ĉ+jc , n−α · d(A, χ0 )3ĉ }), is the approximated density for a matched interval I
                                       0

ϕ0κ (I, ⊥)          = T c (µκ (I, u) · φκ (I, ν \ {u, ⊥}))
Λζκ (I)             smallest interval ball containing ζ of `1 -mass of u-color in µ on the left and right of I
                                       2l         ζ        
ϕζκ (I, ∗6=u )      = T c µκ (I, u) · βζ 2 · φκ (Λβκl(I),∗)
                                                                                         −1
                                                                           V
                                                                                                            
                                                                                  ζ
Γl,ζ (V, χ0 )                                                 0               0              4α    n
                    a vector of costs in Ec with Γl,ζ (V, χ ) = min rdκ0 (V, χ , Λκ (V )) · n · β l ·λt , 1
σV,χ0               = Ql (T θ (Γl,ζ (V, χ0 )))
V                   multiset of pivots; = subsampling (V, χ0 ) ∈ I × ν \ {⊥} k times with prob. µκ0 (V, χ0 ) · β −l
mV ((V, χ0 ))                                 0
                                      ( χ ) in V
                    multiplicity of (V,
                                          σV,χ0 µκ0 (Λζκ0 (V ), χ0 ) ≤ λ · β 6 · β l
θκζ (V, χ0 )        = mV ((V, χ0 )) ·
                                          1        Otherwise
Zl , l > 0             l                          l
                    = β · {1, 2, 4, 8, . . . , n/β }, is the set of radiuses ζ
Z0                  = {0}.                         n P                              o
                                           2l
ϕζκ (I, u), ζ > 0   = T u µκ (I, u) · βζ 2 · min k1 · χ0 ∈ν\{⊥} θκζ (Λζκ (I), χ0 ), 1
                                          0
                                                      
ϕζκ (I, u), ζ = 0   = T u µκ (I, u) · θκ (I,ν\{⊥})
                                                k
                                                       µκ (I,∗6=u )+ ζ∈Z ϕζκ (I,∗)
                                                                    P
µκb (I, ∗)          = µκ (I, ∗6=u ) + µκ (I, u) ·                       l
                                                                                     (always a distribution over χ’s)
                                                      kµκ (I,∗6=u )+ ζ∈Z ϕζκ (I,∗)k1
                                                                    P
                                                                      l

                      (                                    Error measures
                       1                                                                       π[I] = ⊥ or ad(I, π[I]) > c
ξFκ (I)             =
                       ddF (µκ (I, ∗6=⊥ ), µκ (π[I], ∗6=⊥ )) + µκ (I, ⊥)1[distG (I, π[I]) > 2] Otherwise
     0                               0
ρκ,κ
 F (I, S)           = µµκκ(S,u)
                          (I,u)
                                · ξFκ (S)
g0                                   0
ρκ,κ
 F (I, S)           = µµκκ(S,u)
                          (I,u)
                                · ξFκ (Bπ (S)), where Bπ (S) for S ⊆ I is the smallest enclosing ball around π[S]




                                                             35
ddO(F ·n2α ) (φκ (I, χ), φκ (π[I], χ)) ≤ n−10 whp. Notice also that whenever φκ (I, χ) > 0, we add an edge
(A, I) to G which is uniquely identified by color χ. Therefore, one of the following must hold:
   1. We add both edges (A, I) and (A, π[I]) to G; or
   2. The total contribution of F -uncorrupted pairs to ϕ0κ (I, ⊥) is O(n−9 ).
                                                                       0
    Focusing on corrupted pairs (I, χ0 ), note that there is ξFκ corrupted mass in I; i.e., total µκ0 of (I, χ0 )
                                                           0
with ddF (µκ0 (I, χ0 ), µκ0 (π[I], χ0 )) > 0 is at most ξFκ . Recall that we sample λt anchors and by Claim 5.3
                                                                      µ (I,χ0 )
(2), each such anchor generates, in expectation, potential O( κ0 λt ).
    Therefore, for each (I, χ0 ) pair, the added potential over all anchors is a r.v. with expectation
                                                                                                          0
O(µκ0 (I, χ0 )). Overall, we obtain the expected contribution of corrupted pairs to ϕ0κ (I, ⊥) is O(ξFκ (I)).
Define uI = µκ (I, ∗6=u ) + ϕ0κ (I, ∗) and ZI , 1[distG (I, π[I]) > 2]. Notice that,

 h         i
E ξFκbb (I) ≤ ku1I k   ZI · E[µκ (I, ⊥) + ϕ0κ (I, ⊥)] + E ddFb µκ (I, u) + ϕ0κ (I, u), µκ (π[I], u) + ϕ0κ (π[I], u)
                                                                                                                  
                     1
            F act 6.2                      0
                                                       
               ≤ ku1I k · O ξFκ (I) + ξFκ (I) + n19 .
                          1


   as there are only u and ⊥ colors to consider at l = 0. By Lemma 6.5, we have kuI k1 = Ω().
Taking into account Eqn. (9) for corrupted (I, u), we therefore have in expectation E[ξ κbb (I) − ξFκ (I)] =
                                                                                        F
                   0
O 1 (ξFκ (I) + ξFκ (I) + n−9 ) overall for each interval. Summing over all intervals we conclude E[ξ κbb ] =
                                                                                                     F
    1 κ       κ0     −8
O  (ξF + ξF + n ) .

General case. Consider level l ≥ 1. Intuitively, the new corruption added to I is driven by 1) vectors
ϕ that differ between I and π[I] (in dd sense), and 2) normalization. For a fixed ζ ∈ Zl , we shall bound
                                   0
the quantity ddF 0 (ϕζκ (I), ϕζκ (π[I])), for some ζ 0 ∈ Zl , F 0 ≥ F , by the following quantity in expectation,
up to a constant:
                   0
           l
                                                                                                                    
                                                                  mI β l     κ0
   ρζI , βζ · ρκ,κ
               F     (I, Λ 2ζ
                           κ  (I)) +   1
                                     log n · ρ
                                             gκ,κ
                                              F   (I, Λ 3ζ
                                                        κ  (I)) ≥ 4ζ   ζ · ξF   (Λ 2ζ
                                                                                   κ  (I)) +   1
                                                                                                  ξ
                                                                                             log n F
                                                                                                    κ
                                                                                                      (Bπ (Λ 3ζ
                                                                                                             κ  (I)))  . (12)
                                     0
   To bound E[ddF 0 (ϕζκ (I), ϕζκ (π[I]))] by O(ρζI ), we first show such quantity is bounded by O(mI ).
Indeed:
                             0
                                            h        i
        E[ddF 0 (ϕζκ (I), ϕζκ (π[I]))] ≤ E ϕζκ (I)
                                                   1
                                       ϕ def h               2l
                                                                                   2l         ζ         i
                                        ≤ E T u µκ (I, u) · βζ 2 + T c µκ (I, u) · βζ 2 · φκ (Λβκl(I),∗)
                                                                                                                1
                                         ≤ E[mI + mI · ζ1 · φκ (Λζκ (I), ν)]
                                         Claim 5.3
                                            =        mI + mI · ζ1 · O(ζ)
                                         = O(mI ).
                                                                   0
    From the above, if ρζI ≥ m                   ζ       ζ               ζ                      ζ    mI
                               10 , then E[ddF (ϕκ (I), ϕκ (π[I]))] = O(ρI ). Hence we assume ρI < 10 in the
                                I              0

rest.
                                                               ζ 0 /2
    Let ζ 0 ∈ Zl be the smallest such that π[Λ3ζ                                      0
                                                   κ (I)] ⊆ Λκ (π[I]). Note that ζ = O(F · ζ · log n) —
as otherwise, this would mean µκ (Bπ (Λκ (I)), u) = ω(F · ζ · log n), and since µκ (Λ3ζ
                                            3ζ
                                                                                           κ (I), u) ≤ 6ζ (by
                                                            3ζ
definition of Λ-balls), this in turn implies most of Bπ (Λκ (I)) × {u} is F -corrupted, and hence:
                                                                                    Eqn. (12)
               ξFκ (Bπ (Λ3ζ                      3ζ
                         κ (I)) > 0.5 · µκ (Bπ (Λκ (I)), u) = ω(ζ · F · log n)         ⇒        ρζI > ω(mI ),

                                                              36
which is a contradiction.
                                                     2                                  2
   By Lemma 6.4, we have that, for some F 0 = F Θ(1/ ) satisfying F 0 ≥ (F ζ 0 /ζ)Θ(1/ ) · 2 log n:

  "                                       # "                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                          
                               ζ0                                                            ζ0                                                    ζ0
E dd       F0         ϕζκ (I), ϕκ (π[I]) = E dd                F0         ϕζκ (I, ∗6=u ), ϕκ (π[I], ∗6=u ) + dd             F0         ϕζκ (I, u), ϕκ (π[I], u)
        2 log n                                             2 log n                                                      2 log n

                                                = O(ρζI + n−9 ).

      We now aggregate the contribution from all ζ’s, obtaining:

                                                                                                                         
                                                                Fact 6.6
                             X                 X                                                X                  X
            E ddF 0               ϕζκ (I),          ϕζκ (π[I])            =        E dd F 0   ϕζκ (I), |Zl | ·   ϕζκ (π[I])
                             ζ∈Zl              ζ∈Zl                                          |Zl |     ζ                     ζ
                                                                                                             
                                                                      Fact 6.2  X                  X
                                                                         ≤ 2E    dd F 0 ϕζκ (I),   ϕζκ (π[I])
                                                                                             ζ       2|Zl |              ζ
                                                                                         "                                         #
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                    ζ0
                                                                              X
                                                                      ≤2             E dd       F0         ϕζκ (I), ϕκ (π[I])
                                                                                ζ            2 log n
                                                                                      
                                                                           X ζ
                                                                      = O  (ρI + n−9 ) .
                                                                                     ζ


    Finally, we consider the contribution from normalization. Define uI = µκ (I, ∗6=u ) + ζ∈Zl ϕζκ (I) and
                                                                                                                         P

vI = µκ (π[I], ∗6=u ) + ζ∈Zl ϕζκ (π[I]). Using Fact 6.7 and Lemma 6.5 to bound the normalization, we
                               P
have:
  h                                                            i
E dd8F 02 ( kuuIIk1 , kvvIIk1 ) + dd8F 02 ( kvvIIk1 , kuuIIk1 ) ≤ O l+1   1
                                                                             
                                                                               · E [dd2F 0 (uI , vI ) + dd2F 0 (vI , uI )]
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                 F act 6.2
                                                                                                                         (ρζ + ρζ + n−9 ) .
                                                                                                                   X
                                                                                 1
                                                                                      · ξFκ (I) + ξFκ (π[I]) +
                                                                                    
                                                                    = O l+1                                                               I     π[I]
                                                                                                                                   ζ∈Zl
                                                                                                                                                        (13)

      We now compute the aggregate contribution ξF̂κ̂ (I) over all intervals I ∈ I, where F̂ = 8F 02 · F =
        2
F Θ(1/ ) . For this, we need to also bound the sum of all ρζI quantities as a function of total corruption
ξFκ , which we do in the next claim.
                                                                                            0
Claim 6.9. Fix l > 0 and assume µκ (Y, u), µκ (X , u) ≥ 1. Then, I∈I ζ∈Zl ρζI = O(ξFκ + ξFκ ).
                                                                   P      P

                           l    0
Proof. Recall that ρζI = βζ ρκ,κ    2ζ         1 g  κ,κ    3ζ
                             F (I, Λκ (I)) + log n ρF (I, Λκ (I)). We bound the sum of each term sepa-
rately. First, let rX = min{2ζ − 1, µκ (X , u)} and rY = min{2ζ − 1, µκ (Y, u)}. Then µκ (Λ2ζ
                                                                                           κ (I), u) ∈
[rX , 2(rX + 1)] for I ∈ X (and similarly for Y) and:




                                                                                37
            X κ,κ0            X µ (I,u)      0
                                                         X µ (I,u)      0
             ρF (I, Λ2ζ
                     κ (I)) ≤
                                 κ
                                  rX    · ξFκ (Λ2ζ
                                                κ (I)) +
                                                            κ
                                                             rY    · ξFκ (Λ2ζ
                                                                           κ (I))
            I∈I                       I∈X                                  I∈Y
                                   Claim 6.8           X                          0
                                                                                                X                       0
                                       ≤           1
                                                  rX         µκ (Λ2ζ           κ        1
                                                                  κ (I), u) · ξF (I) + rY             µκ (Λ2ζ           κ
                                                                                                           κ (I), u) · ξF (I)
                                                       I∈X                                      I∈Y
                                                                    κ0                                   0
                                            X                                    X
                                   ≤ r1X          2(rX + 1) · ξF (I) + r1Y             2(rY + 1) · ξFκ (I)
                                            I∈X                                  I∈Y
                                         0
                                   < 3ξFκ .
                                                      l    0
    Summing over ζ ∈ Zl , we get I∈I ζ∈Zl βζ ρκ,κ               2ζ          κ0
                                      P     P
                                                         F (I, Λκ (I)) = O(ξF ). For the second term, defining
 κ
ξf        κ ← −−1 (I)) = ξ κ ({I 0 ∈ I | ←
                                         −(I 0 ) = I})11 :
 F (I) , ξF ( π           F              π

            X κ,κ                 X µ (I,u)                         X µ (I,u)
                        3ζ                      κ        3ζ
             ρg
              F   (I, Λ κ  (I)) ≤    κ
                                      rX    · ξ F (Bπ (Λ κ  (I))) +    κ
                                                                        rY    · ξFκ (Bπ (Λ3ζ
                                                                                          κ (I)))
            I∈I                       I∈X                                        I∈Y
                                      X µ (I,u)                           X µ (I,u)
                                             κ             κ   3ζ                κ          κ   3ζ
                                  ≤           rX        · ξf
                                                           F (Λκ (I)) +           rY     · ξf
                                                                                            F (Λκ (I))
                                      I∈X                                 I∈Y
                                  Claim 6.8            X                                     X
                                      ≤           1
                                                 rX          µκ (Λ3ζ           κ        1
                                                                  κ (I), u) · ξF (I) + rY
                                                                              f                    µκ (Λ3ζ           κ
                                                                                                        κ (I), u) · ξF (I)
                                                                                                                    f
                                                       I∈X                                   I∈Y
                                                         ←−                                             ←−
                                           X                                              X
                                  ≤ r1X          µκ (Λ3ζ                κ        1
                                                      κ ( π (I)), u) · ξF (I) + rY              µκ (Λ3ζ                κ
                                                                                                     κ ( π (I)), u) · ξF (I)
                                           I∈Y                                            I∈X
                                           X                                    X
                                  ≤ r1X          3(rX + 1) · ξFκ (I) + r1Y            3(rY + 1) · ξFκ (I)
                                       I∈X                                      I∈Y
                                      κ
                                  < 4ξF .
                                            P          P        1 g  κ,κ    ζ         |Zl |    κ      κ
   Summing over ζ ∈ Zl , we get                  I∈I     ζ∈Zl log n ρF (I, Λκ (I)) ≤ log n · 4ξF = O(ξF ). By summing up
both terms, the claim follows.

   Finally, we can estimate the amount of “new corruption”, I∈I ddFb (µκb (I, ∗), µκb (π[I], ∗)) − ξFκ , by
                                                              P
summing Eqn. (13) over all intervals I ∈ I, and using Claim 6.9 (noting we only call AmendColoring
when µκ (Y, u), µκ (X , u) ≥ β l = ω(1) for level l > 0).
 11
      Recall ←
             −(I) = π(I + j), where j ≥ 0, is the minimal one such that π(I + j) 6= ⊥.
             π




                                                                     38
                         X
           E[ξFκbb ] =         E[ξFκbb (I)]
                         I∈I
                   F act 6.2      X h                                                                             i
                                                                                            uI              vI
                         ≤      2  E ddFb/2 (µκ (I, ∗6=u ), µκ (π[I], ∗6=u )) + ddFb/2 (mI kuI k1 , mπ[I] kvI k1 )
                                   I∈I
                                                                                                                        
                   Eqn. (13)
                                                                                                      (ρζI + ρζπ[I] + n−9 )
                                              X                                                X
                                  2ξFκ +                1
                                                                 · ξFκ (I) + ξFκ (π[I]) +
                                                             
                         ≤                          O   l
                                              I∈I                                              ζ∈Zl
                                                                                          
                                               X            X ζ
                   = 2ξFκ + O            1
                                         l
                                               ·  ξFκ (I) +  (ρI + n−9 )
                                                I∈I                    ζ∈Zl
                   Claim 6.9                       0
                                                                 
                      ≤      2ξFκ + O 1l · ξFκ + ξFκ + Õ(n−8 )
                                        0
                                             
                   = O 2/1
                                · ξFκ + ξFκ + Õ(n−8 ).
    The soundness of the Lemma is obtained using the Markov inequality.


7    Proof of Key Correctness Lemmas 6.4, 6.5
We now prove the key correctness Lemmas 6.4, 6.5. Before proceeding, we develop several supporting
statements, in particular:
    • We argue how soft operators are resilient under the dd distance;
    • We provide a proof for density approximation algorithm, Lemma 5.2;
    • We provide a proof for φ color assignment properties, Claim 5.3.
Soft operators are resilient under DD. We show that dd distance behaves nicely under the soft
operators of thresholding T and quantile Q (which are used precisely for that reason).
                                             q         q
Claim 7.1. For any x, y ≥ 0, we have ddF q (Tδ,γ (x), Tδ,γ (y)) < ddF (x, y) + γ(δF )q .
                      q                  q
Proof. Let tx = Tδ,γ    (x) and ty = Tδ,γ  (y) We first observe that tx ≤ x, and hence if x > F y, then
ddF (tx , ty ) ≤ tx ≤ x = ddF (x, y). Now, suppose x ≤ F y. If ty > 0, then tx ≤ F q ty by definition
    q

of T transformation (in particular, in the interesting regime when y ≤ γ, we have ty = γ · (y/γ)q ≥
F −q γ · (x/γ)q ≥ tx /F q ). Otherwise tx ≤ γ · (δF )q , and hence ddF q (tx , ty ) ≤ tx ≤ γ · (δF )q .
Claim 7.2. Fix δ < 1 and integers v, d with v < δd. Fix x, y ∈ [0, 1]d with kxk∞ ≤ 1. For any set of
coordinates U ⊆ [d] of size d − v we have: ddF 0 ·F v (Qδ,s,F (x), Qδ,s,F (y)) ≤ ddF 0 (xU , yU ) + 1/F δd−v .
Proof. Let qx = Qδ,s,F (x), qy = Qδ,s,F (y). Consider the set J which maximizes qx . We have |J ∩ U | ≥
|J| − v and hence either (1) a|J∩U | ≥ a|J| · F −v , in which case
                                   ddF 0 ·F v (qx , qy ) ≤ ddF 0 F v (a|J| · min xj , a|J∩U | · min yj )
                                                                                   j∈J                  j∈J∩U

                                                             ≤ ddF 0 (min xj , min yj )
                                                                        j∈J        j∈J∩U

                                                             ≤ ddF 0 ( min xj , min yj )
                                                                        j∈J∩U       j∈J∩U

                                                             ≤ ddF 0 (xJ∩U , yJ∩U )
                                                             ≤ ddF 0 (xU , yU ).


                                                                              39
   or (2) a|J| ≤ 1/F δd−v , in which case ddF 0 F k (qx , qy ) ≤ qx ≤ F v−δd · kxk∞ ≤ F v−δd . This concludes the
proof.


Corollary 7.3. Suppose v = Θ(1/α) with d = Ω(1/α2 ). Fix x, y ∈ [0, 1]d with kxk∞ ≤ 1. For any set
of coordinates U ⊆ [d] of size d − v we have: ddF ·nO(α) (Ql (x), Ql (y)) ≤ ddF (xU , yU ) + n−10 .
                                                               2
Proof. Apply Claim 7.2 with F 0 = F , F = nC·α for some large enough constant C.

Analysis for Approximating Densities. We now analyze the performance of ApproxDensity and
ApproxRelativeDensity (Alg. 3), proving Lemma 5.2.

Proof of Lemma 5.2. For (1), let d = dκ (I, χ, S)c and let db = µκ (S     f∗ , χ) + 1 · |S ∗ \ S
                                                                                               f∗ | be the estimator.
                                                                                    γ
Also, let d0 = dκ (I, χ, S \ S
                             f∗ )c and s = |S ∗ \ S
                                                  f∗ |. Note that s is a sum of independent random variables in
                                         log n
[0, 1] with expectation γd0 . If d0 ≥ Ω( γ ), then by Chernoff bound, s would concentrate whp: s = Θ(γd0 ).
Otherwise, if d0 < O( logγ n ), then whp s/γ ≤ O( logγ n ) = dm for appropriately chosen constant. Hence the
algorithm outputs whp, up to the Θ(·) rescaling:

max{d,b dm } = max{dκ (I, χ, S   f∗ )c + Θ(1) · max{dκ (I, χ, S \ Sf∗ )c , dm }, dm } = Θ(1) · max{dκ (I, χ, S)c , dm }.
                                                                                                                        
For run-time, we have from Theorem 8.1, that generating the set S 0 costs Õ(γµκ (S, χ)+1) = Õ µκd(S,χ)      m
                                                                                                                    +  1   ,
                                                                                                                    
and since |S 0 | is bounded by that amount as well. The total complexity hence is TD = Tad ·Õ µκd(S,χ)     m
                                                                                                                 +1 .
   For (2), we first note that since I ∈ S, then d ≥ µκ (I, χ), and since we set dm = µκ (I, χ) in
the first call to ApproxDensity, we have that db = Θ(d) whp. Also, let D = dκ (I, χ)c , noting that
D/d = rdκ (I, χ, S)c . Now, consider the second call to ApproxDensity, and let D                 b be the output; by
part (1), we have that D = Θ(1) · max{D, rdm µκ (I, χ)}.
                           b
   Combining the bounds on D               b we have that whp, using that d ≥ µκ (I, χ):
                                    b and d,
                         n        o
                                                      rdm µκ (I,χ)
                     max D̂ˆ , rdm = Θ(1) max{ D   d,      d       , rdm } = Θ(1) · max{ D d , rdm }.
                                       d
                                                                                                                           
                                     ˆ + TD (D̂) + Õ(1) = Tad · Õ                          µκ (S,χ)    1    µκ (I,χ)
      For runtime, we have TRD = TD (d)                                                      µκ (I,χ) + rdm · µκ (I,χ)          as needed.


Analysis for φ invariants. We now prove the properties of the φ potentials, in particular Claim 5.3.

Proof of Claim 5.3. Fix pair (I, χ0 ), and ĉ ∈ Ec . Assuming that (I, χ0 ) was clustered by some anchor
                                                                      µκ0 (I,χ0 )
(A, χ00 ), for fixed j ∈ {0, . . . jmax }, let mI,χ0 ,j = n−αj · 2n
                                                                 λt ·             , where ĉj = ĉ + jc, and dd
                                                                                                              I,j the
                                                                         d              dI,j
                                  0        −α                         χ00 )3ĉ . For a color χ ∈ [λt ], the contribution
approximation of max{d    Pκ (I, χ )ĉj , n dA } with dA = dκ (A,
                            0                                    0
        0                                                           0
of (I, χ ) to φκ (I, χ) is j∈{0,...,jmax } mI,χ0 ,j , whenever (I, χ ) was clustered by the anchor at distance ĉj .

                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                  0
                                   0                     00                           0    00                          2n µκ0 (I,χ )
                                                                                          −αj
E   A,χ00       m
                I,χ0 ,j   · 1 (I, χ ) clustered by (A, χ , j) = Pr00 A ∈ Nĉj (I) ∧ χ = χ · n       · EA∈Nĉ (I) λt · d
                                                                  A,χ                                         j             dI,j
                                                                         X µ 0 (A,χ0 )                                 
                                                                                                            µκ0 (I,χ0 )
                                                                = n−αj ·         κ
                                                                                   2n   · 2n
                                                                                          λt · EA∈Nĉ (I)      d        j          dI,j
                                                                               A∈Nĉj (I)
                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                        −αj              0                                          µκ0 (I,χ0 )
                                                                   =n         · dκ0 (I, χ )ĉj · λ1t · EA∈Nĉ (I)       [Ω(1),1]·max{dκ0 (I,χ0 )ĉj ,n−α dA }
                                                                                                             j




                                                                    40
                                                       0             0
                                 P
    The last equality is since     A∈Nĉj (I) µκ0 (A, χ ) = dκ0 (I, χ )ĉj , and that dI,j is a constant-factor approx-
                                                                                      d
imation to max{dκ0 (I, χ0 )ĉj , n−α dA }. Summing over all j, this immediately gives us the required upper
bound for item (2), as we need only consider the first component of the max:
                                                                      µ (I,χ0 )
                                                                               
                             EA,χ00 ,ĉ φκ (I, χ) · 1[χ0 = χ00 ] = O κ0 λt
                                                               
                                                                                  .
     For item (3), recall that dA = dκ0 (A, χ0 )3ĉ and since I ∈ Nĉj (A), we have that dA ≤ dκ0 (I, χ0 )6ĉ
(by triangle inequality) . Therefore, whenever max{dκ0 (I, χ0 )ĉj , dA · n−α } > dκ0 (I, χ0 )ĉj we have that
dκ0 (I, χ0 )ĉj ≤ n−α · dκ0 (I, χ0 )6ĉ , which can happen only for at most O(1/α) costs ĉ ∈ Ec . Now, consider
any other “good cost”, and consider j = 0; we get the following bound:

                                                                                     µ 0 (I,χ0 )
       EA,χ00 mI,0 · 1 (I, χ0 ) clustered by (A, χ00 , j) ≥ dκ0 (I, χ0 )ĉj · λ1t · d κ0 (I,χ       = µκ0 (I, χ0 )/λt .
                                                       
                                                                                              0)
                                                                                                 ĉ
                                                                                                  κ   j

Since mI,0 is a lower bound on the total potential, and we are sampling a cost from a universe of size
|Ec | = 1/η, this implies that for all but O(η/α) fraction of costs ĉ ∈ Ec :
                                                                    µ (I,χ0 )
                                    EA,χ00 φκ (I, χ) · 1[χ0 = χ00 ] ≥ κ0 λt
                                          

 as needed for (3).
    It remains to prove item (1). Assume (I, χ0 ) is not F -corrupted, i.e., µκ0 (I, χ0 ) ≤ F · µκ0 (π[I], χ0 ).
                                                                                              0
Consider any j < jmax , and recall the clustering property — that Nc (Aj ) ∩ Pκχ0 ⊆ Aj+1 — and hence
π[I] ∈ Aj+1 . Also, we have that dd                        −α d ) = Ω(n−α d 0 (A, χ0 ) ), and hence
                                  I,j is at least Ω(n          A             κ            3ĉ
                                                            
                              max{dA n−α ,dκ0 (I,χ0 )ĉj }
                                                                                          
                dd                                                            dA n−α
                \
                 I,j
                      = Ω           −α            0
                            max{dA n ,d 0 (π[I],χ )ĉ      }
                                                               = Ω   min{1,         0
                                                                            d 0 (A,χ )3ĉ }   = Ω(n−α ),
               dπ[I],j+1                          κ           j+1                       κ


where the second derivation is by triangle inequality. Therefore, ddO(F ·n2α ) (mI,j , mπ[I],j+1 ) = 0 for any
j < jmax . For j = jmax = O(1/α), we have mI,jmax ≤ n−11 · n ≤ n−10 , and by summing over all mI,j and
mπ[I],j , we obtain ddO(F ·n2α ) (φκ (I, χ), φκ (π[I], χ)) ≤ n−10 as needed for (1).
   This concludes the proof.


7.1    Controlling average ϕ corruption: proof of Lemma 6.4
We prove parts 1 and 2 separately. We use the following notation: for any J ∈ I, define mJ = µκ (J, u),
                 0
and Bπ[I] = Λζκ (π[I]).

Proof of Lemma 6.4 (1). Let pχ = J∈BI φκ (J, χ), qχ = J∈Bπ[I] φκ (J, χ), vχ = J∈BI ϕζκ (J, χ), uχ =
                                        P                          P                         P
P           ζ0                                           ν\{u,⊥} correspondingly. Also, let m = µ (I, u), and
   J∈Bπ[I] ϕκ (J, χ). We define vectors p, q, v, u ∈ R                                         I κ
note that since (I, u) is not F -corrupted pair in κ, then ddF (mI , mπ[I] ) = 0. We have, using T c , for some
             2
Fb = F Θ(1/ ) :
                                                       l                      l
                                                                                     
                        ddFb (v, u) ≤ ddFb T c (mI · ζβ2 · p), T c (mπ[I] · ζβ02 · q)
                                    Claim 7.1                 l                 l
                                                                                      
                                       ≤      ddFbΘ() mI · ζβ2 · p, mπ[I] · ζβ02 · q + n−10
                                      F act 6.6           l
                                                                                            −10
                                         ≤        mI · ζβ2 dd              ζ 2 (p, q) + n
                                                                FbΘ() /F · 02
                                                                           ζ
                                                      l
                                      ≤ mI · ζβ2 ddF 4 (p, q) + n−10 .


                                                                    41
    It remains to compute (the expected value of) ddF 4 (p, q), i.e., the difference in φ potential. Fix a
color (coordinate) χ. If an interval J ∈ BI is matched to some anchor/color (A, χ0 ) pair, and (J, χ0 ) is
not F -corrupted pair, then, by Claim 5.3, similar potential will be added to π[J] up to distortion factor
O(F · n2α ) ≤ F 4 : specifically, ddF 4 (φκ (J, χ), φκ (π[J], χ)) ≤ ddO(F n2α ) (φκ (J, χ), φκ (π[J], χ)) ≤ n−10 whp.
                                                                                               0                       0
    Now focus on corrupted pairs (J, χ0 ) where J ∈ BI , χ0 ∈ ν. Note that ξFκ (BI ) ≤ m       2ζ
                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                   · ρκ,κ
                                                                                                      F (I, BI ); i.e.,
                                                                           κ,κ0
                                                                                    
                  0                     0               0             ζ
total µκ0 of (J, χ ) with ddF (µκ0 (J, χ ), µκ0 (π[J], χ )) > 0 is O mI · ρF (I, BI ) . Also, from Claim 5.3, the
                                                                                      µ (J,χ0 )
                                                                                               
expected potential added for each corrupted pair (J, χ0 ) for an anchor is O κ0 λt                . Since we sample
λt anchor pairs, for each (J, χ0 ) pair, the added potential over all anchors is a r.v. with expectation
O(µκ0 (J, χ0 )). Overall, we obtain, using Fact 6.2:
                                                                           0                            κ,κ0
                       l                                l
                                                                                                  l                         
E ddFb (v, u) ≤ mI · ζβ2 E [ddF 4 (p, q)]+n−10 = mI · ζβ2 ·O(n−9 + mζI ρκ,κ              −10      β                       −9
             
                                                                        F    (I, BI ))+n     = O  ζ  · ρF    (I, BI ) + n

    completing the proof of the first part.

                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                    l             
    In the 2nd part, we need to prove Eqn. (8): that ddFb                     ϕζκ (I, u), ϕζκ (π[I], u)        = O    β         1
                                                                                                                      ζ+ · ρ + n10       ,
              0
where ρ = ρκ,κ    +ζ
           F (I, BI ).
                                                                                                   0
   We first introduce a central claim. Define a = θκζ (BI , ν \ {⊥}), and b = θκζ (Bπ[I] , ν \ {⊥}). We prove
the following later. We note that the case mI = 0 trivially proves the lemma, and hence below mI > 0.
                                                                                         
Claim 7.4. Assuming a = Ω(β 1.5 ), then, whp, ddF O(1/) (a, b) = O mkI · ζβ+l · ρ + n−9 .

Proof of Lemma 6.4 (2), using Claim 7.4. We have, by definition of ϕ(I, u), a, b, and using BI = Λζκ (I)
               0
and Bπ[I] = Λζκ (π[I]), for level l > 0:
                               0
                                                              2l                                 2l
                                                                                                                     
          ddFb (ϕζκ (I, u), ϕζκ (π[I], u)) = ddFb T u (mI · βζ 2 · min{ ka , 1}), T u (mπ[I] · βζ 02 · min{ kb , 1})
                                           dd,T are monotone                  2l                        2l
                                                                                                                  
                                                   ≤         ddFb T u (mI · βζ 2 · ka ), T u (mπ[I] · βζ 02 · kb ) .
                                                                                   +                           +


                                                             0 = 1 at level 0, and that B = {I} and
    Similarly, for l = 0, we have using the fact β l = ζ+ = ζ+                           I
Bπ[I] = {π[I]}:


                   ddFb (ϕ0κ (I, u), ϕ0κ (π[I], u)) = ddFb T u (mI · ka ), T u (mπ[I] · kb )
                                                                                            
                                                                       2l                        2l
                                                                                                           
                                                    = ddFb T u (mI · βζ 2 · ka ), T u (mπ[I] · βζ 02 · kb ) .
                                                                          +                            +


                         O(1/)
    Note that T u = T1/β,Ω (1) transformation zeros-out any o (1/β) quantity, and hence if a = o (k·β −1.5 ),
the statement is trivial. Therefore, from this point on, we assume a = Ω (k·β −1.5 ) = Ω(β 1.5 ). We continue
                                   ζ2
to derive, for some F 0 = FbΘ() · +02 · 1/F :
                                       ζ+




                                                              42
                                         0
                                                                        2l                        2l
                                                                                                             
                    ddFb (ϕζκ (I, u), ϕζκ (π[I], u)) ≤ ddFb T u (mI · βζ 2 · ka ), T u (mπ[I] · βζ 02 · kb )
                                                                       +                         +
                                                                                                      
                                                     Claim 7.1                  2l               2l
                                                        ≤      ddF̂ 11 mI · ζ 2 k , mπ[I] · ζ 0 2 k + n−10
                                                                               β a             β b
                                                                                           +                +

                                                            F act 6.6
                                                                        mI β 2l                              −10
                                                               ≤        k · ζ+
                                                                             2 · dd             2 (a, b) + n
                                                                                         mπ[I] ζ+
                                                                                   F̂ 11 m     02
                                                                                           I ζ+
                                                                        2l
                                                            = mkI · βζ 2 ddF 0 (a, b) + n−10
                                                                      +
                                                                          l             
                                                            Claim 7.4
                                                               =       O ζβ+ · ρ + n−9 ,

                                                     ζ 02                          2
using F 0 = F O(1/) and hence F̂ = (F 0 ζ+2 F )Θ(1/) = F Θ(1/ ) (ζ+
                                                                     0 /ζ )Θ(1/) .
                                                                         +
                                                      +




   It remains to prove Claim 7.4. We first establish the following auxiliary claims. First claim argues
that for a set S of uncorrupted intervals I, the density of I in S (local density) cannot be much larger
than the density of π[I] in π[S].

Claim 7.5. Fix a color χ ∈ ν \ {⊥} in a coloring κ. Fix interval sets S, Sπ ⊆ I such that: (1) π[S] ⊆ Sπ ;
and (2) (I, χ) is F -uncorrupted for all I ∈ S. Then, for any I ∈ S, for all but 1/α costs ĉ ∈ Ec we have
dκ (I, χ, S)ĉ ≤ nα F · dκ (π[I], χ, Sπ )ĉ .

Proof. For each I ∈ S, we have ad(I, π[I]) ≤ c since (I, χ) is F -uncorrupted. Fix some I ∈ S. By
triangle inequality, we have that π[Nĉ (I) ∩ S] ⊆ Nĉ+2c (π[I]) ∩ Sπ , and since all pairs in S × {χ} are
F -uncorrupted, then µκ (Nĉ (I) ∩ S) ≤ F · µκ (π[Nĉ (I) ∩ S]). Overall, we obtain that that, dκ (I, χ, S)ĉ ≤
F ·dκ (π[I], χ, Sπ )ĉ+2c . Since there can be at most 1/α costs where dκ (π[I], χ, Sπ )ĉ+2c > nα ·dκ (π[I], χ, Sπ )ĉ ,
the claim follows.

    Second claim shows that for some interval sets S, the local density of I ∈ S in S is at least a 1/Fd
fraction of their density with respect to another set of interest S 0 (on most costs in Ec ), except for a
mass ≈ 1/Fd -fraction of the mass of S 0 . This claim will help us both 1) to bound the mass of corrupted
pairs where their local density is significantly skewed by corrupted pairs which can potentially generate
additional corruption, as well as 2) dealing with the sharp threshold of Line 4 in AssignThetaPotential
Algorithm.

Claim 7.6. Fix interval sets S, S 0 ⊆ I, color χ ∈ ν \ {⊥} in a coloring κ and density factor Fd .
                          α
Except for a mass of O nFd · µκ (S 0 , χ) of (I, χ) ∈ (S, χ), for all except ≤ 1/α costs ĉ ∈ Ec , we have
dκ (I, χ, S)ĉ ≥ F1d · dκ (I, χ, S 0 )ĉ .
                                                                 P
Proof. Let µI = µκ (I, χ) and µS = µκ (S, χ) =     I∈S µI . Define a distribution       ipS over S by setting pS (I) =
                                                                        dκ (I,χ,S 0 )ĉ
                                                                      h
µI
µS . For each ĉ ∈ Ec , we consider the following expectation EI∼pS dκ (I,χ,S)2ĉ . By triangle inequality, we
have that dκ (I, χ, S)2ĉ ≥ maxJ∈Nĉ (I)∩S 0 dκ (J, χ, S)ĉ . Hence, we can estimate the expectation as follows:

                    0                                                                                                                      µ
         I dκ (I,χ,S )ĉ                                       µI ·µJ                                      µI ·µJ
  Xµ                                       X                                             X                                   X
        µS dκ (I,χ,S)2ĉ   = µ1S                                             1
                                                            dκ (I,χ,S)2ĉ ≤ µS
                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                         dκ (J,χ,S)ĉ = µS           µJ = µSS0 .
  I∈S                              I∈S,J∈S 0 :ad(I,J)≤ĉ                         I∈S,J∈S 0 :ad(I,J)≤ĉ                       J∈S 0




                                                                          43
                                                                    dκ (I,χ,S 0 )ĉ
                                                                h                        i                α
                                                                                    Fd           µS 0
    By Markov Inequality, we have that PrI∼pS                       dκ (I,χ,S)2ĉ > nα       ≤   µS     · nFd . By union bound over
                                     µ    ·nα
ĉ ∈ Ec , there is a mass of O ( SF0 d ) where the inequality occurs for at least one cost. On the other
hand, for intervals where the inequality does not occur for any cost, there can be at most 1/α costs where
 dκ (I,S)2ĉ   α                                                                                       0
 dκ (I,S)ĉ > n (noting n is an upper bound for µS ), and hence for all other costs we have dκ (I, χ, S )ĉ ≤
Fd · dκ (I, χ, S)ĉ as needed.


    A corollary is that the sharp threshold of Line 4 in AssignThetaPotential Algorithm    cannot affect
                                        0                                  θ           0
the θ scores too much. For a pair (J, χ ), we use the notation σJ,χ0 = Ql T (Γl,ζ (J, χ )) as the quantity
in Line 11 of AssignThetaPotential. Note that θκζ (J, χ0 ) = mV ((J, χ0 )) · σJ,χ0 unless the threshold of
Line 4 passes.

Corollary 7.7. Fix a level l > 0 and ζ ∈ Zl . Consider an interval ball Q with µκ (Q, u) = O(ζ). Let
Q+ζ = Λζκ (Q). Then, E[θκζ (Q, ν \ {⊥})] < (1 + o(1)) · βkl · (I 0 ,χ0 )∈Q+ζ ×ν\{⊥} µκ0 (I 0 , χ0 ) · σI 0 ,χ0 .
                                                             P


Proof. Let θQ , θκζ (Q, ν \ {⊥}). Define the set of colors of large mass in Q+ζ , where Line 4 of Assign-
ThetaPotential may pass:

                                   T = {χ0 ∈ ν \ {⊥} | µκ0 (Q+ζ , χ0 ) > λ · β l+6 }.

Also, define T̄ = ν \ T \ {⊥}. Notice that pairs (J, χ0 ) ∈ Q × T̄ will not pass the threshold from Line 4 of
AssignThetaPotential and their contribution to E[θQ ] is E[mV ((J, χ0 ))] · σJ,χ0 = βkl µκ0 (J, χ0 ) · σJ,χ0 .
     Now focus on pairs (J, χ0 ) ∈ Q × T . We split the ball Q+ζ into h = O(1) consecutive balls each of
                                                                                                         0
u-mass ≤ ζ each: call them Qq for q ∈ {1, 2, . . . , h}. By Lemma 6.3 we have that µκ0 (I, χ0 ) ≤ |Pκχ0 | =
Õ ( n·λ   5                                                      q   0               n
      λt · β ). For fixed q ∈ [h], we invoke Claim 7.6, using S = Q , S = I, and Fd = λt β l , to obtain that
                                              T def.
there exists at most Õ (nα · λ · β l+5 ) = o(µκ0 (Q+ζ , χ0 )) mass of J ∈ Qq where rdκ0 (J, χ0 , Qq )ĉ > λtnβ l on
more than 1/α costs. Note that when rdκ0 (J, χ0 , Qq )ĉ ≤ λtnβ l for all q, then also rdκ0 (J, χ0 , Λζκ (J))ĉ ≤ λtnβ l .
   Hence for all J ∈ Q, except for O(1) · o(µκ0 (Q+ζ , χ0 )), we have rdκ0 (J, χ0 , Λζκ (J))ĉ ≤ λtnβ l on all but
1/α costs ĉ. The latter implies that σJ,χ0 = 1 whp. This in turn gives us:
                                 X
                                          µκ0 (J, χ0 ) · σJ,χ0 ≥ µκ0 (Q, T ) − o(µκ0 (Q+ζ , T )).                              (14)
                            (J,χ0 )∈Q×T

    Now, we combine both cases. Note that, by construction, we have:
                                     X                                             X
                      E[θQ ] ≤                  E[mV ((J, χ0 ))] · σJ,χ0 +                       E[mV ((J, χ0 ))]
                                 (J,χ0 )∈Q×T̄                                  (J,χ0 )∈Q×T
                                                                                                   
                                                 X
                                 = βkl ·                   µκ0 (J, χ0 ) · σJ,χ0 + µκ0 (Q, T ) .
                                             (J,χ0 )∈Q×T̄

    Using Eqn. 14, we conclude:
                                                                                                    
                                                   X                                              
                        E[θQ ] ≤ βkl ·                        µκ0 (J, χ0 )σJ,χ0 + o µκ0 (Q+ζ , T ) 
                                          (J,χ0 )∈Q×ν\{⊥}




                                                                    44
                                                                                                         
                                                                         X
                                        ≤ βkl (1 + o(1)) ·                            µκ0 (J, χ0 )σJ,χ0  ,
                                                                (J,χ0 )∈Q+ζ ×ν\{⊥}

      as needed.


   Finally, we are ready to prove Claim 7.4.

Proof of Claim 7.4. Recall that a = (J,χ0 )∈V∩BI ×ν θκζ (J, χ0 ). Since a ≥ Ω (β 1.5 ), and is a sum of inde-
                                    P

pendent r.v. bounded by 1, we have that a = Θ(E[a]) whp, hence we analyze E[a] = J∈BI ,χ0 Pr[(J, χ0 ) ∈
                                                                                          P

V] · θκζ (J, χ0 ). The plan is to show that E[b] · F O(1/) ≥ E[a] unless error ρ is sufficiently large. Note that
                                                    0
this requires comparing θκζ (J, χ0 ) vs θκζ (π[J], χ0 ).
    For reasons that will be clear later, we consider J ∈ BI+ζ .
    Consider an F -uncorrupted pair (J, χ0 ) ∈ BI+ζ × ν \ {⊥}; i.e., ddF (µκ0 (J, χ0 ), µκ0 (π[J], χ0 )) = 0. Let
p = Γl,ζ (J, χ0 ) and q = Γl,ζ 0 (π[J], χ0 ). By the definition of Γ, we have for a cost ĉ:
                                               0
                                                                                                        
                   pĉ       rdκ0 (π[J],χ0 ,Λζκ (π[J]))ĉ         dκ0 (J,χ0 ,Λζκ (J))ĉ  dκ0 (π[J],χ0 )ĉ
                   qĉ = O               0 ζ
                                                          +1 =O           0 ζ
                                                                                0       · d 0 (J,χ0 )ĉ + 1 ,
                                   rdκ0 (J,χ ,Λκ (J))ĉ                       dκ0 (π[J],χ ,Λκ (π[J]))ĉ    κ


     since the two rd quantities are estimated up to a constant-factor, and capped at the same value
rdm = n4α λtnβ l . For the latter fraction, we note that since dκ0 (J, χ0 , S)ĉ is monotonic in ĉ for any fixed
J, S, and since (J, χ0 ) is uncorrupted, then by triangle inequality, there are at most 1/α costs in Ec where
dκ0 (π[J],χ0 )ĉ  α
 d 0 (J,χ0 )ĉ ≥ n .
  κ
                      dκ0 (J,χ0 ,Λζκ (J))ĉ
      The ratio                     0            is more tricky and we analyze it next. Define the set E ⊆ BI+ζ × ν to be
                   dκ0 (π[J],χ0 ,Λζκ (π[J]))ĉ
                                                                                                               dκ0 (J,χ0 ,Λζκ (J))ĉ
the set of interval, color pairs (J, χ0 ) which are either corrupted, or where                                               0           > n3α · F
                                                                                                           dκ0 (π[J],χ0 ,Λζκ (π[J]))ĉ
for more than 2/α distinct costs ĉ ∈ Ec .
    We analyze two cases depending on whether pairs in E contribute significantly to a or not.

Pairs in E contribute insignificantly to a. For an uncorrupted pair (J, χ0 ) ∈ {BI+ζ × ν} \ E, we can
combine both inequalities above to obtain: there exists at most 3/α costs in Ec where pqĉĉ > n4α · F . Let
C ⊆ Ec be the set of all other costs.
   We now use Corollary 7.3 with d = |Ec | > O(1/ · 1/α2 ) and v = 3/α, for some F 0 = F O(1/) :

                    ddF 0 (σJ,χ0 , σπ[J],χ0 ) = ddF 0 (Ql (T θ ([pĉ ]ĉ∈Ec )), Ql (T θ ([qĉ ]ĉ∈Ec )))
                                                  Corollary 7.3
                                                          ≤       ddF 0 ·n−O(α) ([T θ (pĉ )]ĉ∈C , [T θ (qĉ )]ĉ∈C ) + n−10
                                                  Claim 7.1
                                                      ≤       dd(F 0 n−O(α) )O() ([pĉ ]ĉ∈C , [qĉ ]ĉ∈C ) + 2 · n−10
                                                  ≤ ddF 2 ·n4α ([pĉ ]ĉ∈C , [qĉ ]ĉ∈C ) + O(n−10 )
                                                  = O(n−10 ),                                                                                 (15)

where last inequality used the lemma assumption that F ≥ nα , and the last equality used the definition
of C above.                                     P                                    
    Now, for level l = 0, we have E[a] = k ·                        µ   (J, χ0 )σ
                                                   (J,χ0 )∈BI ×ν\{⊥} κ0          J,χ . Otherwise, we invoke
                                                                                    0

Corollary 7.7 for Q = BI to obtain for all levels:




                                                                         45
                                                                                                          
                                                                        X
                         E[a] ≤ βkl (1 + o(1)) ·                                     µκ0 (J, χ0 )σJ,χ0 
                                                                                                       

                                                             (J,χ0 )∈BI+ζ ×ν\{⊥}
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                        X
                                ≤ βkl (1 + o(1)) · µκ0 (E) +                                             µκ0 (J, χ0 )σJ,χ0  .
                                                                                                                           

                                                                            (J,χ0 )∈BI+ζ ×(ν\{⊥})\E

       Now, suppose the second term is the dominant one, i.e.,
                                                                          X
                                           E[a] ≤ 3 βkl ·                                   µκ0 (J, χ0 )σJ,χ0 .
                                                              (J,χ0 )∈BI+ζ ×(ν\{⊥})\E

                                                                    µ (J,χ0 )                                                               σ   0
Then, for any (J, χ0 ) in the sum, we have µ 0κ(π[J],χ
                                                0                    0
                                                       0 ) ≤ F ((J, χ ) is uncorrupted) and σ
                                                                                              J,χ
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                    ≤ F O(1/)
                                                                    κ                                                                       π[J],χ

unless σJ,χ0 < O(n−10 ) (from Eqn. (15)). Hence, using the assumption that F ≤ β O()

                                E[b] ≥ F −O(1/) (E[a] − O(n−9 )) ≥ β −1 · Ω (β 1.5 ) = Ω (β 0.5 ).

Therefore, we have that b = Θ(E[b]) whp as well, and overall we obtained ddF O(1/) (a, b) = O(n−9 ) whp.

Pairs in E contribute significantly. Now assume that E[a] ≤ 3 βkl · µκ0 (E).
     We now bound the color mass µκ0 (E). For a color χ0 , we define Cχ0 to be the set of corrupted pairs
in BI+ζ × {χ0 }, and C := ∪χ0 ∈ν Cχ0 . Also let Jχ0 be the interval set representing the first coordinates of
                                                                                                 κ,κ0    +ζ
Cχ0 . Like in the proof of part (1) of the Lemma above, we have µκ0 (C) ≤ 2ζ    +
                                                                              mI · ρ where ρ = ρF (I, BI ).
For level l = 0, we have BI = {I} and hence E ⊆ C (when BI = {I}, a pair (I, χ0 ) can only be in E if
                                                                             −ζ 0 /2    ζ 0 /2
it is corrupted by definition of E). For l ≥ 1, let BI+2ζ = Λ3ζ κ (I) and Bπ[I]      = Λκ (π[I]). We invoke
                                                          −ζ 0 /2
Claim 7.5 with S = BI+2ζ \ Jχ0 , S 0 = Bπ[I]                        ⊇ π[BI+2ζ ]. The claim implies that, for J ∈ BI+ζ and hence
  −ζ 0 /2        0
Bπ[I]       ⊆ Λζκ (π[J]), we have for all but 1/α costs ĉ:

                                          dκ0 (J,χ0 ,Λζκ (J)\Jχ0 )ĉ        dκ0 (J,χ0 ,BI+2ζ \Jχ0 )ĉ
                                                           0            ≤                   −ζ 0 /2     ≤ nα · F.
                                          dκ0 (π[J],χ0 ,Λζκ (π[J]))ĉ       dκ0 (π[J],χ0 ,Bπ[I] )ĉ


                                                                           dκ0 (J,χ0 ,Λζκ (J))ĉ
       Let Eχ0 be the set of uncorrupted pairs (J, χ0 ) ∈ BI+ζ × {χ0 } with                         > n2α on more
                                                                         dκ0 (J,χ0 ,Λζκ (J)\Jχ0 )ĉ
than 1/α costs in Ec . Then, for each uncorrupted pair (J, χ0 ) ∈ BI+ζ × {χ0 } \ Eχ0 \ Cχ0 , except for ≤ 2/α
                 dκ0 (J,χ0 ,Λζκ (J))ĉ 3α
costs, we have                        0             ≤n      · F.
                     dκ0 (π[J],χ0 ,Λζκ (π[J])])ĉ
                                                                        P                           +ζ
   Therefore E ⊆ ∪χ0 Eχ0 ∪ C. It remains to bound µκ0 (∪χ0 Eχ0 ) =        χ0 µκ0 (Eχ0 ). Partition BI  into
8 balls each of u-mass ≤ ζ, called BIq for q ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 8}. Then, for each q and color χ0 ∈ ν, we
invoke Claim 7.6 with S = BIq \ Jχ0 , S 0 = Jχ0 , and Fd = n2α /2, to obtain that there’s only a mass of
                                                                                                                               d 0 (J,χ0 ,J 0 )
O( n1α µκ0 (Cχ0 )) of (J, χ0 ) ∈ BIq × {χ0 } \ Cχ0 having more than 1/α costs satisfying d 0 κ(J,χ0 ,Bq \J
                                                                                                         χ ĉ
                                                                                                           0)
                                                                                                              > n2α /2.
                                                                                                                               κ            I   χ    ĉ
                                                                                            dκ0 (J,χ0 ,Λζκ (J))ĉ
Now, by definition,           we have for each (J, χ0 )                 ∈ Eχ0 that                                       >   n2α       on more than 1/α
                                                                                          dκ0 (J,χ0 ,Λζκ (J)\Jχ0 )ĉ
                                               dκ0 (J,χ0 ,Jχ0 )ĉ                                                  χ ĉd 0 (J,χ0 ,J 0 )
distinct costs, implying that                                           > n2α − 1, as well as that d 0 κ(J,χ0 ,Bq \J    > n2α /2, for q
                                           dκ0 (J,χ0 ,Λζκ (J)\Jχ0 )ĉ                                              κ 0)            I   χ   ĉ

s.t.    J ∈ BIq and hence BIq ⊆ Λζκ (J).                However, as deduced above, such pairs must have mass bounded

                                                                             46
by O( n1α µκ0 (Cχ0 )), implying that µκ0 (Eχ0 ) = o(µκ0 (Cχ0 )). Summing over all colors in ν, we obtain that
                                    ζ+
µκ0 (E) = (1 + o(1)) · µκ0 (C) = O( m I
                                        ρ).
    Overall, we conclude:                                                       
                                   ddF 0 (a, b) ≤ a ≤ O(E[a]) ≤ O        k
                                                                            · ζ+ ρ
                                                                         β l mI
                                                                                         .

    This completes the proof of Claim 7.4.

7.2    Controlling balance of colors: proof of Lemma 6.5
In this section we analyze the quantity MI = µκ (I, ν \ {u}) + ζ∈Zl ϕζκ (I, ν), and in particular, prove
                                                                 P
that for each level l, MI = Ω (1). This will imply that our normalization of µκ̂ introduces only a
constant-factor further error.
    Most importantly, analyzing MI requires understanding of the quantity ϕζκ (I, ν). At a high level, we
show that one of the following must hold, for ζ = β l (or ζ = 0 for l = 0):

   1. ϕζκ (I, u) = Ω (1), or

   2. ϕζκ (I, ν \ {u}) = Ω (1), or,

   3. µκ (I, ν \ {u}) = Ω(1).

    To do so, we proceed in a few steps. Recall that ϕζκ (I, ν \ {u}) depends on φ(Λζκ (I), ν) potential.
First, we show how to bound φ(S, χ) for a set S as a function of rdκ0 (I, ∗, S), for an interval A in
the neighborhood of the sampled anchor A (Claim 7.8). Second, we use this bound to lower bound
kϕ(I, ∗6=u )k1 (which applies T c to a re-scaling of φ(Λζ (I), ∗)) as a function of rdκ0 (J, χ0 , S) for J ∈ S
where S is Λζ (I) — in particular, if enough such J have rd about β lnλt on a non-trivial fraction of costs
c ∈ Ec , we get such a lower bound (Claim 7.9), as long as µκ (I, u) is not too small (otherwise, item (3)
above holds).
    We then focus on ϕ(I, u) which relies on estimates of θ(Λζκ (J), ν \ {⊥}). Our third claim bounds     the
                                                                                                             
                                                       0      0                    0  0                ∗
θ quantity for J ∈ S as a function of the mass of I ∈ S, χ such that rdκ0 (I , χ , S)c is at most O β lnλt
on some fraction ≈ sl of costs c ∈ Ec (Claim 7.11). Our final fourth claim (Claim 7.12), uses the previous
claim (applied to small ζ balls of the previous level l − 1) to show that, overall, small θ(Λζ (I))’s (i.e.,
insufficient for (1) above to hold) imply that many pairs in I’s proximity have the density rd in the right
range for enough costs (allowing us to obtain (2) using Claim 7.9). Finally, we use these four claims to
prove Lemma 6.5.
    Throughout this section, each time we refer to sets of costs, we refer to subsets of Ec , where c is the
base cost of MatchIntervals. Also, when we refer to contribution of a sampled cost ci ∈ Ec , we refer
to the total contribution of all ci,j = ci + c · j where j ∈ {0, . . . jmax } where jmax = O(1/α).
    In the first claim controlling φ, we show that, for a fixed new color χ and chosen anchor (A, χ0 ), for
any ball S ⊆ I, the total potential added to S is roughly concentrated.

Claim 7.8 (Controlling φ(S, χ)). Fix an interval set S ⊆ I and output color χ. For any interval, color
pair (I, χ0 ), for all but O(1/α) costs ci ∈ Ec , and for all A ∈ N2ci (I), we have, where rdci = rdκ0 (I, χ0 , S)ci :

   1. If (A, χ0 , ci ) was sampled for color χ, then φκ (S, χ) = O(n2α ) · rdcn·λt ; and
                                                                                     i


   2. If (A, χ0 , ci+1 ) was sampled for color χ, then φκ (S, χ) = Ω(n−2α ) · rdcn·λt .
                                                                                             i

            Good ⊆ E be all c costs where:
Proof. Let CI,χ 0   c        i



                                                         47
    • dκ0 (I, χ0 )ci · nα ≥ dκ0 (I, χ0 )15ci ; and

    • dκ0 (I, χ0 , S)ci · nα ≥ dκ0 (I, χ0 , S)15ci .

    • i is not maximal (and hence ci+1 may be sampled as well).

We note that by construction, 15ci < ci+3 and since µκ0 (S, χ0 ) ∈ {0} ∪ [n−10 , n] for any set S, then there
                                      Good .
exist at most 66/α + 1 costs in Ec \ CI,χ 0

    We now show the claim holds for all costs in CI,χ  Good . Fix a sampled anchor, color pair (A, χ0 ) in
                                                         0

coloring κ0 and a cost ci ∈ CI,χ
                             Good . For J ∈ I, denote d
                                 0
                                                                          0                                  0
                                                         J,i,j = dκ0 (J, χ )ci,j . By φ definition, if (A, χ , ci )
                                    P −αj                             P                µκ0 (J,χ0 ) 2n
was sampled, we have φκ (S, χ) =        n    · mi,j , where mi,j =
                                                   j                  J∈Nci,j (A)∩S d \       λ   · t , and d[ J,i,j
                                                                                       J,i,j
is constant factor approximation to max{dJ,i,j , dm } for dm = dκ0 (A, χ0 )3ci · n−α (whp, by Lemma 5.2).
Hence, using the triangle inequality, we have,


              −α
 J,i,j ∈ [Θ(n
d[               ), Θ(1)]·dκ0 (A, χ0 )3ci ⊆ [Θ(n−α )·dκ0 (I, χ0 )ci , Θ(1)·dκ0 (I, χ0 )5ci ] ⊆ [Θ(n−α ), Θ(nα )]·dκ0 (I, χ0 )ci ;

    and similarly,

                               −α
                J,i+1,j ∈ [Θ(n
               d\                 ) · dκ0 (I, χ0 )3ci , Θ(1) · dκ0 (I, χ0 )15ci ] ⊆ [Θ(n−α ), Θ(nα )] · dκ0 (I, χ0 )ci .
    Therefore we have that for each j:

                        µκ0 (J,χ0 ) 2n        −α ),Θ(nα )]                                          −α ),Θ(nα )]
                                   · λt ∈ [Θ(n                                  µκ0 (J, χ0 ) = [Θ(n
                X                                                      X
mi,j =                    \                 d  0 (I,χ0 )ci
                                                           · λnt ·                               d   0 (I,χ0 )ci
                                                                                                                 · λnt ·dκ0 (A, χ0 , S)ci,j
                          dJ,i,j             κ                                                     κ
          J∈Nci,j (A)∩S                                           J∈Nci,j (A)∩S

                                                                             [Θ(n ),Θ(n )] n       −α       α
                                                     Good , then m
   and by a similar argument, we have that if ci ∈ CI,χ 0           i+1,j ∈    dκ0 (I,χ0 )ci · λt ·dκ0 (A, χ0 , S)ci+1,j
as well.
   For (1), we have by triangle inequality that dκ0 (A, χ0 , S)ci,j ≤ dκ0 (I, χ0 , S)4ci ≤ nα · dκ0 (I, χ0 , S)ci and
                         2α
hence mi,j = rdO(n    0
                       )
                           · λnt .
               κ0 (I,χ )ci
   For (2), we have by triangle inequality that dκ0 (A, χ0 , S)ci+1,j ≥ dκ0 (I, χ0 , S)ci and hence mi+1,j =
  Ω(n−α )        n
rdκ0 (I,χ0 )ci · λt .
    Summing over all j, we obtain the required bounds.

                                                               ζ       
    The next claim helps control ϕζκ (I, ∗6=u ) = T c γ · φκ (Λβκl(I),∗) for some parameters γ, ζ. In particular,
it shows that if we have a set of pairs D with each (I, χ0 ) ∈ D of the “right” density within some ball Q,
then we add sufficient φ mass to Q, which will survive the T c thresholding whp.

Claim 7.9 (Controlling ϕ(I, ∗6=u )). Fix level l ≥ 0 and parameters δ, γ, s ∈ [Ω (1), 1] as well as a set
Q ⊆ I. Consider the (interval, color) set D ⊆ Q × ν \ {⊥} of pairs (I, χ0 ) for which there exists a set of ηs
                ∗                                 ∗                        0           3α · n · [1, β 2 + 1[l = 0] · n].
distinct costs CI,χ 0 ⊆ Ec , where for each ĉ ∈ CI,χ0 , we have rdκ0 (I, χ , Q)ĉ ∈ n
                                                                                           β l λt
If µκ0 (D) ≥ δ · β l , then, with high probability, we have at step l:
                                       
   1. If l > 0, then T c γ · φκ (Q,∗)
                                    β l     ≥ 0.9δγ · (s − O( αη )).
                                                  1

   2. If l = 0, then, T c (γ · φκ (Q, ν)) ≥ 0.9δγ · (s − O( αη )).


                                                                    48
    To prove Claim 7.9, we cannot apply Claim 7.8 directly, as the lower bound we get from there is for
a different samples, and hence we show first the following useful statistical fact.

Fact 7.10. Let X be a non-negative random variable over some probability space and let A and B be
events such that Pr[A] = Pr[B]. Fix γ ∈ R such that X | B ≥ γ (i.e., whenever B happens, X ≥ γ).
Then, E[X · 1[X ≥ γ]] ≥ E[X · 1[A]].

Proof. Since Pr[A] = Pr[B], then also Pr[A \ B] = Pr[B \ A]. Hence,

            E[X · 1[A]] = E[X · 1[A ∩ B]] + E[X · 1[A \ B]]
                           = E[X · 1[A ∩ B]] + E[X · 1[A \ B] · 1[X ≥ γ]] + E[X · 1[A \ B] · 1[X < γ]]
                           < E[X · 1[A ∩ B]] + E[X · 1[A \ B] · 1[X ≥ γ]] + γ · Pr[A \ B]
                           = E[X · 1[A ∩ B]] + E[X · 1[A \ B] · 1[X ≥ γ]] + γ · Pr[B \ A]
                           ≤ E[X · 1[A ∩ B]] + E[X · 1[A \ B] · 1[X ≥ γ]] + E[X · 1[B \ A]]
                           ≤ E[X · 1[X ≥ γ]]



Proof of Claim 7.9. Note that every output color χ in output coloring κ is defined via the iid sampled
triplet (A, χ00 , ĉ) ∼ I × ν × Ec .
    Fix ∆ = log2 n. We define the random variables ψχ , min{φκ (Q, χ)/β l , 1/∆} and
                                           (
                                             T c (γ · ψχ ) l > 0
                                      Mχ ,
                                             γ · ψχ        l = 0.
                                       
   Note that for l > 0, T c γ · φ(Q,∗)       ≥ χ Mχ , and for l = 0, we have T c (x) = x for any x = Ω (1)
                                                P
                                   βl      1
and hence it suffices to show whp χ Mχ ≥ 0.9δγ · (s − O( αη )).
                                    P

   Now since we sample λt iid triplets (A, χ00 , ĉ), the quantity χ Mχ is a sum of λt iid r.v. bounded
                                                                   P
                                                                                                     
by log12 n . Therefore, by Chernoff bound, we obtain w.h.p.:                                        1
                                                                   P                 P
                                                                     χ Mχ ≥ 0.9 E[ χ Mχ ] − O log n     =
                         
                                                                                  η
0.9λt · E[Mχ ] − O log1 n . Therefore, it suffices to show E[Mχ ] ≥ δγ · (s − O( α )) · λ−t .
   To do that, we introduce another random variable, mχ , and thereafter show the following inequalities:

    • E[mχ ] ≥ δ · β l · (s − O( αη )) · λ−t ; and,

    • E[Mχ ] ≥ βγl E[mχ ].

The random variable mχ . For each (I, χ0 ) ∈ D, let CI,χ     Bad be union of “bad costs” from Claim 5.3 (3)
                                                                0
                           Bad
and Claim 7.8 of size |CI,χ0 | = O(1/α). For a fixed output color χ, define the random variable zI,χ0 as
the contribution of (I, χ0 ) to φκ (I, χ) just from costs in CI,χ
                                                              ∗        Bad
                                                                                            P
                                                                  0 \ CI,χ0 , and let mχ :=  (I,χ0 )∈D zI,χ0 .

The inequality E[mχ ] ≥ δ · β l · (s − O( αη )) · λ−t . Here we use Claim 5.3 (3), which guarantees, for each
(I, χ0 ) ∈ D: E(A,χ00 ,ĉ)∼I×ν×Ec [φκ (I, χ) · 1[χ0 = χ00 ] | ĉ ∈ Ec \ CI,χ
                                                                         Bad ] ≥ µ 0 (I, χ0 ) · λ−t , and hence,
                                                                             0    κ


                                                 
                                      X                     X                                     X
                                                                                                                      ∗       Bad             0   −t
E(A,χ00 ,ĉ) [mχ ] = E(A,χ00 ,ĉ)            zI,χ0  =               E(A,χ00 ,ĉ) [zI,χ0 ] ≥               Pr [ĉ ∈ CI,χ 0 \CI,χ0 ]·µκ0 (I, χ )·λ
                                                                                                            ĉ∈Ec
                                  (I,χ0 )∈D               (I,χ0 )∈D                             (I,χ0 )∈D



                                                                       49
since mχ only counts contribution for ĉ ∈ CI,χ∗      Bad                                       ∗       Bad
                                                 0 \ CI,χ0 . Using the fact that Prĉ∈Ec [ĉ ∈ CI,χ0 \ CI,χ0 ] ≥

(s − O(η/α)) and that µκ0 (D) = δ · β l , we obtain,

                E(A,χ00 ,ĉ)∼I×ν×Ec [mχ ] ≥ µκ0 (D) · (s − O( αη )) · λ−t = δ · β l · (s − O( αη )) · λ−t .
as needed.

The inequality E[Mχ ] ≥ βγl E[mχ ]. Define the event
       n                                                                                                 o
 AD , for sampled (A, χ0 , ci ) there exists some (I, χ0 ) ∈ D s.t. ad(I, A) ≤ 2ci ∧ ci ∈ CI,χ
                                                                                           ∗        Bad
                                                                                               0 \ CI,χ0   .

   Note that on one hand, conditioned on not AD , we have mχ = 0 and hence mχ = mχ · 1[AD ]. On
the other hand, we have rdκ0 (I, χ0 , Q)ĉ ≥ n3α · β lnλt for any (I, χ0 ) ∈ D and ĉ ∈ CI,χ
                                                                                         ∗ , and therefore,
                                                                                             0

whenever AD happens, by Claim 7.8, φκ (Q, χ) ≤ O(β l /nα ) < β l /∆. This implies that φκ (Q, χ) · 1[AD ] =
ψχ · 1[AD ] · β l , and overall:

                            ψχ · 1[AD ] · β l = φκ (Q, χ) · 1[AD ] ≥ mχ · 1[AD ] = mχ
    For l = 0, this immediately gives Mχ = γψχ ≥ γψχ · 1[AD ] ≥ βγl mχ which implies E[Mχ ] ≥ βγl E[mχ ]
as needed.
    For l > 0, we need to use the upper bound guarantee on the density to “deal with T c thresholding”.
For this we first define the event

      n                                                                                                     o
  BD , for sampled (A, χ0 , ci+1 ) there exists some (I, χ0 ) ∈ D s.t. ad(I, A) ≤ 2ci ∧ ci ∈ CI,χ
                                                                                              ∗        Bad
                                                                                                  0 \ CI,χ0


   and notice that Pr[BD ] = Pr[AD ]. Now, since we are guaranteed for any (I, χ0 ) ∈ D and ĉ ∈ CI,χ
                                                                                                  ∗
                                                                                                      0 that

rdκ0 (I, χ0 , Q)ĉ ≤ n3α · β 2 · β lnλt , then by Claim 7.8 (2), we have that, whenever BD holds, ψχ ≥ βΩ(1)
                                                                                                        2 n5α >
 −3                                                                    −3
β /γ. We now invoke Fact 7.10 to obtain E[ψχ · 1[ψχ ≥ β /γ]] ≥ E[ψχ · 1[AD ]]. Since T (x) = x        c

whenever x ≥ β −3 , we also have that Mχ ≥ γψχ · 1[γψχ ≥ β −3 ]. Overall, we obtain:
                         E[Mχ ] ≥ E[γψχ · 1[γψχ ≥ β −3 ]] ≥ γ · E[ψχ · 1[AD ]] ≥ βγl mχ
   for l > 0 as well.
   By combining both inequalities, we conclude:
                                    E[Mχ ] ≥ βγl E[mχ ] ≥ γδ · (s − O( αη )) · λ−t
   which implies the claim with high probability as needed.


    Next, in order to analyze ϕ(·, u), we show an auxiliary claim that bounds θκζ (Λζκ (J), ν \ {⊥}). This
claim will be used for complexity analysis as well. Consider some interval ball Q at level l containing ζ
u-mass in the current coloring κ. Intuitively, this implies there is a mass of sparse pairs proportional to
ζ from previous levels. The claim below bounds θκζ (Λζκ (J), ν \ {⊥}), for all J ∈ Q generated at level l,
based on the mass of sparse pairs around Q for the current level.
Claim 7.11. Fix a level l ≥ 0 and δ ≥ β −1.5 . Fix ζ ∈ Zl , and let sl = 1 − (l+1)·
                                                                                   2   . Consider an interval
ball Q which, for level l = 0, contains precisely one interval, and if l > 0 satisfies µκ (Q, u) ≤ ζ. Let
Q+2ζ = Λ2ζ                                                       0                                     0
             κ (Q). Let D ⊆ Q × ν \ {⊥} be the set of all (I, χ ) ∈ Q × ν \ {⊥} such that rdκ0 (I, χ , Q)c ≤
n3α β ln·λt on at least sηl costs c ∈ Ec , and let D+ ⊆ Q+2ζ × ν \ {⊥} be the set of (I, χ0 ) ∈ Q+2ζ × ν \ {⊥}
where rdκ0 (I, χ0 , Q+2ζ )c ≤ n3α · β · β ln·λt on at least sl −/4
                                                                η   distinct costs. Finally, let ζ+ = max{ζ, 1}.

                                                            50
   1. If µκ0 (D+ ) ≤ δζ+ , then θκζ (Λζκ (J), ν \ {⊥}) < 1.1δk · ζβ+l for each J ∈ Q whp.

   2. If µκ0 (D) ≥ δζ+ , then θκζ (Λζκ (J), ν \ {⊥}) ≥ 0.9δk · ζβ+l for each J ∈ Q whp.

Proof. Let Q+ζ = Λζκ (Q). Let mQ = θκζ (Q, ν \ {⊥}) and mQ+ζ = θκζ (Q+ζ , ν \ {⊥}). Note that mQ ≤
θκζ (Λζκ (J), ν \ {⊥}) ≤ mQ+ζ for each J ∈ Q, hence it suffices to bound mQ , mQ+ζ . To compute mQ , mQ+ζ ,
we first compute their expectations E[mQ ], E[mQ+ζ ], and then use Chernoff bound to conclude that these
variables are roughly bounded by their expectation whp.                                     P                                
     We first upper-bound E[mQ+ζ ]. For level l = 0, we have E[mQ+ζ ] = E[mQ ] = βkl ·                                 0
                                                                                              (J,χ0 )∈Q×ν\{⊥} µκ0 (J, χ )σJ,χ0 .
For levels l > 0, we use Corollary 7.7 to obtain
                                                            X
                          E[mQ+ζ ] < (1 + o(1)) · βkl ·               µκ0 (I, χ0 ) · σI,χ0 .
                                                       (I,χ0 )∈Q+2ζ ×ν\{⊥}

    Consider a pair (I, χ0 ) ∈ Q+2ζ × ν \ {⊥}. If for a cost c we have rdκ0 (I, χ0 , Q+2ζ )c > n3α · β · β ln·λt ,
                                     √
then Γl,ζ (I, χ0 )c = O(nα /β) < 1/ β, and hence T θ (Γl,ζ (I, χ0 )) = 0. If the above occurs on ≥ 1−(slη−/4)
distinct costs c — i.e., for I 6∈ D+ — then σI,χ0 = Ql T θ (Γl,ζ (I, χ0 )) = 0 (based on Ql transformation).
                                                                            

Hence, E[mQ+ζ ] ≤ µκ0 (D+ ) · βkl · (1 + o(1)) ≤ δζ+ · βkl · (1 + o(1)) for part 1.
    Similarly, to lower-bound E[mQ ], we observe that for any (I, χ0 ) ∈ Q×ν\{⊥} with density rdκ0 (I, χ0 , Q)c ≤
n · β ln·λt for a cost c, we have Γl,ζ (I, χ0 )c ≥ Ω(nα ) > 1 whp. Hence T θ (Γl,ζ (I, χ0 )c ) = 1, and for (I, χ0 )
 3α

where the above occurs on ≥ sηl distinct costs, we have σI,χ0 = Ql (T θ (Γl,ζ (I, χ0 ))) = 1. We conclude
E[mQ ] ≥ βkl · µκ0 (D) ≥ δζ+ · βkl for part 2.
   Finally, note that mQ , mQ+ζ are each sum of independent r.v. in [0, 1], and since δ ≥ β −1.5  logk n ,
then one can apply Chernoff bound, and obtain that mQ+ζ ≤ 1.1 E[mQ+ζ ] and mQ ≥ 0.9 E[mQ ] with high
probability.
                                                                                           l    l
    Finally, the next claim helps control ϕ(·, u). In particular, it shows that if θκβ (Λβκ (I), ν \ {⊥}) is too
small to ensure that we u-color such interval with sufficient mass, then there must be a sufficiently large
mass of pairs in I’s proximity of the “right density”. The latter property will instead ensure that I is
colored with non-u color, as we will show later.
Claim 7.12 (Small θ implies many pairs in I’s proximity have right density). Fix input coloring κ0 ,
output coloring κ at a level l P  > 0, and let κ−1 be the coloring κ at the previous level l − 1. Define
b = minI 0 ∈I µκ−1 (I , ν \ {u}) + ζ∈Zl−1 ϕζκ−1 (I 0 , ν) (ie, the minimal un-normalized mass of new coloring
                     0
                                                                             l   l
at level l − 1); and assume b = Ω (1). Consider any I ∈ I with θκβ (Λβκ (I), ν \ {⊥}) < 50
                                                                                          b
                                                                                            · k. Then, with
                                                                        l
high probability, there exists a set of interval–color pairs D ⊆ Λβκ (I) × ν \ {⊥} with µκ0 (D) ≥ 25
                                                                                                   b
                                                                                                     · β l such
                                                                    l
that every (J, χ0 ) ∈ D pair has relative density rdκ0 (J, χ0 , Λβκ (J))c ∈ [1, β 2 ] · n3α · β ln·λt on ≥ /4
                                                                                                            η distinct
costs.
                      l
Proof. Let BI = Λβκ (I) and hence µκ (BI , u) ≥ β l − 1. For each l, we denote Zl∗ = Zl ∩ [0, β l · β 0.9 ].
    Since µκ (J, u) is monotonically decreasing with level l (AmendColoring can only decrease it), there
exists a set of intervals Q ⊆ BI with µκ (Q, u) ≥ β l (1 − o(1)), such that Λ2ζ
                                                                             κ−1
                                                                                 (Q) ⊆ BI for any ζ ≤ β l−0.1
                                                                                  ζ                         2(l−1)
(and hence ζ ∈ Zl−1 ∗ ). Also observe that for ζ ∈ Z        ∗                                   u β
                                                     l−1 \ Zl−1 , we always have ϕκ−1 (J, u) ≤ T ( ζ 2 ) ≤
T u (β −1.8 ) = 0.
     Recall µ recoloring procedure (AmendColoring line 5). Letting mJ = µκ−1 (J, u) and U ζ (J) =
1    ζ       ζ
k · θκ−1 (Λκ−1 (J), ν \ {⊥}), we have:


                                                         51
                                                                                                                                    2(l−1)
                                                                      ϕζκ−1 (J, u) ≤ 1b
                                           X                  X                              X              X
   β l (1 − o(1)) ≤ µκ (Q, u) ≤ 1b                 mJ ·                                            mJ ·             T u (mJ · β ζ 2          · U ζ (J)).
                                           J∈Q               ζ∈Zl−1                          J∈Q              ∗
                                                                                                           ζ∈Zl−1

                          l−1                                                                                                                         β l−1
    Now since mJ , β ζ          ≤ 1, the RHS can be further upper bounded by 1b
                                                                                                                     P                 P
                                                                                                                          J∈Q mJ ·              ∗
                                                                                                                                             ζ∈Zl−1      ζ ·
      l−1
T u ( β ζ · U ζ (J)). Now for each radius ζ ∈ Zl−1 from level l − 1, we decompose Q into disjoint consecutive
interval balls Qζi as follows: for level l = 1, each Q0i represent the next single interval of Q starting from
the left. For l > 1, each ball Qζi is a maximal ball containing u-color of mass ≤ ζ at the start of level
l − 1 (i.e. µκ−1 (Qζi , u) ≤ ζ for all i), starting at the first interval on the right of Qζi−1 . Also, let W be
the set of indices i of the obtained balls, and W 0 the set of indices i excluding the two smallest and two
largest ones.
    By switching summation we get:

                                   β l−1                          l−1                              β l−1                               l−1
                           X               X                                                 X             X X
   b · β l (1 − o(1)) ≤               ζ          mJ · T u ( β ζ · U ζ (J)) =                          ζ                  mJ · T u ( β ζ · U ζ (J)).
                             ∗
                          ζ∈Zl−1           J∈Q                                             ∗
                                                                                        ζ∈Zl−1             i∈W J∈Qζ
                                                                                                                     i

                                                                                      l−1
    Notice that since U ζ (J) ≤ 1, then for a single i, we have            mJ ·T u ( β ζ ·U ζ (J)) ≤ β l−1 = o( 8b ·β l ),
                                                                                       P
                                                                     J∈Qζi
                                                                                                l−1 P
which implies that we can replace W with W 0 in above: i.e., b·β l (1−o(1)) ≤ ζ∈Z ∗ β ζ
                                                                                    P                       P
                                                                                                      i∈W 0  J∈Qζi
                                                                                                                     mJ ·
                                                                                          l−1
     β l−1                                ζ                                                            ζ
T u ( ζ · U ζ (J)) as well. Now, let qi be the µκ0 -mass of interval–color pairs (J, χ0 ) ∈ Qi × ν that are
                                                                      s  −/4
relatively sparse: where rdκ0 (J, χ0 , BI )c ≤ n3α β · β l−1
                                                           n
                                                             ·λt
                                                                 on ≥ l−1η     distinct costs c. Also let q ∗ be the
total µκ0 -mass of relatively sparse pairs in BI (using the same definition as above). By the definition
of sets {Qζi }i , we have q ∗ ≥ i qiζ . We now invoke Claim 7.11 (1) with Q = Qζi to obtain that, for
                                P
                                                                          qζ    ,β −1.5 ζ}
                                                              P
                                                       max{
any J ∈ Qζi , we have U ζ (J) < 1.1 ·             j∈[−2,2] i+j
                                                      β l−1
                                                                    (noting Λ2ζ    ζ               ζ
                                                                             κ (Qi ) ⊆ ∪j∈[−2,2] Qi+j ). Hence
       l−1                            ζ
T u ( β ζ · U ζ (J)) ≤ 1.1                                 u                 −1.5 )). Also, since we defined Qζ
                           P
                        ζ   j∈[−2,2] qi+j (noting that T (x) = 0 for x < O(β                                  i
                                                                                P                u β l−1   ζ
as containing a-priori ≤ ζ uncolored mass in level l − 1, then the quantity J∈Qζ mJ · T ( ζ · U (J))
                                                                                        i
                                 P            ζ
can be upper bounded by 1.1 j∈[−2,2] qi+j        . Overall, we obtain:

                                           β l−1                         ζ                   β l−1                                  β l−1
                                                                                                           qiζ ≤ 6q ∗ ·
                                   X                 X         X                     X               X                      X
                                                                                                                                              ∗
     b · β l (1 − o(1)) ≤ 1.1                 ζ                         qi+j ≤6                 ζ                                      ζ ≤ 12q .
                                   ∗
                                ζ∈Zl−1               i∈W 0 j∈[−2,2]                   ∗
                                                                                   ζ∈Zl−1            i∈W                      ∗
                                                                                                                           ζ∈Zl−1


   Hence we get that q ∗ > 15 b
                                 ·β l , meaning that there exists a set D∗ ⊆ BI ×ν \{⊥} with µκ0 (D∗ ) ≥ 15    b
                                                                                                                 ·β l ,
                                                                                       s  −/4
such that for all (J, χ0 ) ∈ D∗ , we have rdκ0 (J, χ0 , BI )c ≤ n3α β 2 · β ln·λt on ≥ l−1η    distinct costs c. On
                            l                    l       l                                                                                     l
the other hand, let Uκβ (I) := k1 · θκβ (Λβκ (I), ν \ {⊥}). From the claim assumption, we have Uκβ (I) ≤ 50                 b
                                                                                                                              ,
and by applying (the contrapositive of) Claim 7.11 (2) for level l, we have that w.h.p, the µκ0 -mass
in BI with relative sparse intervals with respect to level l (i.e. (J, χ0 ) ∈ BI × ν \ {⊥} pairs, where
rdκ0 (J, χ0 , BI )c ≤ n3α · β ln·λt on ≥ sηl distinct costs) is at most 40
                                                                         b
                                                                           · βl.
    The two statements         can be combined to conclude that BI × ν \ {⊥} contains a set of µκ0 -mass of at
         b      b          b
                              · β l of pairs (J, χ0 ) with relative density rdκ0 (J, χ0 , BI )c ∈ [1, β 2 ] · n3α · β ln·λt on
                    l
least 15     − 40   β > 25
sl−1 −/4
    η     − sηl = /4
                   η distinct costs as needed.

    Finally, we prove Lemma 6.5.

                                                                           52
Proof of Lemma 6.5. We prove by induction on the level l. Fix coloring κ and level l, and         −1
                                                                                          P let κζ be
coloring κ from the previous level, l − 1. Consider each I ∈ I. Let MI = µκ (I, ν \ {u}) + ζ∈Zl ϕκ (I, ν)
and let mI = µκ (I, u). Define
                          (
                           1                                             l=0
                     bl =                             P         ζ
                           minI∈I µκ−1 (I, ν \ {u}) + ζ∈Zl−1 ϕκ−1 (I, ν) Otherwise

Our induction hypothesis is bl = Ω()l . Since bl+1 = minI∈I MI , it suffices to prove that MI = bl · Ω()
(whp) to complete the induction. First, if mI ≤ 0.5, then MI ≥ 0.5 (noting µκ (I, ν) = 1) and the claim
is immediate so we assume mI > 0.5.

Base case: l = 0. If there exists a set of colors ν ∗ ⊆ ν, s.t. µκ0 (I, ν ∗ ) ≥ 41 where, for each χ0 ∈ ν ∗ , we
have rdκ0 (I, χ0 )c > n3α β ln·λt on /4
                                      η distinct costs, then we can use Claim 7.9 and obtain that, whp,

               MI ≥ ϕ0κ (I, ⊥) = T c (mI · φκ (I, ν \ {u, ⊥})) ≥ T c ( 12 · φκ (I, ν \ {u, ⊥})) ≥ 32
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                     .

    Otherwise, we use Claim 7.11 (2) to obtain θκ0 (I, ν \{⊥}) ≥ k5 and hence T u mI · k1 · θκ0 (I, ν \ {⊥}) ≥
                                                                                                             
1                                            0            1
10 (whp) which in turn implies that MI ≥ ϕκ (I, u) ≥ 10 .
                                      l   l
                                                                                         l    l
                                                                                                             
General case: l > 0. Note that if θκβ (Λβκ (I), ν \ {⊥}) ≥ 50
                                                            bl
                                                               · k, then T u mI · k1 · θκβ (Λβκ (I), ν \ {⊥}) ≥
 1                            βl             1
100 · bl , and hence MI ≥ ϕκ (I, u) ≥ min{ 100 bl , 1}. Otherwise, we invoke Claim 7.12 to obtain there
                           βl                                                         l
                                                             β where rdκ0 (J, χ0 , Λβκ (I))c ∈ [1, β 2 ]·n3α β ln·λt
                                                          bl l
exists a set of pairs D ⊆ Λκ (I)×ν \{⊥} of mass µκ0 (D) ≥ 25
on /4                              0
     η distinct costs for each (J, χ ) ∈ D. We now use Claim 7.9 and obtain that whp,
                                                       l                                      l
                                                                                                    
                 l                              φκ (Λβ
                                                     κ (I),∗)
                                                                                            β
                                                                                     1 φκ (Λκ (I),∗)
         MI ≥ ϕβκ (I, ν \ {u, ⊥}) ≥        c
                                         T mI ·      βl
                                                                       ≥ T   c
                                                                                     2 ·    βl
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                               > 300 · bl
                                                                   1                                       1
    as needed. We conclude that MI can be lower bounded by the recursive definition,

                                      bl+1 ≥ min{bl · Ω(), 1} = (Ω())l+1 ,
which completes the proof of the lemma.



8     Runtime Complexity of the Interval Matching Algorithm
In this section we analyze the runtime complexity, establishing Theorem 4.2, item 3.
    First we prove the lemma bounding the size of color parts in each step coloring.

8.1    Sparsity of colors in colorings: proof of Lemma 6.3
Recall that Lemma 6.3 shows that each color χ ∈ ν \ {⊥} is sparse in each coloring κ0 . Specifically,
                   0                                                                            0
recalling that Pκχ0 is the set of intervals I with µκ0 (I, χ0 ) > 0, we need to prove that |Pκχ0 | ≤ O (β 5 λ) · λnt .

Proof of
        Lemma 6.3. Consider  a color χ ∈ ν \ {u, ⊥} in coloring κ. For each level l and for each j, we
                    0                 µ (I,χ0 )
                                                                                   0
            µ (I,χ )
add O λnt · κ0d        = O nα · λnt · κd0 A,j     φ-potential to each (I, χ0 ) ∈ Ncκi,j (A), hence for level l we
               dI,j
have φ(I, χ) = O nα · λnt . We use the bound on φκ (I, χ) to bound the total number of intervals which
                          

“survive the T c transformation” (i.e., have ϕ potential still non-zero). First we derive, for l ≥ 1:

                                                          53
   X X β 2l µ (I,u)·φ (Λζ (I),χ)            X β l X µ (I,u)                            Claim 6.8 X
                                                                                                     βl
              ζ2
                   κ      κ
                          βl
                               κ
                                        ≤          ζ
                                                             κ
                                                                 ζ   φκ (Λζκ (I), χ)     ≤                               α n
                                                                                                     ζ 2φκ (I, χ) = O (n · λt ).
   I∈I ζ∈Zl                                 ζ∈Zl       I∈I                                    ζ∈Zl
                                                                                                                              (16)
                                                                                      ζ
                                         ζ                       c β 2l µκ (I,u)·φκ (Λκ (I),χ) ).        Since T c zeros out any
                               P                    P     P
    Now we have that               ζ∈Zl ϕκ (I, χ) =   I∈I  ζ∈Zl T ( ζ 2           βl
                                                                                                             ζ
input smaller than 1/β 4 , we have that at most O (nβ 5 /λt ) intervals I have
                                                                                                     P
                                                                                                       ζ∈Zl ϕκ (I, χ) > 0. Finally,
                               0
one can observe I ∈ Pκχ0 only if ϕκ0 (I, χ0 ) > 0 at some level of the previous step t − 1, hence the bound
follows.
                                                                                              0
     It remains to show for the color χ = u. For this task, let l0 be such that β l ∈ [1, β) · n3α · β · λnt . We
consider two cases.
                                                                                                0
     First, suppose the algorithm reaches level l0 and µκ (X , u), µκ (Y, u) ≥ β l . We now assume (by
induction) Lemma 6.3 holds for κ0 and invoke Claim 7.11. Then we have that each I ∈ I T u ( k1 ·
θκζ (Λζκ (I), ν \ {⊥})) is at most proportional to the color mass where rdκ (I, χ0 , Q+2ζ )c ≤ n3α · βnβ          l0 λt for some

set Q, on some of the costs. However, since, by the definition of relative density it must be at least 1, then
                                                          2l                                                     2l
rdκ (I, χ0 , Q+2ζ )c ≥ 1 and hence we obtain T u ( k1 · βζ 2 · θκζ (Λζκ (I), ν \ {⊥})) ≤ T u (1.1β −1.5 · k1 · βζ 2 · 1.1k βζl ) ≤
T u (1.1β −1.5 ) = 0 for all I ∈ I (note that Claim 7.11 requires δ ≥ β −1.5 ). This means that all ϕζκ (I, u) = 0
and u will not appear on any interval.
     Now, consider the opposite: the algorithm breaks at level l∗ ≤ l0 , meaning that µκ (X , u) or µκ (Y, u)
                ∗     0                                0                              2 3α
is at most β l ≤ β l . Assume w.l.o.g µκ (X , u) < β l ; this implies µκ (X , u) < nβ λ·n
                                                                                        t  . Next, notice that if
µκ (Y,u)                                                                                               nβ 4
µκ (X ,u) > β, then Adjust-u zeros out all of u mass. Otherwise, we have that µκ (I, u) = O( λt ) before
calling to Adjust-u. Notice that Adjust-u omits u on any palette where u is of mass at most Ω (β −1 )
                                                                            5
(by the T u transformation), hence we conclude color u is part of O ( nβ λt ) palettes as well at the end of
                                                                       0               5
step t for each κ ∈ K . Hence in the next step t̂ = t + 1, we get |Pκχ0 | = Õ ( λnβ
                                                                                    t̂−1
                                                                                         ) for all χ0 ∈ ν \ {⊥} as
needed.


8.2     Algorithm runtime
We now proceed to the main runtime analysis of the interval matching algorithm.
    We define Sκ0 = kµκ0 (∗, ∗)k0 , i.e., the count of non-zero-mass pairs (I, χ0 ) ∈ I × ν. We note that from
Lemma 6.3, we have Sκ0 = n · Õ (β O(1) ). The same Lemma also implies that we converge in 1/ + O(1)
steps, since for t > 1/ + O(1), all ν \ {⊥} colors must be non-zero in 0 intervals, in which case we stop
iterating.
    Before proceeding to the proof, we state a couple theorems for fast evaluation of potentials; they are
all proved in Section 10 (and can be obtained from known data structures). In particular, for sampling
anchors and pivots, we use the following data-structure.
Theorem 8.1. Given a set of numbers a1 , . . . an ≥ 0 in a sparse representation (i.e., as a set S of i’s
with ai > 0) there exists a data structure D supporting the following queries:
   • Sample index i ∈ [n] from the distribution {ai / j aj }i in time O(log n);
                                                     P

    • Given k ≥ 1, produce a setPS ⊆ [n] that includes each i with probability min{kai , 1} independently.
      The runtime is O((1 + k · ni=1 ai ) log n) in expectation.
    • Given an interval [s, t] ⊂ [n], and k ≥ 1, produce a set S ⊆ [n]P that includes each i ∈ [s, t] with
      probability min{kai , 1} independently. The runtime is O((1 + k · ti=s ai ) log2 n) in expectation.

                                                                      54
   Furthermore, the preprocessing time is O(|S| · logO(1) n).
    For fast calculation of equations (3) and (4), we need data-structures that generate for each I ∈ I
the sums of only the relevant φ, θ colors over the Λ balls (i.e., which pass the threshold). We use the
following data-structure and algorithm:
Theorem 8.2. Given a set of numbers a1 , . . . an ≥ 0 in a sparse representation (i.e., as a set S of i’s
with ai > 0), there exists a data structure D supporting the following queries:
   • Given some i < j compute jk=i ak . The query complexity is O(log n).
                                  P

   • Given some i and ζ > 0, compute j ∈ S, j ≤ i such that ik=j−1 ak < ζ ≤ ik=j ak (or output that
                                                                P               P
      none exists). The query complexity is O(log n).
   The preprocessing time is O(|S| log n).
Theorem 8.3. Suppose we are given an m × n matrix A, where m ≤ n, given in the sparse form, i.e., as
a set S of non-zero entries. Also, suppose we are given n intervals [si , ti ] ⊆ [n] such that
                                                                                             Pboth  {si }i and
{ti }i are non-decreasing. Given γ > 0, we can find all pairs (i, χ) ∈ [n] × [m] such that tk=si
                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                    A χ,k ≥ γ.
                                                
                                        t
The runtime is Õ |S| + n + γ1 · χ,i k=s
                                 P    P  i
                                           i
                                             Aχ,k .

   Theorem 8.2 helps us calculating Λζκ for each interval, and generating ϕζκ (I, u) while Theorem 8.3 is
used for ϕζκ (I, ∗6=u ). We prove these theorems in section 10.
   We proceed to proving Theorem 4.2, item 3 next.
Lemma 8.4. Clustering and assigning φκ takes Tad · Õ(n · λ · β O(1) ) time in each step t and level l.
Proof. Fix a step t and level l. We claim the following for the clustering and potential φ computation (in
Alg. 8):
   1. We call ClusterAnchor (Alg. 4) at most λt times. This is immediate from the fact each anchor
      can be clustered at most once.
   2. ClusterAnchor takes Tad ·n·Õ(λ1−t ·β O(1) ) time. Indeed, notice that we call each ClusterAnchor
                      0
      with |R| = |Pκχ0 | = n · Õ (λ1−t · β 5 ) (by Lemma 6.3), and we perform a single ad calculation per
      interval I ∈ R.
   3. We call AssignPhiPotential (Alg. 5) at most α1 · λt times. Indeed, observe each call to Clus-
      terAnchor outputs ≤ 1/α clusters, and we perform AssignPhiPotential once for each output
      cluster.
   4. AssignPhiPotential takes n · Õ(λ1−t · β O(1) ) time in expectation. We argue this below.
   To analyze the time complexity of AssignPhiPotential, we need to bound time spent estimat-
ing densities. For this task, notice that for each I ∈ A, we estimate dκ0 (I, χ0 )ĉ using dm = dA =
                                                                              µ (I,χ0 )
n−2α µκ0 (A, χ0 ). Hence the total complexity TAPP (A) = Tad · Õ(|A| · κ0 dA + |A|). The term Tad · Õ(|A|)
term is dominated by the complexity of ClusterAnchor from above, hence we only need to bound:
                                         µ (I,χ0 )
                                                                                        
                           Tad · Õ |A| · κ0 dA      = Tad · |A|
                                                             dA  · n · Õ   λ 1−t
                                                                                  · β O(1)
                                                                                             .
                             h i
   It remains to bound E |A|                       t                                            00
                               dA . Fix χ ∈ [λ ] for which we sampled an anchor triplet (A, χ , ci ). For
(I, χ0 , ci ) ∈ I × ν \ {⊥} × Ec , define ZI,χ0 ,ĉ as the (random) event that (I, χ0 ) is clustered in some A ∈ Cχ
for cost ĉ ∈ Ec :

                                                        55
                                                                               0
                                                       h                                             i
                                            ZI,χ0 ,ĉ = A ∈ Nci,jmax (I) ∩ Pκχ0 ∧ χ00 = χ0 ∧ ĉ = ci
                                                                                                              d
   Also define pI,χ0 ,ĉ = Pr[ZI,χ0 ,ĉ ] and τI,χ0 ,ĉ = maxA∈Cχ d1A · 1 ZI,χ0 ,ĉ . Notice that pI,χ0 ,ĉ ≤ I,j2nmax ,
                                                                                  

where dI,jmax = dκ0 (I, χ0 , I)ci,jmax . Also note that we have dA ≥ n−α · dI,jmax (as Nci,jmax (I) ⊆ N3c (A)),
                           α
and hence τI,χ0 ,ĉ ≤ dI,jn . We can finally bound the expectation:
                                    max


     h         i                          pI,χ0 ,ĉ
         |A|                                                                                      α                       dI,jmax   nα
                            X                              X                                                X
                                                                                                                                              O(1)
 E       dA        ≤                        dA ≤                         pI,χ0 ,ĉ · τI,χ0 ,ĉ ≤ n2n                      dI,jmax = 2n Sκ = β
                                                                                                                                         0         .
                       (I,χ0 )∈I×ν\{⊥}                (I,χ0 )∈I×ν\{⊥}                                  (I,χ0 )∈I×ν\{⊥}
                          µκ0 (I,χ0 )>0                  µκ0 (I,χ0 )>0                                    µκ0 (I,χ0 )>0


    We conclude the expected time spent on AssignPhiPotential for each cluster is Tad · β O(1) · n ·
Õ(λ1−t · β O(1) ) = Tad · n · Õ(λ1−t · β O(1) ) as needed.
    To summarize the time complexity of clustering, we have for a fixed step t and level l:

     • Total time spent on all calls to ClusterAnchor is λt · Tad · n · Õ(λ1−t · β O(1) ) = Tad · n · Õ(λβ O(1) ) =
       Tad · n1+O() .

     • Expected total time spent on all calls to AssignPhiPotential is α1 · λt · Tad · n · Õ(λ1−t · β O(1) ) =
       Tad · n · Õ(λβ O(1) ) = n1+O() , and since each call is independent and takes at most Tad · Õ(n) time,
       we have the bound with high probability as well.



     Second, we show that computing θ’s for the pivots is also time efficient.

Lemma 8.5. The algorithm AssignThetaPotential (Alg. 6) takes Tad · n · Õ(λβ O(1) ) time in each
level l (whp).

Proof. Fix step t and level l. We notice that the main runtime term to estimate is the time spend on
approximating the relative densities. For this, we note:

     1. We only estimate densities for pairs (V, χ0 ) when µκ0 (Λζκ (V ), χ0 ) ≤ λ · β l+O(1) (from Line 4 threshold
        in AssignThetaPotential).

                  each (I 0 , χ0 ) ∈ I × ν, k times,each with probability pI 0 ,χ0 := β −l · µκ0 (I 0 , χ0 ), and spend
     2. We sample 
                                 1   µκ0 (I,χ0 )   µκ0 (Λζκ (V ),χ0 )
          τI 0 ,χ0 := Õ           ·       0 0
                                rdm µκ0 (I ,χ )  +   µκ0 (I 0 ,χ0 )         time approximating such pair (by Lemma 5.2), where
          rdm = n3α · λtnβ l .
                                                     t l         O(1)
                                                                                                                l+O(1) 
                                                                                       λβ l+O(1)
     Combining the above, we get τI 0 ,χ0 = Tad · Õ λ nβ · n·λ·β
                                                                λ t    ·      1
                                                                               0  0
                                                                         µκ0 (I ,χ ) +       0  0
                                                                                       µκ0 (I ,χ )   = Tad · Õ  λβ
                                                                                                                 µκ0 (I 0 ,χ0 ) .
     Hence, the expected run-time of all pair approximation is




                                                                               56
                                                                                 
                                                               X
           EV [Density approximation time] = EV                           τI 0 ,χ0 
                                                            (I 0 ,χ0 )∈V
                                                               X
                                                 ≤                                k · pI 0 ,χ0 · τI 0 ,χ0
                                                     (I 0 ,χ0 )∈I×ν:pI 0 ,χ0 >0
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                          λβ l+O(1)
                                                                    X
                                                 =k·                                    β −l · µκ0 (I 0 , χ0 ) · Õ       µκ0 (I 0 ,χ0 )
                                                         (I 0 ,χ0 )∈I×ν:pI 0 ,χ0 >0
                                                                    X                                
                                                 =k·                                    Õ λ · β O(1)
                                                         (I 0 ,χ0 )∈I×ν:pI 0 ,χ0 >0
                                                                                       
                                                 = k · Sκ0 · Õ β O(1) = Õ n · λ · β O(1) .

    Since the expectation is over sum of independent r.v., bounded by O(n), we also have the bound whp.


    Last, we show that assigning colors using φ, θ scores is efficient:
Lemma 8.6. Assigning colors in AmendColoring (Alg. 7) takes Õ (n · β O(1) ) time in each level l.
Proof. Let Su = kµκ (∗, u)k0 , Sθ = kθκ (∗, ∗)k0 , Sφ = kφκ (∗, ∗)k0 . We note that Su ≤ 2n and Sθ , Sφ ≤
Sκ0 = n · Õ (β O(1) ).                                                                     
    First, from Theorem 8.2, the pre-processing time of the data structures is Õ Su + Õ(Sθ ) = Õ (n ·
β O(1) ), and since we query each data structure O(n) times (once for each I ∈ I), the total query time is
Õ(1) · O(n) = Õ(n).
                                                                                 β 2l      µκ (I,u)·φκ (Λζκ (I),ν)
    Second, focusing on calculating ϕζκ (∗, ∗6=u ), define Lφ = I∈I ζ∈Zl max{ζ
                                                                  P     P
                                                                                     2 ,1}           βl
                                                                                                                   , and
                                        t       2α   n
recall from Eqn. (16), we have Lφ = λ · O (n · λt ) = O    (n · β). We invoke
                                                                                Theorem 8.3 using γ = β −4 ,
                                                                                          L
to obtain the time spent on calculating ϕζκ (∗, ∗6=u ) is Õ Sφ + n + β −4
                                                                        φ
                                                                                                  = Õ (n · β O(1) ).
    Last, each update rule of µκ (I) using ϕs takes Õ(1) time, which sums up to Õ(n) over all intervals.

    Using the above Lemmas, we prove our main complexity guarantee.

Proof of Theorem 4.2, item 3. We conclude that the runtime of MatchIntervals (Alg. 8), per one step
and level, is Õ(n1+O() · Tad ). There’s is a constant number of levels, so the same bound holds for each
step. Since the algorithm converges in constant steps (as was shown above), and the branching factor is
O(log n), the conclusion follows.


9    Alignment Distance Algorithm for ad: Proof of Theorem 4.3
In this section we show the algorithm for computing the adw distance, in particular proving Theorem 4.3.
To briefly recall the theorem, we want an algorithm for computing a metric adw (I, J) on w-length strings
I, J given an oracle to a metric Dw/γ on w/γ-length strings, running in time poly(γ). Note that we can
assume that w ≥ γ 4 , as otherwise we can afford to set ad(I, J) = ed(I, J) and compute it directly. We
manage to ensure it only for “single scale” metrics adw,c , designed for distances in the range ≈ [c, γc].
    First, we reduce adw,c , where c ∈ Sw , to a set of fewer ad functions, indexed adw,t , where t ∈
{γ, γ 2 , . . . , w/γ 2 }. In particular, for given c, we set t by rounding down c/τ to an integer power of γ, for
some (large) constant τ (to be fixed later). When c/τ < γ, we set t = γ.

                                                              57
    We note that the algorithm for the “largest distance regime”, when t = w/γ 2 , will be different from
the rest, when t ≤ w/γ 3 . We describe each of the two algorithms separately starting with the “large”
distance regime, which is easier.
    Henceforth, for simplicity, we set w0 = w/γ, and often refer to Dw0 as D. Also, for strings I, J of
length w, we let Iw0 , Jw0 be the strings starting at the same position but of length w0 only (e.g., for
I = Xi,w , Iw0 = Xi,w0 ). Finally, we cap all the output distances at w; note that cannot break any of the
guarantees (e.g., triangle inequality, or the fact that each adw,c ≥ edw as edw ≤ w).
    Below, to simplify lots of notation, we will use notation k ∈ [m] to mean k ∈ {0, 1, 2, m − 1} (which is
different from how it was used in the past sections). Also, the notation [a, b) means all integers {a, ...b−1},
whereas [a, b] = {a, ...b}.

9.1     Large distance algorithm: adw,w/γ metric
For simplicity of notation, we set Γ = adw,t when t = w0 = w/γ ≥ γ.
   The algorithm proceeds as follows. For m = γ 4 , the vertices are Vp,q where p ∈ [−m, m] and q ∈
[−m, m]. For each node Vp,q , we add the following edges to H:

   • Vp,q → Vp+1,q+1 of cost w/m          w         w
                              w0 Dw (Iw + m p, Jw + m q) (diagonal edges).
                                   0   0         0


   • Vp,q → Vp,q+1 and Vp,q → Vp+1,q of cost w/m (gap edges).

    Now we run the shortest path from vertex V−m,−m to Vm,m . Define Γ to be 4 times that shortest path
value. It is immediate to note that this can be computed in mO(1) time.

9.1.1    Lower and upper bounds on Γ
First, we prove the lower bound.

Lemma 9.1. Γ(Xi,w , Yj,w ) ≥ edw (Xi,w , Yj,w ) for all i, j.

Proof. Note that any path in H corresponds to an alignment A : [−m, m) → [−m, m) ∪ {⊥} as follows.
For each p ∈ [−m, m), consider the edge which increases p: if it’s the diagonal edge Vp,q → Vp+1,q+1 then
A(p) = q; otherwise set A(p) = ⊥. The number of all gap edges is then 2 · |{p : A(p) = ⊥}|. Hence,
recalling the convention that edw0 (Xi , Yf (⊥) ) = w0 for any function f : N → N:

          Γ(Xi,w , Yj,w ) ≥ w/m
                                        X
                                                                                       w
                             w0                edw0 (Xi+kw/m,w0 , Yj+w/m·A(k),w0 ) + 2 m · |{p : A(p) = ⊥}|.
                                   k∈[−m,m)
                                                  h         i
                                                       w0
By averaging, there must exist some δ ∈               w/m       such that:
                              X
                                                                                          w
        Γ(Xi,w , Yj,w ) ≥              edw0 (Xi+w/m·δ+kw0 ,w0 , Yj+w/m·A(δ+km/γ),w0 ) + 2 m · |{p : A(p) = ⊥}|.
                            k∈[−γ,γ)

We now lower bound this by the ed(Xi+w/m·δ,w , Yj+w/m·A(δ+km/γ),w0 ). In particular, note that we can
build an LCS between these w-length strings from the LCS of the w0 -length strings Xi+w/m·δ+kw0 ,w0 and
Yj+w/m·A(δ+km/γ),w0 . Now, the latter strings Yj+w/m·A(δ+km/γ),w0 may overlap, and hence some characters
double-counted. To account for this overlap, let k1 < k2 < . . . < kz be the indeces k where A(δ +km/γ) 6=
⊥. Then, we can lower-bound the sum of ed of w0 -strings by ed between the 2w-length strings, minus the




                                                                  58
overlap as follows, where i0 , i + w/m · δ − w and j 0 = j + w/m · A(δ − m) (if it exists, and j 0 = j + i0 − i
otherwise):
                                                                    w
                   Γ(Xi,w , Yj,w ) ≥ ed2w (Xi0 ,2w , Yj 0 ,2w ) + 2 m · |{p : A(p) = ⊥}|
                                                                                         w0
                                        X
                                                 w
                                     −           m · A(δ + kl+1 m/γ) − A(δ + kl m/γ) − w/m
                                      l=1..z−1

    Now we note that the subtracted overlap is upper bounded by the (scaled) number of p s.t. A(p) = ⊥
(function A must be injective on the rest of p’s). Furthermore, edw (Xi,w , Yj,w ) ≤ ed2w (Xi0 ,2w , Yj 0 ,2w ) +
w
m · |{p : A(p) = ⊥}| and hence:

                                                                              w
           Γ(Xi,w , Yj,w ) ≥ ed2w (Xi+w/m·δ−w,2w , Yj+w/m·A(i+w/m·δ−w),2w ) + m · |{p : A(p) = ⊥}|,
                         ≥ edw (Xi,w , Yj,w ).



   Now we prove the upper bound. Below, constant C > 1 is from Theorem 4.3 hypothesis:

Lemma 9.2. For any fixed i and any alignment π with π(i) 6= ⊥, we have
                                                                                                  

                                                                      |←
                                                                       −(i + l + 1) − ←
                                                                                      −(i + l) − 1| .
                                 X                                  X
  Γ(Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ) ≤ O  γw2 +   1
                                   w0 D(Xi+l,w , Yπ(i+l),w0 ) + C ·
                                              0                        π              π
                                 l∈[w]                                 l∈[w]

   In the above, in the last term, recall from the preliminaries that ←
                                                                      −(i0 ) is the minimum π(j), j ≥ i0 ,
                                                                      π
which is defined (6= ⊥). This last term should be thought of the error stemming from π skipping large
chunks of y (which, overall, can be charged to the edit distance between x and y).

Proof. Defining

                                                            |←
                                                             −(i + (k + 1)w/m) − ←
                                                                                 −(i + k · w/m) − w/m|,
           X                                        X
                1
     uπ ,      w0 D(Xi+l,w , Yπ(i+l),w0 ) + C
                          0                                  π                   π
           l∈[w]                                 k∈[−m,m)

                                                                    2
                                                  π(i),w ) ≤ O(w/γ + uπ ) as, by simple triangle inequality,
we note that it is enough to prove that Γ(Xi,w , YP
|←
 −(i + (k + 1)w/m) − ←
 π                     −(i + k · w/m) − w/m| ≤
                       π                            l∈[w/m] |←−(i + k · w/m + l + 1) − ←
                                                              π                           −(i + k · w/m + l) − 1|.
                                                                                          π
                                                           j←−            k
   Now, let j = π(i). For k ∈ [−m, m), define A0 (k) = π (i+kw/m)−j
                                                                w/m         . If A0 (i) = A0 (i − 1) or A0 (i) ≥ m
then set A(i) = ⊥ and A(i) = A0 (i) otherwise (i.e., only the first copy of a sequence of equal numbers
remains).
   We claim that
                                      X |←   −(i+(k+1)w/m)−w/m−←
                                             π                      −(i+kw/m)|
                                                                    π                     uπ
          |{k : A(k) = ⊥}| ≤ O(1 +                         w/m                 ) ≤ O(1 + w/m ),
                                         k∈[−m,m)

                                                            ←
                                                            −
since any set of real numbers {r1 , . . . rm } (for us rk = π (i+kw/m)
                                                                w/m    ), when rounded down, will have a number
of duplicates bounded by 1 + m                                              the number of distinct A0 (i) ≥ m is
                                 P
                                    k=1 k+1|r    −  rk −  1|. Furthermore,
upper bounded by (using triangle inequality):
                                                               X |←  −(i+(k+1)w/m)−w/m−← −(i+kw/m)|
            1+ m    ←−                  ←−                           π                   π
                 w | π (i + w − m) − π (i) − w| ≤ 1 +                              w/m              .
                                                            k∈[−m,m)



                                                        59
   Now we have that for Γ = Γ(Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ):
                               w/m
                      X
                                                                     w
          Γ≤4                   w0 D(Xi+kw/m,w0 , Yj+w/m·A(k),w0 ) + m · 2|{k : A(k) = ⊥}|
                    k∈[−m,m),A(k)6=⊥
                                   w/m
                        X
                                                                                  w
               ≤4                   w0 (D(Xi+kw/m,w0 , Y π (i+kw/m),w0 ) + w/m) + m · O(1 + uπ )
                                                        ←−
                    k∈[−m,m)
                                              w/m
                                     X
               = O(uπ ) + 4                    w0 D(Xi+kw/m,w0 , Y π (i+kw/m),w0 ),
                                                                  ←−
                                   k∈[−m,m)

using the fact that we set m ≥ γ.
    Now note that, for any l ∈ [w/m], we have that:
D(Xi+kw/m,w0 , Y←
                π                                  −(i+l+kw/m),w0 )+2Cl+C|←
                −(i+kw/m),w0 ) ≤ D(Xi+l+kw/m,w0 , Y←
                                                   π
                                                                          −(i+(k+1)w/m)−←
                                                                          π             −(i+kw/m)|.
                                                                                        π
Hence:
                                                                                              
                                                     w/m
                          X                 X
                                     1
      Γ ≤ O(uπ ) + 4                w/m               w0       D(Xi+kw/m,w0 , Y←
                                                                               −
                                                                               π (i+kw/m),w 0 )
                       k∈[−m,m)            l∈[w/m]
                          X               X
                                    1
       ≤ O(uπ ) + 4                 w0
                       k∈[−m,m)          l∈[w/m]
                                                                    ←
                                                                    −(i + (k + 1)w/m) − ←
                                                                                        −(i + kw/m)|
                                                                                                   
                 D(Xi+l+kw/m,w0 , Y←
                                   −
                                   π (i+l+kw/m),w   0 ) +  2Cl + C| π                   π
                                                             w2
                    X
                       1                                8C
       ≤ O(uπ ) + 4    w0 D(Xi+l,w , Y π (i+l),w0 ) + w0 m m2
                                   0   ←
                                       −
                       l∈[w]
                                                ←−                    ←
                                                                      −
                               X
                 + 4C                w     w                                         w
                                                                                                   
                   w0                m     m + | π (i + (k + 1)w/m) − π (i + kw/m) − m |
                         k∈[−m,m)
                                                                             w/m
                       X                                         wγ     wγ
                               1
       ≤ O(uπ ) + 4            w0 D(Xi+l,w , Y π (i+l),w0 ) + 8C m + 4C m + 4 w0 · uπ
                                          0   ←−
                       l∈[w]

       ≤ O(uπ + w/γ 2 ),
where we use O(Cwγ/m) ≤ w/γ 2 by our choice of m = γ 4 .

9.2    Not large distance regime: adw,t for t ≤ w/γ 3
To compute the adw,t distance for smaller t, we use a slightly different alignment representation called
block alignment, which maps “grid blocks” into x-axis and y-axis “shifts” (loosely speaking). We think of
alignment of square blocks of size w0 on w by w grid, defined by coordinates pi , qi for every square block
i ∈ [γ] in the alignment. The first coordinate represents accumulated horizontal shifts, corresponding
to inter-block insertions, and the second one represents accumulated vertical shifts, corresponding to
inter-block deletions. Such representation is somewhat easier to handle in our case, and will be formally
defined below.
    Define θ = t/w. Let T = γ 3 . To ease exposition, we use | · |1 notation for the `1 norm.
Definition 9.3 (ad). Let A be the set of functions A = (Ax , Ay ) where Ax , Ay : [−γ, γ] → [T ] are non-
decreasing functions with Ax [−γ] = Ay [−γ] = 0 and Ax [γ] = Ay [γ]. For I, J ∈ Iw , define the distance
adw,t (I, J) = min{ad∗w,t (I, J), w0 θT }, where ad∗w,t (I, J) is equal to:
                              X             X
min (Ax [γ] + Ay [γ]) θw0 +           1                            0                             0
                                                                                                                     
                                      T              D    I w 0 + w (k + θ(∆ + Ax [k])), Jw 0 + w (k + θ(∆ + Ay [k])) .
A∈A
                                k∈[−γ,γ)     ∆∈[3T −|A[k]|1 ]

   The former term can be thought of as “shift costs” and the latter as “diagonal costs”.

                                                                    60
9.2.1   Fast computation

Algorithm. The vertices are Vk,p,q where k ∈ [−γ, γ] and p, q ∈ [T ], as well as final node V ∗ . For each
node Vk,p,q we add the following edges to H:

   • Vk,p,q → Vk+1,p,q of cost T1 ∆∈[3T −p−q] D(Iw0 + w0 (k + θ(∆ + p)), Jw0 + w0 (k + θ(∆ + q))) (diagonal
                                 P
     edges).

   • Vk,p,q → Vk,p+1,q and Vk,p,q → Vk,p,q+1 of cost θw0 (gap edges).

   • when k = γ, Vγ,p,q → V ∗ of cost θw0 · |p − q| (target edges).

   We run shortest path from V−γ,0,0 to V ∗ , and output its value, capped at w0 θT (from above).
Complexity. It’s immediate to see that the runtime complexity is γ O(1) since H has O(γT 2 ) edges.
Note that this is also the upper bound on the number of calls to D distance queries.

9.2.2   Lower bound on adw,t
We establish the lower bounds for adw,t in the following lemma.

Lemma 9.4. For all t ∈ {γ, . . . w/γ 3 }, intervals I, J ∈ Iw , we have that adw,t (I, J) ≥ min{edw (I, J), w0 θT }.

     For both the above, as well as for the upper bound shown later, we define distances:
                   X       X
 dt (I, J) , min        T
                         1
                                D(Iw0 + w0 (k + θ(∆ + Ax [k])), Jw0 + w0 (k + θ(∆ + Ay [k]))) + |A[γ]|1 θw0 .
             A
                  k∈[−γ,γ)       ∆∈[T ]
                                                                                                                    (17)
                     X              X
Dt (I, J) , min              1
                             T             D(Iw0 + w0 (k + θ(∆ + Ax [k])), Jw0 + w0 (k + θ(∆ + Ay [k]))) + |A[γ]|1 θw0 .
             A
                  k∈[−γ,γ)       ∆∈[3T ]
                                                                                                                    (18)

   Note that dt (I, J) ≤ ad∗w,t (I, J) ≤ Dt (I, J), hence it is enough to prove Lemma 9.4 for dt . We will use
Dt later for the upper bound, in Lemma 9.5. Note that while each of dt , Dt lower/upper bounds adw,t ,
those may not satisfy triangle inequality over I, hence we use Def. 9.3 for ad.

Proof of Lemma 9.4. Without loss of generality, assume that I = Xi = Xi,w (i.e., it is an interval from
x, starting at position i) and J = Yj = Yj,w (the cases when I, J are both from x or both from y are
treated in exactly the same manner). By the above, it is enough to prove that dt (Xi , Yj ) ≥ ed(Xi , Yj ).
Note that we can rewrite:
                        X X
 dt (Xi , Yj ) = min T1          D(Xi + w0 (k + θ(∆ + Ax [k])), Yj + w0 (k + θ(∆ + Ay [k]))) + |A[γ]|1 θw0 ,
                 A
                         ∆∈[T ] k∈[−γ,γ)

and hence, for the minimizing A, there’s some ∆ ∈ [T ] such that
                      X
      dt (Xi , Yj ) ≥     D(Xi + w0 (k + θ(∆ + Ax [k])), Yj + w0 (k + θ(∆ + Ay [k]))) + |A[γ]|1 θw0 .
                         k∈[−γ,γ)
                           X
                     =            (D(Xi + w0 θ∆ + w0 (k + θ · Ax [k]), Yj + w0 θ∆ + w0 (k + θ · Ay [k]))
                         k∈[−γ,γ)

                                    + (Ax [k + 1] − Ax [k] + Ay [k + 1] − Ay [k]) · θw0 ).


                                                               61
     Using that D ≥ ed, we get, using the notation i0 , i + w0 θ∆ ≤ i + w and j 0 , j + w0 θ∆ ≤ j + w:
             X
dt (I, J) ≥       ed(Xi0 +w0 (k+θ·Ax [k]) , Yj 0 +w0 (k+θ·Ay [k]) ) + w0 θ · (Ax [k + 1] − Ax [k] + Ay [k + 1] − Ay [k])
             k∈[−γ,γ)

           ≥ ed(X[i0 − w : i0 + w + w0 θAx [γ]], Y [j 0 − w : j 0 + w + w0 θAy [γ]]) ≥ ed(X[i : i + w], Y [j : j + w]),

where we also used the fact that Ax [γ] = Ay [γ].
   In conclusion: adw,c (I, J) = min{ad∗w,c (I, J), w0 θT } ≥ min{dt (I, J), w0 θT } ≥ min{ed(I, J), w0 θT }.


9.3    adw align-approximates ed
                             P
Recall that adw (Xi , Yj ) = c∈Sw c · 1 [adw,c (Xi , Yj ) ≥ c]. Hence the lower bound, that adw ≥ edw point-
                                                                                                    √
wise follows immediately from Lemmas 9.1 and 9.4 (for the latter, note that w0 θT ≥ τ γc 2 T ≥ c γ). In
particular for c∗ ∈ Sw such that 1 ≤ c∗ ≤ edw (Xi , Yj ) < 2c∗ , we have adw (Xi , Yj ) = c∈Sw :c≤c∗ c ≥
                                                                                              P
2c∗ − 1 ≥ edw (Xi , Yj ) (the case of edw (Xi , Yj ) = 0 is immediate).
    We now prove the upper bound on adw , where CPis the constant from the Theorem 4.3 hypothesis. Fix
the alignment π ∈ Π that minimizes the cost kπ = i∈[n] w10 Dw0 (Xi,w0 , Yπ(i),w0 ). Note that the hypothesis
of the theorem implies that kπ ≤ C · ed(x, y). We prove the following lemma.
               P        1                                P       1
Lemma 9.5.        i∈[n] w adw (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ) ≤ O(C) ·   i∈[n] w0 Dw0 (Xi,w0 , Yπ(i),w0 ).

   Note that this implies the desired upper bound of O(C 2 ) · ed(x, y) as required for adw to O(C 2 )-align-
approximate ed.

Proof. We first introduce a bit of useful notation, edπ (i, w), which, intuitively, is the edit distance of the
alignment π from [i, i + w) to [←
                                −(i), ←
                                π     −(i + w)):
                                      π


                                 ediπ (i, w) , {i0 ∈ [i, i + w) | π(i0 ) = ⊥} .
                                 edj (i, w) , {j ∈ [←
                                     π
                                                      −(i), ←
                                                      π      −(i + w)) | π −1 (j) = ⊥} .
                                                             π
                                 edπ (i, w) , ediπ (i, w) + edjπ (i, w).

     We rewrite adw in terms of ad∗w,t and Γ as follows, where τ is a constant from the start of the section,
still to be determined. Recall that 1 [adw,c (I, J) ≥ c] = 1 [adw,t (I, J) ≥ c], where t is the rounding down
of c/τ to a power of γ . Considering the “large” and “not large” cases for t separately, we can further
rewrite the “large” case as:
                      X
                             c · 1 [adw,c (I, J) ≥ c] ≤ 2 · Γ(I, J) · 1 Γ(I, J) ≥ w/γ 2 · τ .
                                                                                          

                          c∈Sw
                        c/τ ≥w/γ 2


Hence, using Lemma 9.2, for τ at least twice the implicit constant from the lemma (in front of w/γ 2 ),
we obtain that:
                                                                                                            

                                                                                |←
                                                                                 −(i + k + 1) − ←
                                                                                                −(i + k) − 1| .
 X                                           X                                X
                                               1
                                     
       c·1 adw,c (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ) ≥ c ≤ O    w0 D(Xi+k,w , Yπ(i+k),w0 ) + C
                                                          0                      π              π
  c∈Sw                                             k∈[w]                                 k∈[w]
c/τ ≥w/γ




                                                             62
In particular, by summing over all i, and noting that each D(Xi,w0 , Yπ(i),w0 ) appears at most w = w0 γ
times (and same with the absolute difference terms):
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                    ←−               ←
                                                                                                     −
X X                                                    X
                                                         1
                                           
           c · 1 adw,c (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ) ≥ c ≤ w · O    w0 D(Xi,w , Yπ(i),w0 ) + C| π (i + k + 1) − π (i + k) − 1|
                                                                  0                                                
 i     c∈Sw                                                    i∈[n]
     c/τ ≥w/γ
                                                                                                                 (19)
                                                                                                  
                                                                       X
                                                                               1
                                                 ≤ w · O (1 + C)              w0 D(Xi,w , Yπ(i),w0 ) ,
                                                                                        0                       (20)
                                                                       i∈[n]

as D(Xi,w0 , Yπ(i),w0 ) = w0 whenever π(i) = ⊥ .
    We now upper bound the “not large” regime, which is significantly more involved. For fixed c with
c/τ < w/γ, recall that t is the round-downof c/τ ; except if    c/τ < γ, when we set t = γ. Hence we have
                                                  ∗
1 [adw,c (I, J) ≥ c] = 1 [adw,t (I, J) ≥ c] ≤ 1 adw,t (I, J) ≥ c ≤ 1 [Dt (I, J) ≥ tτ ] + 1 [Dγ (I, J) ≥ c], where
Dt is as defined in Eqn. (18). We can bound:
                                                                                                                     !
     X                                                                              X                                +
             c·1 [adw,c (I, J) ≥ c] ≤ O       max         Dt (I, J) + Dγ (I, J) ≤ O   [Dt (I, J) − τ t/2 · 1 [t > γ]]    ,
                                          t:Dt (I,J)≥tτ
  c∈Sw                                                                                      t
c/τ <w/γ 2
                                                                                                           (21)
where [x]+ = max{0, x}, and recalling that there are O(logγ n) = O(1) different possible t’s considered.
    We upper bound Dt (Xi,w , Yj,w ) for any fixed t and indeces i ∈ [n] and j = ←      −(i), by exhibiting a
                                                                                        π
convenient choice for function A. We define Ax [k]’s, for fixed i and t. For k = −γ, Ax [k] = 0 by definition.
For k ∈ (−γ, γ), define real δk ≥ 0 to be the smallest such that ediπ (i+w0 (k −1+θAx [k −1]), w0 +w0 θδk ) =
w0 θδk (infinity if it doesn’t exist). Set Ax [k] = min{Ax [k − 1] + dδk e, T }. Then, if Ax [k] = T , then set
Ay [k] = T , as well as the subsequent Ax , Ay . Otherwise, let A∗y [k] to be the unique integer such that
                            ←
                            −(i + w0 (k + θA [k])) ∈ ←
                            π                        −(i) + w0 (k + θA∗ [k]) + [0, w0 θ).
                                                     π                                                           (22)
                                            x                         y

   and set Ay [k] = min{A∗y [k], T }. Note that for t = γ, we have that w0 θ = 1 and hence ←
                                                                                           −(i + w0 (k +
                                                                                           π
θAx [k])) = ←
            −(i) + w0 (k + θA [k]).
            π                  y
   Finally, set Ax [γ] = Ay [γ] = max{Ax [γ − 1], Ax [γ − 1]}.
Claim 9.6. Functions Ax , Ay are non-decreasing and |A[γ]|1 ≤ O( edπ (i−w,3w)
                                                                      w0 θ    + γ). Futhermore, when
                                 edπ (i−w,3w)
t = γ, we have that |A[γ]|1 ≤ O(      w0 θ    ).

Proof. While Ax is non-decreasing by construction, we need to prove that Ay is non-decreasing. We have
that, as long as Ak [x] < T , for ik = i + w0 (k + θAx [k]) and ik−1 = i + w0 (k − 1 + θAx [k − 1]), and noting
that ik − ik−1 = w0 + w0 θdδk e:
                                ←
                                −(i ) − ←
                                        −(i ) ≥ i − i        i
                                π  k    π  k−1   k   k−1 − edπ (ik−1 , ik − ik−1 )
                                                      ≥ w0 + w0 θdδk e − w0 θdδk e
                                                      = w0 .

   Hence Ay [k] must also be non-decreasing.
   To prove the bound on |A|1 , we first note that the bound is immediate if edπ (i − w, 3w) ≥ γ 2 t/10:
                          γ2t                                                 γ2
then |A|1 ≤ 2T = 2γ 3 = 2 w                                                                     i
                            0 θ . Suppose for the rest that edπ (i − w, 3w) ≤ 10 t (and hence edπ (i − w, 3w)




                                                                 63
as well). We now show by induction on k that Ax [k] ≤ T /5 and δk ≤ T — satisfied for k = −γ by
definition. As for inductive step:
                                                         k
                                                         X
             ediπ (i − w, w + w0 (k + θAx [k])) =                ediπ (i + w0 (l − 1 + θAx [l − 1]), w0 + w0 θdδl e)
                                                        l=−γ+1
                                                         k
                                                         X
                                                    ≥            w0 θδl
                                                        l=−γ+1
                                                         k
                                                         X
                                                    ≥            w0 θdδl e − w0 θ
                                                      l=−γ+1

                                                    = w0 θ(Ax [k] − γ − k),                                            (23)
                            i             0
    and thus Ax [k] ≤ edπ (i−w,w+w
                                 w0 θ
                                     (k+θAx [k]))
                                                  + γ + k ≤ γ 3 /10 + 2γ ≤ T /5. This also implies w0 θAx [k] ≤
t/γ · T /5 ≤ tγ /5 < w . Now we also show that δ’s are < T . Indeed, define f (δ) , ediπ (i + w0 (k − 1 +
               2         0

θAx [k − 1]), w0 + w0 θδ), and note that f (0), f (T /10) ≤ ediπ (i − w, 3w) ≤ tγ 2 /10. At the same time the
function g(δ) = w0 θδ grows from 0 to g(T /10) = w0 θT /10 ≥ tγ 2 /10. Hence the non-decreasing functions
f, g must intersect somewhere at δ ∈ [0, T /10] (with w0 θδ an integer).
                                                     i
    From the above we have that Ax [γ − 1] ≤ edπ (i−w,3w)
                                                       w0 θ    + γ. As for Ay [γ − 1], we have that:
               ←
               −        0                       0    ←
                                                     −            0          ←
                                                                             −          j        0
Ay [γ − 1] ≤ π (i+w+w θAxw[γ−1])−(j+w−w
                            0θ
                                        )
                                          ≤ π (i+w)+w θAx [γ−1]−wπ0 θ(j+w)+edπ (i+w−w ,w) ≤ O( edπ (i−w,3w)
                                                                                                    w0 θ    + γ).

The conclusion follows since |A[γ]|1 = 2 max{Ax [γ − 1], Ay [γ − 1]}.
    In the case when t = γ, we note that w0 θ = 1, and hence it is enough to consider δk to be integers
only. Thus in Eqn. (23) we don’t need the negative term (that comes only from rounding δk ), and hence
                              i
Ax [γ − 1], Ay [γ − 1] ≤ O( edπ (i−w,3w)
                                 w0 θ    ), from which we obtain the conclusion.

    Since A depends on i and t, we denote it as Ai,t below. For each i ∈ [n], we also define ti ∈ {γ, . . . w/γ 2 }
as the round-down of edπ (i − w, 3w) (i.e., ti ≤ edπ (i − w, 3w) < γti ), unless edπ (i − w, 3w) < γ, in which
case ti = γ. Also let θi be the θ from Dti , i.e., θi = ti /w.
    By the claim above, we have that for any i, t:

                                 w0 wt · |Ai,t [γ]|1 ≤ O(edπ (i − w, 3w) + t · 1 [t > γ]).                             (24)

We also observe that

     X                            X n/w−3
                                     X
 1
 w        edπ (i − w, 3w) = w1                  edπ (iw − w + j, 3w) ≤ 3w
                                                                       w · O (|{i ∈ [n] | π(i) = ⊥}|) ≤ O(kπ ). (25)
      i                          j∈[3w]   i=0


     Hence, for τ sufficiently large constant, and t ranging over {γ, . . . , w/γ 2 }, we can bound the total




                                                                 64
                                              1 P
                                   P                                                          
“not-large” contribution,               i∈[n] w    c∈Sw c · 1           adw,c (Xi , Yπ(i) ) > c as follows:
                                                 c/τ <w/γ

(21)                                  X Xh                                             i+
 ≤ 2 · |{i : π(i) = ⊥}| + w1                      Dt (Xi , Y←
                                                            −
                                                            π (i) ) − τ t/2 · 1 [t > γ]
                                      i∈[n]   t
                                                                                                                                     +
(18)
                                                                                                                       τ t·1[t>γ] 
           X                   X
                   1 1                                                                                 0     i,t
                      
 ≤ 2kπ +           w T                 D(Xi+w0 (k+θt (∆+Ai,t
                                                          x   [k]))
                                                                    , Y←−(i)+w0 (k+θ (∆+Ai,t [k])) ) + w θt |A [γ]|1 −
                                                                        π           t    y                                  2
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                  
           i∈[n]             k∈[−γ,γ)
             t                ∆∈[3T ]
                                                                                                                                          +
(24)
                                                                                                                                τ t·1[t>γ] 
                    X             X
 ≤ O(kπ ) + w1       1
                     T                     D(Xi+w0 (k+θt (∆+Ai,t
                                                              x   [k]))
                                                                        , Y←−(i)+w0 (k+θ (∆+Ai,t [k])) ) + O(edπ (i − w, 3w)) −
                                                                            π           t    y                                       3
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                           
                   i∈[n]        k∈[−γ,γ)
                     t           ∆∈[3T ]
                                                                                                                                     +
(25)
                                                                                                                            τ t·1[t>γ] 
                                 X               X
 ≤ O(kπ ) + O(kπ ) + w1           1
                                  T                     D(Xi+w0 θt ∆+w0 (k+θt Ai,t
                                                                                x [k])
                                                                                       , Y←−      0      0       i,t
                                                                                           π (i)+w θt ∆+w (k+θt Ay [k])
                                                                                                                        ) −      3
                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                       
                                i∈[n]         k∈[−γ,γ)
                                  t            ∆∈[3T ]
                                                                                                                                              +
(22)                X             X
                                                                                                                       0
 ≤ O(kπ ) + w1       1                                                                                                        τt
                                                                                                                                              
                     T                     D(Xw0 θt ∆+i+w0 (k+θt Ai,t
                                                                   x [k])
                                                                          , Y 0     ←−     0       i,t
                                                                             w θt ∆+ π (i+w (k+θt Ax [k]))
                                                                                                           ) + 6γ · Cw   θ t − 3    · 1 [t > γ]
                                                                                                                                               
                   i∈[n]        k∈[−γ,γ)
                     t           ∆∈[3T ]
                   X         X
            1
≤ O(kπ ) + wT                        D(Xw0 θt ∆+i+w0 (k+θt Ai,t
                                                            x [k])
                                                                   , Y←
                                                                      −(w0 θ ∆+i+w0 (k+θ Ai,t [k])) )
                                                                      π     t           t x
                   i∈[n] k∈[−γ,γ)
                     t     ∆∈[3T ]
       O(C)                    ←
                               −(w0 θ ∆ + i + w0 (k + θ Ai,t [k])) − (w0 θ ∆ + ←
                                                                               −(i + w0 (k + θ Ai,t [k]))) ,
            X       X
  + wT                         π     t                 t x                t    π              t x
          i∈[n] k∈[−γ,γ)
            t      ∆∈[3T ]

    where the last two inequalities are due to triangle inequality for D and D(Yj , Yj+1 ) ≤ C, as well as
for τ satisfying 6γ · Cw0 θt ≤ τ3t , i.e., τ ≥ 18C. To estimate the last term, we note that, again since
w0 θT ≤ w0 :
                             ←
                             −(w0 θ ∆ + i + w0 (k + θ Ai,t [k])) − (w0 θ ∆ + ←
                                                                             −(i + w0 (k + θ Ai,t [k])))
                X X
             1
       S , wT                π       t               t x                t    π              t x
                   i∈[n] k∈[−γ,γ)
                     t    ∆∈[3T ]
                   X         X
            1
         ≤ wT                        edjπ (i + w0 (k + θt Ai,t      0
                                                           x [k]), w θt ∆).
                   i∈[n] k∈[−γ,γ)
                     t    ∆∈[3T ]
                    X          X
            1
         ≤ wT                        2 · edπ (i − w, 3w).
                   ∆∈[3T ] i∈[n],t

         ≤ O(logγ n · edπ (1, n))
         ≤ O(kπ ).

   Finally, overall we have, using that Ai,t
                                         x [k] ∈ [0, T ] and hence we can absorb it into ∆-summation,




                                                                         65
now over ∆ ∈ [4T ] (the main reason we are using ∆ to start with):
X      X                                                      X X     X
    1                                                     1         1
                                           
    w        c · 1   adw,c (Xi , Yπ(i) ) > c  ≤ O(Ckπ ) + w 0      γT   D(Xi+w0 k+ t ∆ , Y←
                                                                                          −(i+w0 k+ t ∆) ),
                                                                                          π
                                                                  t                      γ            γ
i∈[n]     c∈Sw                                                        k∈[−γ,γ)   i∈[n]
        c/τ <w/γ                                                       ∆∈[4T ]
                                                                 X X
                                               ≤ O(Ckπ ) + w10    8  D(Xi , Yπ(i) )
                                                                  t      i
                                               ≤ O(logγ n · Ckπ )
                                               = O(Ckπ ).

    We complete the proof of Lemma 9.5, combining the bound for “large” distance regime (Eqn. (19),
scaled by 1/w), and the above “not large” distance regime, we obtain that:
                 X                                              X
                     1                                            1
                     w adw (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w ) ≤ O(Ckπ ) ≤ O(C) ·   w0 Dw (Xi,w , Yπ(i),w0 ),
                                                                       0     0

                   i∈[n]                                                i∈[n]

which completes the proof of Lemma 9.5.

9.4     adw,c are metrics
Finally, we prove that adw,c is a metric for each c. Given how we reduce them to Γ, adw,t , it is enough to
prove metricity for the latter two.
Γ metric. Identity follows by definition. Symmetry follows from the fact that the graph H is symmetric.
   It remains to prove the triangle inequality. Consider three intervals I, J, K. We want to prove that:

                                             Γ(I, K) ≤ Γ(I, J) + Γ(J, K).

     Note that, for the pair (I, J), the optimal path in graph H corresponds to an alignment AIJ :
[−m, m) → [−m, m) ∪ {⊥}. In particular, for each p ∈ [−m, m), consider the edge which increases p: if
it’s the diagonal edge Vp,q → Vp+1,q+1 then AIJ (p) = q; otherwise AIJ (p) = ⊥. The number of used gap
edges is then 2 · |{p : AIJ (p) = ⊥}|. Hence:

       Γ(I, J) = 4 w/m
                             X
                    w 0              D(Iw0 + mw          w
                                                k, Jw0 + m · AIJ (k)) + 8 · |{p : AIJ (p) = ⊥}| + 2w/γ 2 .
                             k∈[−m,m)
                                   w
                           AIJ (i+ m k)6=⊥


    Similarly we can extract AJK . We now define an alignment AIK from I to K as AIK (p) = AJK (AIJ (p))




                                                            66
(and ⊥ if either functions has value ⊥). Then we have that:

   Γ(I, K) ≤ 4 w/m
                        X
                w 0
                                         w
                                 D(Iw0 + m          w
                                           k, Kw0 + m · AIK (k)) + 8 · |{p : AIK (p) = ⊥}| + 2w/γ 2
                               k∈[−m,m)
                                     w
                             AIK (i+ m k)6=⊥

           ≤ 4 w/m
                                   X
                                                        w          w
                w0                              D(Iw0 + m k, Jw0 + m · AIJ (k)) + 8 · |{p : AIK (p) = ⊥}|
                               k∈[−m,m)
                                     w
                             AIK (i+ m k)6=⊥

           + 4 w/m
                                   X
                w0
                                                        w
                                                D(Jw0 + m                  w
                                                          · AIJ (k), Kw0 + m · AIK (k)) + 2w/γ 2
                           k∈[−m,m)
                                 w
                         AIK (i+ m k)6=⊥

           ≤ 4 w/m
                                X
                w0
                                                  w
                                          D(Iw0 + m          w
                                                    k, Jw0 + m · AIJ (k)) + 8 · |{p : AIJ (p) = ⊥}| + 2w/γ 2
                             k∈[−m,m)
                             AIJ (k)6=⊥

           + 4 w/m
                                   X
                                                        w                  w
                w0                              D(Jw0 + m · AIJ (k), Kw0 + m · AJK (AIJ (k))) + 8 · |{p : AJK (p) = ⊥}|
                           k∈[−m,m)
                                 w
                         AIK (i+ m k)6=⊥

           ≤ Γ(I, J) + Γ(J, K).

adw,t metric. Identity and Symmetry are trivial (for identity, we use A = (~0, ~0) and for symmetry we
switch the coordinates of A).
      To show triangle inequality, fix I, J, K ∈ I. We prove that adw,c (I, K) ≤ adw,c (I, J) + adw,c (J, K).
Fix A, A0 which minimize ad∗w,c (I, J), ad∗w,c (J, K). Define A00 = A + A0 (i.e. A00x [l] = Ax [l] + A0x [l] and
A00y [l] = Ay [l] + A0t [l]). Note that if we obtain A00x [l] ≥ T or A00y [l] ≥ T , then we already have that
adw,c (I, J) + adw,c (J, K) ≥ w0 θT ≥ adw,c (I, K), and hence we can assume that A00X [l], A00y [l] < T below.
Last, we use the shorthand |A|1 = |A[γ]|1 , meaning the total number of shifts of A.

                    X                     X
ad∗w,c (I, K) ≤                1
                               T                         D(Iw0 + w0 (l + θ(∆ + A00x [l])), Kw0 + w0 (l + θ(∆ + A00y [l]))) + |A00 |1 θw0
                  l∈[−γ,γ)         ∆∈[3T −|A00 [l]|1 ]
                  X                 X              
             ≤           1
                         T                             D(Iw0 + w0 (l + θ(∆ + A00x [l])), Jw0 + w0 (l + θ(∆ + A0x [l] + Ay [l])))
                   l         ∆∈[3T −|A00 [l]|1 ]
                                                                                              
                  + D(Jw0 + w0 (l + θ(∆ + A0x [l] + Ay [l])), Kw0 + w0 (l + θ(∆ + A00y [l]))) + |A00 |1 θw0
               X          X
             =   1
                 T                    D(Iw0 + w0 (l + θ(∆ + A00x [l] − A0x [l])), Jw0 + w0 (l + θ(∆ + Ay [l])))
                   l         ∆∈[3T −|A00 [l]|1 ]+A0x [l]
                                      X
                  + T1                                   D(Jw0 + w0 (l + θ(∆ + A0x [l])), Kw0 + w0 (l + θ(∆ + A00y [l] − Ay [l]))) + |A00 |1 θw0
                         ∆∈[3T −|A00 [l]|1 ]+Ay [l]
                  X                 X
             ≤           1
                         T                      D(Iw0 + w0 (l + θ(∆ + Ax [l])), Jw0 + w0 (l + θ(∆ + Ay [l])))
                   l         ∆∈[3T −|A[l]|1 ]
                                   X
                  + T1                        D(Jw0 + w0 (l + θ(∆ + A0x [l])), Kw0 + w0 (l + θ(∆ + A0y [l]))) + |A|1 θw0 + |A0 |1 θw0
                         ∆∈[3T −|A0 [l]|1 ]

             ≤ad∗w,c (I, J) + ad∗w,c (J, K)

   where the 2nd step is triangle inequality of (I, D), 3rd step is change of variables, 4th step is triangle

                                                                         67
inequality of (N2 , `1 ), and last step is by definition. The conclusion follows from the fact that all ad∗ ’s
are thresholded at the same threshold.


10      Fast Data Structures
In this section, all reals have O(log2 n) of precision (in fixed point representation).

Theorem 10.1 (Theorem 8.2, restated). Given a set of numbers a1 , . . . an ≥ 0 in a sparse representation
(i.e., as a set S of i’s with ai > 0), there exists a data structure D supporting the following queries:

    • Given some i < j compute jk=i ak . The query complexity is O(log n).
                                    P

    • Given some i and ζ > 0, compute j ∈ S, j ≤ i such that ik=j−1 ak < ζ ≤ ik=j ak (or output that
                                                                  P                 P
       none exists). The query complexity is O(log n).

     The preprocessing time is O(|S| log n).

Proof. First of all, at preprocessing time, we can compute all the prefix sums σi = ik=1 ak for i ∈ S.
                                                                                         P
Then we build a predecessor data structure [CLRS01] on S as well as on the reals σi for i ∈ S. Then the
first type of queries is answered by two predecessor queries (and taking their difference). The second type
of queries is answered by a single query to the (second) predecessor data structure. The preprocessing
and query runtime follow immediately from standard predecessor data structures.


Theorem 10.2 (Theorem 8.1, restated). Given a set of numbers a1 , . . . an ≥ 0 in a sparse representation
(i.e., as a set S of i’s with ai > 0) there exists a data structure D supporting the following queries:

    • Sample index i ∈ [n] from the distribution {ai / j aj }i in time O(log n);
                                                         P

     • Given k ≥ 1, produce a setPS ⊆ [n] that includes each i with probability min{kai , 1} independently.
       The runtime is O((1 + k · ni=1 ai ) log n) in expectation.

     • Given an interval [s, t] ⊂ [n], and k ≥ 1, produce a set S ⊆ [n]P that includes each i ∈ [s, t] with
       probability min{kai , 1} independently. The runtime is O((1 + k · ti=s ai ) log2 n) in expectation.

     Furthermore, the preprocessing time is O(|S| · logO(1) n).

   We note that similar data structures were also developed in [Bri14]; we include our proof below for
completeness of the algorithm.

Proof. Let m = |S|. First, note that we can assume wlog that m = n. When m < n, we pre-process
vector b ∈ Rm consisting of the non-zero entries in a in an increasing order. Then, for the third query
type, define the semi-monotone function Φ : [n + 1] → [m + 1] − 1, which maps each i ∈ [n + 1] to the
number of non-zero entries whose index is strictly smaller than i in a. For that task, we build during
preprocessing a BST to calculate Φ(i) (in additive time Õ(m)), and when queried on interval [s, t], we
use interval [Φ(s) + 1, Φ(t + 1)] instead (with O(log n) P
                                                         additive query overhead).
     At preprocessing, precompute all partial sums pi = ij=1 aj for all i ∈ [n]. Let p0 = 0. Also, assuming
n is a power of 2 (otherwise we can pad to nearest power), we build a balanced binary search tree with
each leaf corresponding to an index i ∈ [n]. Each node v of the tree stores the sum of leafs in the subtree,
σv . Also, sort all ai in increasing order.



                                                     68
                                                                                    2
Query of the first type. Pick  P a random uniform r ∈ [0, 1] (say, to        P O(log ) bits of precision) and
perform a binary search on r · j aj in the set p0 , p1 , . . . P
                                                               pn . If pi ≤ r j aj ≤ pi+1 , then output i + 1.
Note that the probability that output is i is precisely ai / j aj .
Query of the second type. The algorithm works as follows. First, using the sorted list, find all ai ’s
such that ai ≥ 0.5/k (i.e., the ones that are included with set S with probability ≥ 1/2). Call this set L.
Sample each i ∈ L into set S accordingly (taking O(|L|) time).
    Start at the root r, generate a integer qr from the Poisson distribution with expectation 2kσr . Then,
we proceed recursively as follows: for a node v with integer qv , for children with sums σ, σ 0 , pick random
integers q, q 0 such that: 1) q + q 0 = qv , and 2) assuming that qv is from distribution Poi(2kσv ), then q, q 0
are independently from Poi(2kσ), Poi(2kσ 0 ) respectively. Recurse into each child with > 0 integer q. At a
leaf i ∈ [n] \ L, if qi > 0 (and hence qi ≥ 1), then include i into set S with probability 1−ea−2a
                                                                                                ik
                                                                                                   i /k
                                                                                                        . (Indeces
in L are ignored here.)
    We now briefly argue that the above produces the desired set. First of all note that the procedure on
the tree generates qi from Poi(ai k) distribution independently (using Poission’s distribution property).
                     −2x
We note that 1−ex        = 2 − 2(2x)/2! + 2(2x)2 /3! − ... ≥ 1 for x ≤ 1/2, hence the probability 1−ea−2a  ik
                                                                                                              i /k
                                                                                                                   is
indeed less than 1 for i ∈ [n] \ L. For such i, we indeed include it into S with probability

                                  Pr[i ∈ S] = Pr[qi ≥ 1] · 1−ea−2a
                                                                ik
                                                                   i /k
                                                                        = ai k < 1.

    We now bound the query time. First, we note that L has size at most 2k · ni=1 ai (since each included
                                                                            P
i satisfies ai ≥ 1/2k). Second, we note that E[qr ] = O(k), and the tree procedure has runtime at most
O(log n) factor of the number of leafs with qi > 0, of which there are exactly qr . Hence runtime is
O(k log n) in expectation.
Query of the third type. We augment the data structure D from above as follows. Recall the dyadic
intervals on [n] are intervals of the form [j2i +1, (j +1)2i ], where i ∈ {0, . . . log n} and j ∈ {0, . . . n/2i −1}.
For each dyadic interval I = [u, v], we build a data structure DI on the numbers au , . . . av . For a query
interval [s, t], we decompose [s, t] into O(log n) dyadic intervals, and perform query of the second type in
each of these.

Theorem 10.3 (Theorem 8.3, restated). Suppose we are given an m × n matrix A, where m ≤ n, given
in the sparse form, i.e., as a set S of non-zero entries. Also, suppose we are given n intervals [si , ti ] ⊆ [n]
such that both {si }i and {ti }i are non-decreasing.  Given γ > 0, we can     find all pairs (i, χ) ∈ [n] × [m]
                                                           P Pt i
          Pti                                                 χ,i k=si A χ,k
such that k=si Aχ,k ≥ γ. The runtime is Õ |S| + n +               γ          .

Proof. Suppose n is a power of 2; otherwise, just pad with zero’s until the closest power of 2. Recall
the dyadic intervals on [n] are intervals of the form [j2i + 1, (j + 1)2i ], where i ∈ {0, . . . log n} and
j ∈ {0, . . . n/2i − 1}. We call i to be the level of the dyadic interval.
    First, for each dyadic interval I, we store two sorted lists SI , TI . For each given interval [si , ti ], we
decompose it into at most 2 log n dyadic intervals I1 , I2 , . . .. For each such dyadic interval Ik , we add si
to SIk and ti to TIk . Note that this takes O(n log n) time.
    We also store a dictionary data structureP     (e.g., a BST) storing, for each pair (χ, I), where χ ∈ [m]
and I a dyadic interval, the quantity τχ,I = k∈I Aχ,k . In particular, we store only the non-zero τχ,I .
We can compute this efficiently as follows: 1) initialize an empty dictionary; 2) enumerate through all
(χ, k) ∈ S and add Aχ,k to all τχ,I where k ∈ I; 3) if some τχ,I is not yet in the dictionary, create an
entry for it first. Note that the runtime is O(|S| log n).
    The rest of the algorithm proceeds as follows. Using the dictionary structure, find all pairs (χ, I) of
                                                              γ
χ ∈ [m] and dyadic interval I = [u, v] such that τχ,I ≥ 2 log    n . For each one of them, using SI , let si ∈ SI


                                                         69
be the max si ∈ SI . Similarly, let tj ∈ TI be
                                             Ptthe min. For each interval index l such that j ≤ l ≤ i and
sl ∈ SI (equivalently tl ∈ TI ), we compute k=sl Aχ,k (using the dyadic interval sums) in O(log n) time.
                                               l

We output (l, χ) if the resulting sum is ≥ γ. At the end we remove the duplicate (l, χ) if multiple copies
have been output.
    We now argue correctness and runtime. Consider an interval [sl , tl ] with mass at least γ for some
χ ∈ [m]. Then it can be decomposed into ≤ 2 log n dyadic intervals, at least one of which, say I = [u, v],
                                γ
has to have mass γχ,I ≥ 2 log     n . Hence, when we consider the pair (χ, I) where the dyadic interval
I = [u, v], we will have that sl ≤ si ≤ u and v ≤ tj ≤ ti (by the definition of i, j). Hence we will output
the pair (l, χ).
    Let’s argue runtime. First of all, the number of pairs (χ, I) with non-zero τ is at most |S| · log n as
each Aχ,i can contribute to that many pairs (χ, I). Hence enumerating the dictionary takes O(|S| · log n)
time.PFor each pair (χ, I) with τχ,I > 0, and each interval index l ∈ [n] that we end up checking, we have
that tk=sl
            l
              Aχ,k ≥ γ/2 log n. Furthermore any such (l, χ) can be considered only O(log n) times (as this
is how many times l appears in the data structures SI , TI over all dyadic intervals I). Hence the total
number of pairs (l, χ) for which we estimate the precise mass is upper bounded by:
                                                    X X Ptk=s
                                                           l  Aχ,k
                                       O(log n) ·                        l
                                                                     γ/2 log n   .
                                                    χ      l
                                                     P         Pti
                                                                k=si Aχ,k
Hence total time spend in this phase is O(log3 n)
                                                         χ,i
                                                                 γ           . This completes the analysis.



References
[AHWW16] Amir Abboud, Thomas Dueholm Hansen, Virginia Vassilevska Williams, and Ryan Williams.
         Simulating branching programs with edit distance and friends: or: a polylog shaved is a
         lower bound made. In Proceedings of the forty-eighth annual ACM symposium on Theory of
         Computing, pages 375–388. ACM, 2016.
[AK12]       Alexandr Andoni and Robert Krauthgamer. The smoothed complexity of edit distance.
             ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 8(4):44, 2012. Previously in ICALP’08.
[AKO10]      Alexandr Andoni, Robert Krauthgamer, and Krzysztof Onak. Polylogarithmic approxi-
             mation for edit distance and the asymmetric query complexity. In Proceedings of the
             Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2010. Full version at http:
             //arxiv.org/abs/1005.4033.
[And18]      Alexandr Andoni. Simpler constant-factor approximation to edit distance problems, 2018.
             Manuscript, available at http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~andoni/papers/edit/.
[ANSS22]     Alexandr Andoni, Negev Shekel Nosatzki, Sandip Sinha, and Clifford Stein. Estimating the
             longest increasing subsequence in nearly optimal time. In Proceedings of the Symposium on
             Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2022. Also as arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.05106.
[AO12]       Alexandr Andoni and Krzysztof Onak. Approximating edit distance in near-linear time.
             SIAM J. Comput. (SICOMP), 41(6):1635–1648, 2012. Previously in STOC’09.
[BCAD21]     Karl Bringmann, Vincent Cohen-Addad, and Debarati Das.              A linear-time n0.4 -
             approximation for longest common subsequence. In Proceedings of International Colloquium
             on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), 2021.

                                                        70
[BCFN22]    Karl Bringmann, Alejandro Cassis, Nick Fischer, and Vasileios Nakos. Almost-optimal
            sublinear-time edit distance in the low distance regime. In Proceedings of the Symposium on
            Theory of Computing (STOC), 2022.

[BCR20]     Joshua Brakensiek, Moses Charikar, and Aviad Rubinstein. A simple sublinear algorithm
            for gap edit distance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.14368, 2020.

[BEG+ 18]   Mahdi Boroujeni, Soheil Ehsani, Mohammad Ghodsi, MohammadTaghi HajiAghayi, and
            Saeed Seddighin. Approximating edit distance in truly subquadratic time: Quantum and
            mapreduce. In Proceedings of the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA),
            pages 1170–1189. SIAM, 2018.

[BEK+ 03]   Tuğkan Batu, Funda Ergün, Joe Kilian, Avner Magen, Sofya Raskhodnikova, Ronitt Ru-
            binfeld, and Rahul Sami. A sublinear algorithm for weakly approximating edit distance. In
            Proceedings of the Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 316–324, 2003.

[BES06]     Tuğkan Batu, Funda Ergün, and Cenk Sahinalp. Oblivious string embeddings and edit dis-
            tance approximations. In Proceedings of the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms
            (SODA), pages 792–801, 2006.

[BI15]      Arturs Backurs and Piotr Indyk. Edit distance cannot be computed in strongly subquadratic
            time (unless SETH is false). In Proceedings of the Symposium on Theory of Computing
            (STOC), 2015.

[BJKK04]    Ziv Bar-Yossef, T. S. Jayram, Robert Krauthgamer, and Ravi Kumar. Approximating edit
            distance efficiently. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
            (FOCS), pages 550–559, 2004.

[BR20]      Joshua Brakensiek and Aviad Rubinstein. Constant-factor approximation of near-linear edit
            distance in near-linear time. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Theory of Computing
            (STOC), 2020. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05390.

[Bri14]     Karl Bringmann. Sampling from discrete distributions and computing Fréchet distances.
            PhD thesis, Saarland University, 2014.

[CDG+ 18]   Diptarka Chakraborty, Debarati Das, Elazar Goldenberg, Michal Koucky, and Michael Saks.
            Approximating edit distance within constant factor in truly sub-quadratic time. In 2018
            IEEE 59th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 979–
            990. IEEE, 2018.

[CDK19]     Diptarka Chakraborty, Debarati Das, and Michal Koucky. Approximate online pattern
            matching in sub-linear time. In FSTTCS, 2019.

[Cha02]     Moses Charikar. Similarity estimation techniques from rounding. In Proceedings of the
            Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 380–388, 2002.

[Che14]     Shiri Chechik. Approximate distance oracles with constant query time. In Proceedings of the
            Forty-sixth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’14, pages 654–663,
            New York, NY, USA, 2014. ACM.

[CLRS01]    Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest, and Clifford Stein. Introduction
            to Algorithms. MIT Press, 2nd edition, 2001.


                                                 71
[GKKS22]   Elazar Goldenberg, Tomasz Kociumaka, Robert Krauthgamer, and Barna Saha. Gap edit
           distance via non-adaptive queries: Simple and optimal. In Proceedings of the Symposium on
           Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2022.

[GKS19]    Elazar Goldenberg, Robert Krauthgamer, and Barna Saha. Sublinear algorithms for gap edit
           distance. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
           pages 1101–1120. IEEE, 2019.

[GRS20]    Elazar Goldenberg, Aviad Rubinstein, and Barna Saha. Does preprocessing help in fast
           sequence comparisons? In Proceedings of the Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC),
           2020.

[HSS19]    MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi, Saeed Seddighin, and Xiaorui Sun. Massively parallel approx-
           imation algorithms for edit distance and longest common subsequence. In Proceedings of the
           ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 1654–1672. SIAM, 2019.

[HSSS19]   MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi, Masoud Seddighin, Saeed Seddighin, and Xiaorui Sun. Ap-
           proximating lcs in linear time: Beating the barrier. In Proceedings of the ACM-SIAM
           Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 1181–1200. SIAM, 2019.

[KS20a]    Tomasz Kociumaka and Barna Saha. Sublinear-time algorithms for computing & embedding
           gap edit distance. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
           (FOCS), pages 1168–1179, 2020.

[KS20b]    Michal Kouckỳ and Michael E Saks. Constant factor approximations to edit distance on far
           input pairs in nearly linear time. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Theory of Computing
           (STOC), 2020. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05459.

[Kus19]    William Kuszmaul. Efficiently approximating edit distance between pseudorandom strings.
           In Proceedings of the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 1165–
           1180. SIAM, 2019.

[LMS98]    Gad M. Landau, Eugene W. Myers, and Jeanette P. Schmidt. Incremental string comparison.
           SIAM J. Comput., 27(2):557–582, 1998.

[Mat96]    Jiřı́ Matoušek. On the distortion required for embedding finite metric spaces into normed
           spaces. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 93(1):333–344, Dec 1996.

[MN07]     M. Mendel and A. Naor. Ramsey partitions and proximity data structures. Journal of the
           European Mathematical Society, 9(2):253–275, 2007. Extended abstract appeared in FOCS
           2006.

[MP80]     William J. Masek and Mike Paterson. A faster algorithm computing string edit distances.
           J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 20(1):18–31, 1980.

[Mye86]    Eugene W. Myers.      An O(N D) difference algorithm and its variations.     Algorithmica,
           1(2):251–266, 1986.

[Nav01]    Gonzalo Navarro. A guided tour to approximate string matching. ACM Comput. Surv.,
           33(1):31–88, 2001.

[Nos21]    Negev Shekel Nosatzki. Approximating the longest common subsequence problem within a
           sub-polynomial factor in linear time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08454, 2021.

                                                72
[OR07]     Rafail Ostrovsky and Yuval Rabani. Low distortion embedding for edit distance. J. ACM,
           54(5), 2007. Preliminary version appeared in STOC’05.

[RS20]     Aviad Rubinstein and Zhao Song. Reducing approximate longest common subsequence
           to approximate edit distance. In Proceedings of the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
           Algorithms (SODA), pages 1591–1600. SIAM, 2020.

[RSSS19]   Aviad Rubinstein, Saeed Seddighin, Zhao Song, and Xiaorui Sun. Approximation algorithms
           for lcs and lis with truly improved running times. In Proceedings of the Symposium on
           Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 1121–1145. IEEE, 2019.

[Sah08]    Süleyman Cenk Sahinalp. Edit distance under block operations. In Ming-Yang Kao, editor,
           Encyclopedia of Algorithms. Springer, 2008.

[Tis08]    Alexander Tiskin. Semi-local string comparison: Algorithmic techniques and applications.
           Mathematics in Computer Science, 1(4):571–603, 2008.

[TZ05]     Mikkel Thorup and Uri Zwick. Approximate distance oracles. J. ACM, 52(1):1–24, January
           2005.

[Ukk85]    Esko Ukkonen. Algorithms for approximate string matching. Information and control, 64(1-
           3):100–118, 1985.




                                               73
