                                          A general framework for enumerating equivalence classes of
                                                                  solutions∗
                                                  Yishu Wang†, Arnaud Mary* , Marie-France Sagot‡, Blerina Sinaimeri§


                                                                                            Abstract
arXiv:2004.12143v4 [cs.DS] 14 May 2023




                                                   When a problem has more than one solution, it is often important, depending on the
                                               underlying context, to enumerate (i.e., to list) them all. Even when the enumeration can
                                               be done in polynomial delay, that is, spending no more than polynomial time to go from
                                               one solution to the next, this can be costly as the number of solutions themselves may be
                                               huge, including sometimes exponential. Furthermore, depending on the application, many of
                                               these solutions can be considered equivalent. The problem of an efficient enumeration of the
                                               equivalence classes or of one representative per class (without generating all the solutions),
                                               although identified as a need in many areas, has been addressed only for very few specific
                                               cases. In this paper, we provide a general framework that solves this problem in polynomial
                                               delay for a wide variety of contexts, including optimization ones that can be addressed by
                                               dynamic programming algorithms, and for certain types of equivalence relations between
                                               solutions.


                                         1     Introduction
                                         Enumerating the solutions of an optimization problem solved by a dynamic programming al-
                                         gorithm (DP-algorithm) is a classical and well-known question. However, many enumeration
                                         problems have a huge number of solutions in practice, which might be an issue. From a compu-
                                         tational point of view, since the number of solutions is a lower bound on the time complexity
                                         of any enumeration algorithm, it might make the algorithm impractical on real instances. Fur-
                                         thermore, even if the number of solutions is reasonable enough to be enumerated, the purpose of
                                         some applications is to give the output of the algorithm to a human specialist (this is necessary,
                                         for example, when some of the constraints of the problem are subjective and cannot be modeled).
                                             Indeed, one of the advantages of an enumeration algorithm compared to an optimization one
                                         which in general outputs only one optimal solution, is to be able to understand the space of
                                         solutions. While this is important in many cases, no human can understand an output composed
                                         of billions of solutions.
                                            ∗ This is a preprint version of the following published paper:           Wang, Y., Mary, A., Sagot, MF.
                                         et al. A General Framework for Enumerating Equivalence Classes of Solutions. Algorithmica (2023).
                                         https://doi.org/10.1007/s00453-023-01131-1
                                            † Université de Lyon, Université Lyon 1, CNRS, Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Evolutive UMR 5558,

                                         F-69622 Villeurbanne, France. Inria Grenoble Rhône-Alpes, Villeurbanne, France. yishu.wang@univ-lyon1.fr.
                                         arnaud.mary@univ-lyon1.fr
                                            ‡ Inria Grenoble Rhône-Alpes, Villeurbanne, France. Université de Lyon, Université Lyon 1, CNRS, Laboratoire

                                         de Biométrie et Biologie Evolutive UMR 5558, F-69622 Villeurbanne, France. marie-france.sagot@inria.fr
                                            § Luiss University, Rome, Italy. Inria Grenoble Rhône-Alpes, Villeurbanne, France. Université de Lyon, Uni-

                                         versité Lyon 1, CNRS, Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Evolutive UMR 5558, F-69622 Villeurbanne, France.
                                         bsinaimeri@luiss.it



                                                                                                 1
    The approach generally used to address this consists of enumerating all solutions, and then
applying some type of clustering (grouping) algorithm to the set of optimal solutions. The final
output presented to the user would then be some “representative description” of the clusters
(groups) themselves. However, since the number of solutions is a lower bound for the total
execution time of any enumeration algorithm, the first step of such a strategy becomes impossible
when the number of solutions is too big. A natural question is then whether it would be possible to
enumerate directly what we just called a “representative description” of the clusters of solutions.
This could be for instance an element per cluster. Sometimes a cluster can also be seen as a set
of characteristics that the solutions within the cluster share. In such a case, the representative
description of a cluster could then be such a set of characteristics. A particularly convenient
situation is however when the clusters correspond to equivalence classes of an equivalence relation
over the set of solutions that we could establish a priori. The output could be in this case the
quotient space of the equivalence relation.
    Notice that the enumeration of equivalence classes of solutions is a combinatorial problem
that could be solved exactly given a well-defined equivalence relation, and unlike data analysis
methods such as incremental clustering, it does not require the definition of a similarity or
dissimilarity measure between solutions which, depending on the mathematical nature of the
solutions (numerical values, graphs, functions on graphs, etc.), can be difficult to define or costly
to compute.
    The problem this paper addresses is how to perform the task of enumerating equivalence
classes of solutions with polynomial delay for a wide variety of problems (including optimization
problems solved by dynamic programming algorithms), for certain types of equivalence relations
between solutions.
    The problem of enumerating equivalence classes, and particularly the generation of represen-
tative solutions is a challenge in the context of enumeration algorithms. It has been identified as a
need in different areas, such as Genome Rearrangements [10], Artificial Intelligence [1] or Pattern
Matching [7, 26]. It was listed as an important open problem in a recent Dagstuhl workshop on
“Algorithmic Enumeration: Output-sensitive, Input-Sensitive, Parameterized, Approximative”
(see, e.g., Sections 4.2 and 4.10 in [15]). To the best of our knowledge, this challenge has been
addressed only for some few specific problems in the literature (e.g., [2, 10, 24, 25]).
    To enumerate equivalence classes, we go through an intermediate problem, namely the enu-
meration of colored subtrees in acyclic decomposable AND/OR graphs (ad-AND/OR graph).
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides an algorithm to enumerate with polyno-
mial delay colored subtrees in ad-AND/OR graphs; Section 3 details how this algorithm applies
to the enumeration of equivalence classes in DP-problems. In that direction, we present some
examples from well-known optimization problems in the literature. Finally, in Section 4 we
conclude with some open problems.


2     Enumeration of colored subtrees in an acyclic decom-
      posable AND/OR graph
2.1    AND/OR graphs and solution subtrees
An AND/OR graph (see, for example [23, 27]) is a well-known structure in the field of Logic and
Artificial Intelligence (AI) that represents problem solving and problem decomposition. In this
paper, we consider a particular flavor of AND/OR graphs known as explicit AND/OR graphs for
trees [12].
    This is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) G which explicitly represents an AND/OR state space


                                                 2
for solving a certain problem by decomposing it into subproblems. The set of nodes (or states)
S := V (G) contains OR and AND nodes (the OR nodes represent alternative ways for solving
the problem while the AND nodes represent problem decomposition into subproblems, all of
which need to be solved). There is a set of goal nodes Sg ⊆ S and a set of start nodes S0 ⊆ S
representing respectively the terminal states and the initial states. The children (out-neighbors)
of an OR node are AND nodes, and the children of an AND node are OR nodes or goal nodes.
We say that a node is an OR+ node when it is either an OR node or a goal node. Furthermore,
the AND/OR graphs that we consider must have the property of being decomposable (they can
model a problem for which every decomposition yields disjoint subproblems that can be solved
independently): for any AND node, the sets of nodes that are reachable from each one of its
child nodes are pairwise disjoint. The example graph in Figure 1 is decomposable.




Figure 1: An acyclic decomposable AND/OR graph with four start nodes. Squares are OR+
nodes (OR nodes or goal nodes); crossed circles are AND nodes. One solution subtree of size 8
is shown in bold.


   Formally, in this paper, any graph that satisfies the properties in Definition 1 will be called
an ad-AND/OR graph. Notice that this definition corresponds only to a particular case of the
general AND/OR graphs in the AI literature; the latter may be neither acyclic nor decomposable.
Definition 1 (ad-AND/OR graph). A directed graph G is an acyclic decomposable AND/OR
graph, henceforth denoted by ad-AND/OR graph, if it satisfies the following:
   • G is a DAG.
   • G is bipartite: its node set V (G) can be partitioned into (A, O) so that all arcs of G are
     between these two sets. Nodes in A are called AND nodes; nodes in O are called OR+
     nodes.
   • Every AND node has in-degree at least one and out-degree at least one. The set of nodes
     with out-degree zero is then a subset of O and is called the set of goal nodes; the remaining
     OR+ nodes are simply the OR nodes. The subset of OR nodes of in-degree zero is the set
     of start nodes.
   • G is decomposable: for any AND node, the sets of nodes that are reachable from each one
     of its child nodes are pairwise disjoint.
Definition 2 (solution subtree). A solution subtree T of an ad-AND/OR graph G is a subgraph
of G which: (1) contains exactly one start node; (2) for any OR node in T it contains one of its
child nodes in G, and for any AND node in T it contains all its children in G.


                                                3
    It is immediate to see that a solution subtree is indeed a subtree of G: it is a rooted tree, the
root of which is a start node. If we would drop the requirement of G being decomposable, the
object defined in Definition 2 would not be guaranteed to be a tree. One solution subtree of the
example graph in Figure 1 is shown in bold.
    The set of all solution subtrees of G is denoted by T(G). Given an ad-AND/OR graph G,
counting the number of its solution subtrees and enumerating all solution subtrees can be solved
by folklore approaches based on depth-first search (DFS).
    Before going further, we recall that the motivation of this paper is concerned with solu-
tions of dynamic programming problems. The correspondence between the solutions of DP-style
recurrence equations and the solution subtrees of general AND/OR graphs has been formally
proven in [16]. In the case where the underlying graph is acyclic, the recurrence equations can be
solved efficiently by DP-algorithms. While we will now concentrate on the solution subtrees of
an ad-AND/OR graph and on the equivalence classes of solution subtrees, we will demonstrate in
Section 3 how to apply our algorithms to analyze equivalence classes of solutions of a very general
class of problems solvable by DP. It is important to point out that solution subtrees of general
AND/OR graphs are equivalent to various other well-known formalisms, e.g., acceptance trees of
a nondeterministic tree automata, languages of regular tree grammars, complete subcircuits of
tropical circuits. The reader who is more familiar with those may also find this paper interesting
even outside of a dynamic programming context.

2.2    Equivalence classes
Let G be an ad-AND/OR graph. Let C be an ordered set of colors. We will consider equivalence
relations on the set of solution subtrees of G which are based on a local comparison of the colors
of the OR+ nodes. Intuitively, two OR+ nodes having the same color represent two alternative
ways of solving the problem that can be considered equivalent.
Definition 3 (e-coloring). An ad-AND/OR graph G is e-colored if its OR+ nodes are colored
in such a way that for any AND node all its children have distinct colors.

   Notations If s is a OR+ node of G, we denote by c(s) its color. If s is an AND node, we
denote by C(s)
           e    the tuple of colors of the children of s sorted in increasing order of the colors. If
T1 ∈ T(G) is a solution subtree of G, we use the notation π(T1 ) for the result of contracting the
AND nodes in T1 : for each OR node s of T , contract the only child node of s in T (i.e., remove
the child and connect s to each one of its “grandchildren”).
Definition 4 (equivalence class). A node-colored rooted tree T is an equivalence class of solution
subtrees of an e-colored ad-AND/OR graph G (or shortly an equivalence class of G) if there exists
a solution subtree T1 of G such that π(T1 ) is equal to T . Such a T1 is said to be a solution subtree
belonging to the class T .

   More notations We denote by C(G) the set of equivalence classes of G. The notation π
can be seen as a function π : T(G) → C(G). We denote by π −1 (T ) := {T1 ∈ T(G) | π(T1 ) = T }
the subset of solution subtrees of G belonging to the class T . The notations c(s) and C(s)
                                                                                        e   are
naturally extended to the case where s is a node in an equivalence class T . The root node of a
rooted tree T is denoted by r(T ). The set of the children of a node s is denoted by Ch(s).
   An example of an e-colored ad-AND/OR graph with five equivalence classes is given in
Figure 2.




                                                  4
                                a
                                                                         a                       a

                                                                     x       y               x       y

                                                                 a       b       c       c       b       c
                   y     x      y       x       y
                                                                 a                   a                   a

                                                             x       y           x       y           x       y

                                                         a       b           c       b           a       b       c
                  c     b           a       b       c

Figure 2: An e-colored ad-AND/OR graph and its five equivalence classes. The colors of the
OR+ nodes are written inside the squares.



2.3     Enumerating equivalence classes
Given an e-colored ad-AND/OR graph G, we propose a polynomial delay algorithm to enumerate
all equivalence classes of G. Given a total ordering c1 , . . . , cm of the colors of G, we define a total
ordering ≺ over C(G), the set of equivalence classes of G. If T and T 0 have their roots colored
differently, we say that T is smaller than T 0 , denoted by T ≺ T 0 , if the root color of T precedes
the one of T 0 . If T and T 0 have the same root color, let (T1 , . . . , Tk ) (resp. (T10 , . . . , T`0 )) be the
child subtrees of r(T ) (resp. r(T 0 )) sorted recursively with respect to ≺. We then say that T
is smaller than T 0 if the tuple (T1 , . . . , Tk ) is lexicographically smaller than (T10 , . . . , T`0 ), i.e., if
Ti ≺ Ti0 with i being the smallest index such that Ti 6= Ti0 . We also assume that ∅ is smaller
than any tree, and therefore a single node tree colored with color c comes before any other tree
whose root is colored with c in ≺.

2.3.1    Definitions and notations
Recall that given an AND-node x, C(x)        e       is the tuple of colors of the children of x sorted in
increasing order. Given an OR-node o, we denote by T (o) the set of color tuples of its children,
i.e., T (o) := {C(x)
                 e        : x ∈ Ch(o)}. In other words, a color tuple (c1 , . . . , cj ) belongs to T (o) if o
has an AND-child node whose children are colored with (c1 , . . . , cj ). If we consider an equivalence
class T of C(G/{o}) rooted at o, the tuples of T (o) are precisely the possible colorings of the
children of r(T ). Indeed, if the AND-child node x ∈ Ch(o) is chosen in a solution subtree, then
C(x)
 e     will be the colors of the children of o in that solution. Notice that several AND-children
nodes of o may have the same color tuple.
     We extend this definition to a set O of OR+ nodes with T (O) = o∈O T (o). In the same
                                                                                     S
way, t = (c1 , . . . , cj ) is a color tuple of T (O) if and only if there exists an equivalence class T
of C(G/O) such that the children of r(T ) are colored with (c1 , . . . , cj ). Given a set O of OR+
nodes, we denote by t1 , . . . , t|T (O)| the different color tuples of T (O) ordered lexicographically,
and we denote by Ch` (O) the set of AND-nodes in Ch(O) whose color tuple is t` , i.e., Ch` (O) =
{x ∈ Ch(O) : C(x) e        = t` }. The sets Ch1 (O), . . . , Ch|T (O)| (O) form a partition of Ch(O), each
part corresponding to a color tuple ti ∈ T (O).
     Finally, given a color tuple t` := (c1 , . . . , cj ) ∈ T (O), for each i ≤ j, by Definition 3, each node
of Ch` (O) has exactly one child with color ci . We denote by Ci` the set of children of Ch` (O)


                                                         5
 Algorithm 1: Next solution
 1 Input: A set O of OR+ nodes having all the same color c and an equivalence class T of
    G/O
                                            0
 2 Output: The equivalence class T of G/O that follows T w.r.t the ≺ ordering.
 3 Function Next(T ,O):
 4    if T = ∅ and O contains terminal nodes then
 5        Return A tree with a single root node colored with c
 6    end
 7    r←0
 8    if T = ∅ or T is a single node tree then
 9        r ←r+1
10        if r > |T (O)| then
11             Return ⊥
12        end
13        Let (c1 , . . . , cj ) be the color tuple of tr ∈ T (O) and let T1 , . . . , Tj ← ∅
14        O1 ← C1r
15        `←1
16    else
17        Let r be such that tr ∈ T (O) is the root color tuple C(r(T   e      ))
18        Let (T1 , . . . , Tj ) be the child subtrees of r(T ), the roots of which are colored
            respectively with (c1 , . . . , cj ) := tr
19        For all i ≤ j, let Oi ⊆ Cir be the set of nodes in Cir compatible with (T1 , . . . , Ti−1 )
20        Let ` be the largest index i ≤ j such that Next(Ti ,Oi ) 6= ⊥ if such index exists.
            Otherwise, T ← ∅ and go to line 8
21    end
22      T` ← Next(T` ,O` )
23      for ` < i ≤ j do
24         Let Oi ⊆ Cir be the set of nodes in Cir compatible with (T1 , . . . , Ti−1 )
25         Ti ← Next(∅,Oi )
26      end
27      Return A tree with root color c and root child subtrees (T1 , . . . , Tj )


colored with ci , i.e., Ci` = {o ∈ Ch(x) : x ∈ Ch` (O), c(o) = ci } (it is a set of “grandchildren” of
O).
    In the left panel of Figure 3, an example graph is shown where each node is labeled by an
integer. The colors are, in increasing order, w, x, y, and z. For O = {1, 2}, the set T (O)
contains the three tuples t1 = (w, y), t2 = (x, y), and t3 = (x, y, z). We have Ch1 (O) = {6},
Ch2 (O) = {4, 5}, and Ch3 (O) = {3}. The sets Ci` are C11 = {12}, C21 = {11}, C12 = {9, 10},
C22 = {8, 11}, C13 = {9}, C23 = {8}, and C23 = {7}.

2.3.2    Algorithm description
Notice that by definition of ≺, given a set of OR+ nodes O, all having the same color c, and a
color tuple t` ∈ T (O), all equivalence classes T of G/O such that C(r(T
                                                                    e      )) = t` are consecutive
with respect to ≺.
    The algorithm outputs the equivalence classes in ascending order with respect to ≺. Given
an equivalence class T of G/O for a set of OR+ nodes O of color c, it will output the equivalence


                                                   6
                                                                               Admissible combinations:
                       1       a                           2    a
                                                                                       a             a

              3                    4              5                 6              x       y     x        y

                                                                                   a       c     b        d
          7 z      8 y              9   x 10 x 11 y                     12 w
                                                                               Non admissible combinations:
                                                                                       a             a
                  13               14        15            16
                                                                                  x        y     x        y
                           c            a             b             d
                           17           18            19        20                a        d     b        c

Figure 3: Left panel: An e-colored ad-AND/OR graph. Right panel: For O = {1, 2}, there are
four combinations between C(G/C12 ) and C(G/C22 ); only two of them are admissible.


class T 0 of G/O that succeeds T w.r.t. ≺ if it exists or output the symbol ⊥ if T is the last
solution.
    Assume that the children of r(T ) are colored with the root color tuple (c1 , . . . , cj ) =: tr ∈ T (O)
and let (T1 , . . . , Tj ) be the child subtrees of T , the roots of which are colored with the tuple tr .
Notice that for all i ≤ j, Ti is an equivalence class of G/Cir . The algorithm will output the next
equivalence class T 0 such that C(r(T   e    0
                                               )) = tr if there remains one (same color tuple at the root),
                                                              0
or it will output the first solution such that C(r(T    e       )) = tr+1 ∈ T (O) otherwise (the next color
tuple at the root).
    To find the next solution corresponding to the root color tuple tr , the algorithm will replace
recursively Tj by its successor Tj0 w.r.t. ≺ if there exists one. We obtain the solution T 0 whose
subtrees are (T1 , . . . , Tj−1 , Tj0 ) which is by definition the successor of T in ≺ whenever Tj0 is the
successor of Tj . If Tj has no successor (that is, if it is the last one), we replace if possible Tj−1
                       0
by its successor Tj−1       and we replace Tj by the smallest admissible solution (i.e., the successor of
∅). In general, we select at each step the greatest index ` such that T` has a successor w.r.t. ≺,
we replace it by its successor T`0 and we take the smallest admissible solution for every ` < i ≤ j.
    Without further care, the above described procedure would output solutions whose child
subtrees (T1 , . . . , Tj ) of the root correspond to the elements of the Cartesian product of C(G/Cir ),
i ≤ j. However, while it is true that if T is a solution, its child subtree Ti is an equivalence class of
G/Cir for all i ≤ j, the converse is not true. Indeed, not all elements of C(G/C1r ) × · · · × C(G/Cjr )
lead to an admissible solution (an example is given in the right panel of Figure 3). In order to
find an admissible solution, we should guarantee that the choice of a given Ti is compatible with
the previous choices (T1 , . . . , Ti−1 ). This is done by selecting the subset of OR+ nodes Oi ⊆ Cir
that are compatible with (T1 , . . . , Ti−1 ) (see Definition 5 below). An admissible choice of Ti will
then be any equivalence class of G/Oi . The two key properties are that the set Oi can be easily
computed, and that it is never empty, i.e., there is always a choice for Ti that is compatible with
the previous choices of (T1 , . . . , Ti−1 ) (there is at least one choice that corresponds to the current
solution). Notice that if the latter were not true, the algorithm would not have a polynomial
delay complexity since we may spend exponential time without reaching a final solution. With
this property, we are guaranteed that we can always extend a partial tuple (T1 , . . . , Ti ) until we
reach a complete tuple (T1 , . . . , Tj ) that will form a solution.



                                                                        7
Compatible nodes Given a set of OR+ nodes O all colored with the same color c and a tree
T of C(G/O), we denote by r(π −1 (T )) := {r(S) : S ∈ π −1 (T )} the subset of OR+ nodes of O,
each one of which is the root of a solution subtree of class T . The following definition formalizes
the notion of compatible nodes mentioned previously.

Definition 5. Let O be a set of OR+ nodes of color c, tr =: (c1 , . . . , cj ) ∈ T (O), and let
T1 , . . . , Tk , with k < j, be respectively equivalence classes of C(G/Cir ) for all i ≤ k. We say that
                   r
a node o ∈ Ck+1         is compatible with (T1 , . . . , Tk ) if there exists an AND-node x ∈ Chr (O) such
that o is a child of x and such that r(π −1 (Ti )) contains a child of x for all i ≤ k.

2.3.3    Analysis
Lemma 6. Let O be a set of OR+ nodes of color c, tr =: (c1 , . . . , cj ) ∈ T (O). Let T ∈ C(G/O),
let T1 , . . . , Tk , k < j be its first k child subtrees with Ti ∈ C(G/Cir ) for all i ≤ k and let
Ok+1 ⊆ Ck+1    r
                     be the set of OR+ nodes compatible with (T1 , . . . , Tk ). Given Tk+1 ∈ C(G/Ck+1
                                                                                                    r
                                                                                                       ),
                           0
there exists a tree T ∈ C(G/O) whose first k + 1 child subtrees are (T1 , . . . , Tk , Tk+1 ) if and only
if Tk+1 ∈ C(G/Ok+1 ).
Proof. (⇒) Assume that there exists a tree T 0 ∈ C(G/O) whose first k + 1 child subtrees are
(T1 , . . . , Tk , Tk+1 ), and let C be a solution subtree of G/O such that π(C) = T 0 . Let x be the
AND-child node of the root of C. Notice that since we assumed that Ti ∈ Cir for all i ≤ k,
C(x)
 e      = tr , and so x ∈ Chr (O). Let (o1 , . . . , oj ) be the children of x. Since for all i ≤ k we have
oi ∈ r(π −1 (Ti ), the node ok+1 is compatible with (T1 , . . . , Tk ). Thus Tk+1 ∈ C(G/Ok+1 ) since
Tk+1 ∈ C(G/{ok+1 }), and ok+1 ∈ Ok+1 .
    (⇐) Assume now that Tk+1 ∈ C(G/Ok+1 ). There exists ok+1 ∈ Ok+1 and a solution subtree
Ck+1 of G/{ok+1 } rooted at ok+1 with π(Ck+1 ) = Tk+1 . Since ok+1 ∈ Ok+1 , there exists an
AND-child node x of a node o in O such that C(x)        e    = tr , and oi ∈ r(π −1 (Ti )) for all i ≤ k where
oi is the unique child of x of color ci . Therefore, for all i ≤ k, there exists a solution subtree Ci
of G/{oi } such that π(Ci ) = Ti . Now consider any solution subtree C of G/O rooted at o, with
o having x as AND-child node and with x having its first k + 1 child solution subtrees equal to
(C1 , . . . , Ck+1 ). Then the first k + 1 child subtrees of π(C) will be (T1 , . . . , Tk , Tk+1 ).
Proposition 7. Let T be an equivalence class of G/O for a set O of OR+ nodes of G, all colored
with the same color c. Then, the function Next of Algorithm 1 is such that:
   1. Next(∅, O) returns the smallest equivalence class of G/O w.r.t. ≺.
   2. Next(T, O) returns the equivalence class of G/O that follows T w.r.t. ≺.

   3. if T is the last equivalence class of G/O, Next(T, O) returns ⊥.
Proof. Let us define the height of G/O, h(G/O) to be the maximum height of an equivalence
class of G/O, i.e., the number of OR+ nodes in a longest path from O to a goal node minus 1.
The proof will be done by induction on h(G/O).
    Assume first that h(G/O) = 0, i.e., O contains only goal nodes. Then G/O has only one
equivalence class T , which is the single node tree of color c. The call of Next(∅, O) will output it
in Line 5 of the algorithm, and the call of Next(T, O) will return ⊥ in Line 11 since |T (O)| = 0.
    Assume now that h(G/O) > 0.




                                                      8
    Proof of 7.1 If O contains goal nodes, then the smallest equivalence class of G/O with
respect to ≺ is the single node tree colored with c and Next(∅, O) outputs it in Line 5. Otherwise,
let T be the smallest equivalence class of G/O and let (T10 , . . . , Tj0 ) be the subtrees of T rooted at
the children of r(T ). By definition of ≺, the roots of (T10 , . . . , Tj0 ) are colored with the minimum
color tuple t1 := (c1 , . . . , cj ) of T (O) and by Lemma 6, for all i ≤ j Ti0 is the smallest equivalence
class of G/Oi where Oi ⊆ Ci1 is the set of nodes of Ci1 compatible with (T10 , . . . , Ti−1     0
                                                                                                  ). Thus,
Next(∅, O) will return T in Line 27 since r will receive 1 in Line 9, T1 will receive Next(∅, C11 )
in Line 22 which is equal to T10 by the induction hypothesis, and for all i ≤ j, Ti will receive
Next(∅, Oi ) in Line 25 which is equal to Ti0 by the induction hypothesis.

     Proof of 7.2 Let (T10 , . . . , Tj0 ) be the child subtrees of r(T ) and let tr := (c1 , . . . , cj ) be the
color tuple of T (O) with which their roots are colored. Let T 0 be the equivalence class of G/O
that follows T with respect to ≺. Notice that the children of r(T 0 ) are either colored with tr or
with tr+1 if T is the largest equivalence class whose root children are colored with tr .
     Assume first that the children of r(T 0 ) are colored with the color tuple tr . Let (T100 , . . . , Tj00 )
be the child subtrees of r(T 0 ) and let Oi ⊆ Cir be the set of nodes of Cir compatible with
(T10 , . . . , Ti−1
                0
                    ) for all i ≤ j. Let ` be the smallest index such that T`0 6= T`00 . We claim that `
is also the largest index such that T`0 has a successor in C(G/O` ) with respect to ≺, and thus
that it corresponds to the ` chosen by the algorithm in Line 20. Indeed, assume that there exist
i < k ≤ j and F ∈ C(G/Ok ) such that Tk0 ≺ F . By Lemma 6, there exists an equivalence
class of G/O whose first k child subtrees would be (T10 , . . . , Tk−1      0
                                                                                 , F ). However, in this case such
an equivalence class would be greater than T and smaller than T 0 with respect to ≺, and it
would be in contradiction with the fact that T 0 immediately follows T in ≺. Now T` will receive
Next(T`0 , O` ) in Line 22 which is by the induction hypothesis the tree of C(G/O` ) that follows
T`0 . Since we assumed that ` is the smallest index such that T`0 6= T`00 , by definition of ≺ and by
Lemma 6, T`00 is the equivalence class of G/O` that follows T`0 in ≺, and so T` will receive T`00 in
Line 22. Since for all i ≤ ` Ti0 = Ti00 , and since (T1 , . . . , T`−1 ) are not modified by the algorithm,
at the end of it, (T1 , . . . , T`−1 , T` ) will be equal to (T10 , . . . , T`−1
                                                                              0
                                                                                   , T`00 ) = (T100 , . . . , T`−1
                                                                                                               00
                                                                                                                   , T`00 ). It
now remains to show that Ti will be equal to Ti00 for all ` < i ≤ j. Again, by Lemma 6, for all
` < i ≤ j, Ti00 is the smallest tree of C(G/Oi0 ) where Oi0 is the set of nodes of Cir compatible
with (T100 , . . . , Ti−1
                       00
                          ) since otherwise, another tree of C(G/O) greater than T and smaller than T 0
could be built. Thus, in Line 25, Ti will receive Next(∅, Oi0 ) which is equal to Ti00 by the induction
hypothesis, and T 0 will be returned in Line 27.
     Assume now that the children of r(T 0 ) are colored with the color tuple tr+1 . In this case, T
is the greatest tree of C(G/O) with respect to ≺ whose root children are colored with tr . Let
Oi ⊆ Cir be the set of nodes of Cir compatible with (T10 , . . . , Ti−1        0
                                                                                    ) for all i ≤ j. We claim that
  0
Ti is the greatest tree of C(G/Oi ) for all i ≤ j with respect to ≺. Indeed, assume otherwise
that there exists Ti00 ∈ C(G/Oi ) with Ti0 ≺ Ti00 . Then by Lemma 6 C(G/O) would contain a tree
whose root children would be colored with tr which would be larger than T with respect to ≺.
By the induction hypotheses, Next(Ti0 , Oi ) will therefore return ⊥ for all i ≤ j. So T will receive
∅ in Line 20 and the algorithm will jump to Line 8, and the next color tuple tr+1 will be selected
in Line 9. Using now similar arguments to the ones used in the proof of 7.1, the smallest tree
with respect to ≺ whose root children are colored with tr+1 will be returned.

   Proof of 7.3 Assume now that T is the last equivalence class of G/O. Notice that in this
case, the root children of T are colored with tr where r = |T (O)|. As previously, Ti0 is the
greatest tree of C(G/Oi ) for all i ≤ j with respect to ≺ since otherwise a greater tree of C(G/O)
would exist. By the induction hypothesis, Next(Ti0 , Oi ) would return ⊥ for all i ≤ j. Therefore



                                                              9
T will receive ∅ in Line 20 and the algorithm will return to Line 8. Since r = |T (O)|, r will
receive r + 1 in Line 9 and ⊥ will be returned in Line 11.


Theorem 8. Given an e-colored ad-AND/OR graph G, the set C(G) can be enumerated with
delay O(n · s) where n is the number of nodes of G and s is the maximum size of a solution.
Proof. To enumerate C(G), we first split the start nodes of G into sets S0 , . . . , Sk according
to their colors. For each set Si , starting with T = ∅, we repeatedly assign Next(T, Si ) to T
and output it until T = ⊥. By Proposition 7, this guarantees that we output every solution of
C(G/Si ) exactly once. Since any solution of C(G) belongs to C(G/Si ) for a given i ≤ k, every
solution of C(G) will be outputted exactly once.
    For the complexity, notice that at most one recursive call is performed by the node of the
next solution. More precisely, if Next(T, O)= T 0 , there will be exactly one recursive call per
node in T 0 that is not in T , and thus at most s recursive calls will be performed.
    In each recursive call, both the set T (O) and the partition {Cir }i≤j of grandchildren of O
can be computed in O(n) time. It remains to show that the sets of compatible nodes Oi , i ≤ j,
can be computed in O(n) time in total which will conclude the proof. To do this, we should
be able to compute the sets r(π −1 (Ti )) for all i ≤ j. If Next(T, O)= T 0 , the easiest way is to
return the set r(π −1 (T 0 )) together with T 0 when the call Next(T, O) returns. This could be done
by observing that if T ∈ C(G/O) where O is a set of goal nodes all having the same color c,
then r(π −1 (T )) = O, and if T has child subtrees T1 , . . . , Tj then r(π −1 (T )) is the set of nodes
of O that has at least an AND-child x such that the children of x contain exactly one node in
r(π −1 (Ti )) for each i ≤ j, which can be found in O(n) time. Thus only O(n) time is necessary
at each recursive call to return r(π −1 (T 0 )) in addition to T 0 .

2.4    Restricting the graph to an equivalence class
After the enumeration of the equivalence classes, it might be interesting to go back to the solutions
in each class, in particular, one might want to use the number of solutions as a measure for the
“importance” or “significance” of an equivalence class. We present an algorithm that, given an
e-colored ad-AND/OR graph G and an equivalence class T , constructs the subgraph GT of G
restricted to T , that is, a subgraph of G of which the solution subtrees are exactly the ones of G
                                                    −1
belonging to the equivalence class T : T(GT ) = πG     (T ) := {T1 ∈ T(G) | π(T1 ) = T }. Once the
         T
graph G is obtained, the following questions can be answered (by applying the same method
as for the unrestricted ad-AND/OR graph G): counting the number of, and enumerating the
solution subtrees belonging to the class T .
    Algorithm 2 relies on two recursive functions VisitOR and VisitAND, both taking as input a
node in G and a node in T . The Require statements are used to specify the preconditions that
the two parameters of the two Visit functions must verify; it can be checked by inspection that
these conditions are always satisfied whenever the functions are called. The algorithm performs
an operation called Mark on the nodes in G. All nodes are initially unmarked; the Mark operation
changes the state of a node into marked.
    Recall that π(T1 ) transforms a solution subtree T1 ∈ T(G) into an equivalence class T ∈ C(G)
by contracting the AND nodes in T1 . For a fixed T1 , we extend this notation and write π(s) =
π(s1 ) := v for every OR node s in T1 with its unique AND-child node s1 in T1 that are identified
with the node v in T under the transformation.
Lemma 9. Let T1 be a solution subtree of G belonging to the class T . For every node s of T1 ,
there is a call to either VisitOR or to VisitAND of Algorithm 2 with parameters s and π(s),
depending on whether s is an OR+ node or an AND node.


                                                  10
 Algorithm 2: Restricting the graph to an equivalence class
   Data: an e-colored ad-AND/OR graph G, an equivalence class T
   Result: the graph GT
 1 Function Main(G, T ):
 2   for each start node s0 of G such that c(s0 ) = c(r(T )) do
 3       VisitOR(s0 , r(T ))
 4   end
 5   return GT obtained from G by removing all unmarked nodes
 6 Function VisitOR(s, v):
 7   Require: c(s) = c(v)
 8   if s is a goal node and v is a leaf then
 9       Mark(s)
10       return
11   end
12   for each child node si of s in G such that C(s
                                                e i ) = C(v)
                                                        e    do
13       VisitAND (si , v)
14   end
15   if at least one child of s is marked then
16       Mark(s)
17   end
18 Function VisitAND(s, v):
19   Require: C(s)e    = C(v)
                          e
20   for each child node si of s do
21       vi ← the unique child of v such that c(vi ) = c(si )
22       VisitOR (si , vi )
23   end
24   if all children of s are marked then
25       Mark(s)
26   end


Proof. By top-down induction. The start node of T1 is visited in Line 3 since it has the correct
color. In the induction step we separate two cases. For an OR+ node s of T1 that is not a start
node, suppose that the parent s1 of s in T1 is visited in a call VisitAND(s1 , π(s1 )). Then s is
visited (Line 22), and the second parameter is π(s). In the other case, for an AND node s of
T1 , suppose that the parent s1 of s in T1 is visited in a call VisitOR(s1 , π(s1 )). Since we have
π(s) = π(s1 ) and C(π(s
                   e    1 )) = C(s), the condition at Line 12 is satisfied and s is visited in a call
                               e
VisitAND(s, π(s)).
    The correctness of Algorithm 2 is shown in Proposition 10. We omit the analysis of complexity
as the algorithm clearly requires a running time that is linear in the size of the graph.
Proposition 10. The set of solution subtrees of GT , the graph returned by Algorithm 2, is equal
    −1
to πG  (T ), i.e., the set of solution subtrees of G belonging to the equivalence class T .

Proof. (First direction) We show that any solution subtree of GT is also a solution subtree of G,
and that it belongs to the equivalence class T . For every marked OR node, at least one child is
marked (Line 15); for every marked AND node, all its children are marked (Line 24). A solution


                                                 11
subtree of GT is thus a solution subtree of G. Let T1 be a solution subtree of GT , consider
the recursion tree of the Visit function calls during which the nodes in T1 are marked. By the
preconditions of the Visit functions (c(s) = c(v) and C(s)
                                                       e   = C(v)),
                                                              e      the tree π(T1 ) is equal to the
tree formed by the colored nodes that are used as the second parameter v in this recursion tree.
The latter is simply equal to T (we start with the root of T , then visit each child of the current
node), so we have π(T1 ) = T . Therefore, every solution subtree of GT belongs to the class T .
    (Second direction) Let T1 be a solution subtree of G such that π(T1 ) = T , we show that every
node in T1 is marked by bottom-up induction. By Lemma 9, any goal node s in T1 is visited in a
call VisitOR(s, π(s)) so s is marked (Line 9) because π(s) is necessarily a leaf. For the induction
step we separate two cases. Let s be an OR node in T1 , and suppose that all nodes in T1 at
a smaller height are marked. By the same lemma, s is visited. Then s is marked at Line 16,
since exactly one child of s is in T1 and is thus marked. In the other case, let s be an AND
node in T1 and suppose that all nodes in T1 at a smaller height are marked. By the lemma, s
is visited. Then s is marked at Line 25 because all children of s are in T1 and are thus marked.
This completes the proof.


3     Application to dynamic programming
3.1     A formalism for tree-sequential dynamic programming
Since its introduction by Karp and Held [21], monotone sequential decision processes (mSDP)
have been the classical model for problems solvable by dynamic programming (DP). This for-
malism is based on finite-state automata. The solutions of DP-problems are thus equivalent to
languages of regular expressions, or to paths in directed graphs. It is known that Bellman’s
principle of optimality [5] also applies to problems for which the solutions are not sequential but
tree-like [9]. Various generalizations have been proposed to characterize broader classes of prob-
lems solvable by DP or DP-like techniques [11, 19]. In this paper, we consider a framework which
is the immediate generalization of the mSDP model, i.e., generalizing finite automata (regular
expressions, paths in DAGs) to finite tree automata (regular tree grammars, solution trees of
general AND/OR graphs). Further generalizations exist (from trees to graphs of treewidth > 1);
the collection of these methods is known as Non-serial dynamic programming [6].
    In this model, a tree-sequential problem can be specified by a finite (bottom-up) tree au-
tomaton A = (Q, Σ, δ, q0 , QF ), where Q is a finite set of states, Σ is a ranked alphabet, δ is a
set of transition rules of the form (q1 , . . . , qn , a, q) where q1 , . . . , qn , q ∈ Q and a ∈ Σ, q0 ∈ Q is
the initial state, QF ⊆ Q is a set of final states. The problem specification also includes a cost
function. The set L(A) of trees accepted by the tree automaton A defines the set of feasible
solutions. The minimization problem seeks to minimize the cost function over the set L(A) of
feasible solutions.
    We will consider the simple case of a positive additive cost function that always equals zero
in the initial state. An additive cost function can be defined via an incremental cost function
I : Q∗ ×Σ → R, where Q∗ consists of tuples of states in Q of the form (q1 , . . . , qn ). I(q1 , . . . , qn , a)
can be viewed as the cost of attaching n child subtrees to a new root of symbol a. While it might
seem restrictive to require an additive structure on the cost function, this simple case does cover
many important problems admitting a DP-algorithm, for instance, Travelling Salesman [4, 18],
Knapsack [22], or Levenshtein distance [34].
    In this case, the answer of the minimization problem can be shown to be equal to minq∈QF D(q),




                                                      12
where D : Q → R≥0 is defined by the following recurrence equations:

                D(q0 ) = 0 ,
                                                                                                           (1)
                                                                X
                for q 6= q0 ,   D(q) =         min                     D(qi ) + I(q1 , . . . , qn , a) .
                                         (q1 ,...,qn ,a,q)∈δ
                                                               1≤i≤n

A dynamic programming algorithm for the minimization problem corresponds to an algorithm
that computes D; the function D is commonly called a dynamic programming table (a DP-tabled,
also called a DP-array, or a DP-matrix). Needless to say, such an algorithm does not exist in
general for given arbitrary tree automata and cost functions [20].
    Using an algebraic approach, Gnesi and Montanari [16] have shown that solving the functional
Equation (1) corresponds to finding the solution subtrees of a general AND/OR graph. An
important special case in which DP-algorithms exist is when the underlying AND/OR graph is
acyclic.
    When a fixed tree is given as an input to the problem, the underlying AND/OR graph
is acyclic and decomposable (that is, it is an ad-AND/OR graph). Such problems are hence
naturally solvable by DP-algorithms. These algorithms are known in folklore under the name
Dynamic programming on a tree. Many graph-theoretical problems (e.g., maximum matching,
longest path) can be solved optimally on trees by DP-algorithms. Numerous real-world applica-
tions also rely on DP-algorithms on trees; examples can be found, for instance, in Data Science
[30], Computer Vision [14, 33], and Computational Biology [3, 13].

Explicit construction of the ad-AND/OR graph for DP on a fixed tree Due to its
usefulness for the examples that we will develop next, in the case of DP on a fixed tree, an explicit
construction of the ad-AND/OR graph from Equation (1) is described below. The construction
is done in two steps. In the first step, we build a graph in which every node retains an additional
attribute, its value, and every OR+ node is labeled by a state q ∈ Q. In the second step, we
prune the graph by removing nodes that do not yield optimal values.
  1. For each (q0 , a, q) ∈ δ, create a goal node of value 0 labeled by q. Then, for each q 6= q0 in
     post-order,
        i. For each (q1 , . . . , qn , a, q) ∈ δ, create an AND node, connect it to the n OR+ nodes
           labeled by q1 , . . . , qn . Its value is equal to the sum of the values of its children, plus
           I(q1 , . . . , qn , a).
        ii. Create a single OR node, connect it to every AND node created in the previous step.
            Its label is q, and its value is the minimum of the values of its children.
  2. For each q ∈ QF , remove the OR node labeled by q unless its value is equal to minq∈QF G(q).
     For each OR node s, remove the arc to its AND-child node si if the value of si is not equal
     to the value of s. Finally, remove recursively all AND nodes without incoming arcs.

3.2     Examples
3.2.1    Optimal tree coloring problem
Description A prototypical problem that fits into the framework of DP on a tree is Optimal
tree coloring, that is, finding an optimal node-coloring of the input tree. Many problems of
practical interest reduce to Optimal tree coloring; three concrete examples are given later
in this section.


                                                        13
    If T is the input (rooted, ordered) tree and C is the set of colors, such a problem seeks a
coloring φ : V (T ) → C that minimizes the cost function. There can be many constraints on the
coloring function: some nodes of T may be forced to have a certain color, the possible colors of a
node may depend on the colors of its descendants. In our tree-sequential dynamic programming
formalism, a tree automaton and a cost function are given as part of the input. The tree
automaton defines the set L(A) of feasible coloring functions satisfying all those constraints. A
state q can be interpreted as a colored subtree of T with a particular root color; the unique initial
state is an empty coloring and transitions into a colored leaf of T ; a final state corresponds to a
fully colored T with a particular root color. A commonly used form of cost functions considers the
(possibly weighted) sum over the edges of the tree of the cost of putting two colorsPon each end of
an edge, that is, an incremental cost function I of the form I(q1 , . . . , qn , a, p) = 1≤i≤n p(ai , a)
where ai is the color of the root of the subtree in state qi and p : C 2 → R≥0 is a function that
gives the cost of putting two colors at each end of an edge.

Equivalence relations on the set of solutions A possible strategy to define equivalence
classes on the solution space of the Optimal tree coloring problem is to consider some
colors to be locally equivalent on a node. In practical applications (see the next section), the
space of colors can be quite large. Even though the precise colors of each node are necessary
for correctly computing the cost function, when the solutions are analyzed by a human expert,
it can be desirable to omit the colors and just look at whether the color of a node belongs to
some group of colors. Therefore, this kind of equivalence relations is natural in many situations.
Our Definition 4 of equivalence classes of an e-colored ad-AND/OR graph deals exactly with
equivalence relations of this type.
    Let e be a function that maps a color c to its “color group” e(c). Two solutions of the
Optimal tree coloring problem φ1 , φ2 : V (T ) → C are said to be equivalent if ∀u ∈ V (T ),
e(φ1 (u)) = e(φ2 (u)). Let G be the ad-AND/OR graph associated with this instance. For each
OR+ node s of G labeled with the state q, where q is interpreted as a colored subtree of T with
a particular root color c, color the node s with e(c). Then G is e-colored and C(G) corresponds
to the set of equivalence classes of the solutions of the instance. Notice that the constraint we
had on the e-coloring of an ad-AND/OR graph is naturally satisfied by any meaningful function
e because in a DP setting we only consider ordered trees: the i-th and j-th children of a node of
T cannot be in the same color group unless i = j.

Concrete examples of tree coloring problems

    Example 1 The first example is related to the alignment of gene sequences on a phyloge-
netic tree [31]. The input is a tree T , a set Σ of letters (DNA alphabet or protein alphabet),
a function that labels each leaf node of T with a letter, and a distance function d : Σ2 → R≥0
between two letters. The goal is to extend the leaf labeling to a full labeling φ : V (T ) → Σ such
that the sum of the distances over the edges of T is minimized. Defining equivalence relations of
the solutions based on a grouping of the letters is uncontrived in this problem: for the DNA or
protein alphabet, the letters can be subdivided into structurally similar groups.

   Example 2 The Frequency assignment problems are a family of problems that nat-
urally arise in telecommunication networks, and that have been extensively studied in graph
theory as a generalization of graph coloring known as the T-coloring problem [17, 29, 32]. In the
variant called the list T-coloring, the input is a graph G representing the interference between
radio stations, a set C of colors, a function S that gives for each vertex v ∈ V (G) a set S(v) ⊆ C


                                                  14
of colors (possible frequencies for a station), and a set T ⊆ C 2 of forbidden pairs of colors (in-
terfering frequencies). The goal is to find a coloring φ : V (G) → C such that a ∀v ∈ V (G),
φ(v) ∈ S(v), and ∀(u, v) ∈ E(G), (φ(u), φ(v)) 6∈ T . While this problem is hard in general, it can
be solved by DP when the underlying graph is a tree. In this case, we can enumerate colorings of
the input trees without any forbidden pair of colors on the edges. Defining equivalence relations
by grouping some of the colors together (similar frequencies) can be a practical way of reducing
the size of the output.

    Example 3 The Tree Reconciliation problem is the main method for analyzing the
co-evolution of two sets of species, the hosts and their parasites [28]. The input are two phy-
logenetic trees H, P (of the hosts and of the parasites, respectively), together with a mapping
φ0 : Leaves(P ) → Leaves(H) that reflects the present-day parasite infections. What needs to
be enumerated are then all past associations, that is, all mappings of the non-leaf nodes of the
parasite tree to the nodes of the host tree that optimize a function which overall represents
the sum of the number of different possible “events” weighted by the inverse of their estimated
probability. The number of optimal solutions is often huge and, by applying our Algorithm 1,
the enumeration of biologically inspired equivalence classes have allowed a significant reduction
(in some cases from 1042 to only 96 classes) of the size of the output while still preserving the
important biological information (see [35]).

3.2.2    Dynamic programming on tree decomposition of a graph
Many graph problems can be solved in polynomial time with a dynamic programming algorithm
when the input graph has bounded treewidth (see for example [8]). The underlying idea is
that, given a tree decomposition of a graph, the dynamic programming algorithm traverses
the nodes (bags) of the decomposition and consecutively solves the respective sub-problems. For
vertex subset optimization problems, given a bag X, a dynamic programming algorithm generally
computes for each Z ⊆ X the optimal solution of the sub-problem whose intersection with X
is Z. In this context, we could define two solutions to be equivalent if they intersect each bag
of the decomposition in an “equivalent” way. The equivalence relation on the solutions is then
defined by an equivalence relation over the subsets of each bag, and two solutions S1 and S2 are
equivalent if for all bags X of the decomposition, S1 ∩ X is equivalent to S2 ∩ X.
    One of the simplest examples is to consider that all the nonempty subsets of vertices of a bag
are equivalent. Thus, what we are interested in is whether a solution “hits” a bag (i.e., whether
it has a nonempty intersection with the vertices in the bag). Consequently, two solutions would
be considered equivalent if they hit the same bags.
    We can also consider two subsets of a bag to be equivalent if they have the same size. In this
case, two solutions would be equivalent if each bag contains the same number of vertices in the
two solutions.
    We believe that considering solutions in the way they are distributed along the tree decom-
position of a graph could give a good overview of the diversity of the solution space.


4       Conclusion and perspectives
In this paper, we provide a general framework for the enumeration of equivalence classes of
solutions in polynomial delay for a wide variety of contexts. This work opens a door to different
research directions.
    It would be interesting to ask whether we can efficiently enumerate groups of solutions that
result from classical clustering procedures, or one representative per group. Moreover, in this


                                                15
paper we heavily rely on the decomposability property of the structure of the solution space.
It remains open whether the problem of enumerating equivalence classes is hard without this
restriction.


References
 [1] Steen A. Andersson, David Madigan, and Michael D. Perlman. A characterization of markov
     equivalence classes for acyclic digraphs. Annals of Statistics, 25(2):505–541, 04 1997. doi:
     10.7916/D8280JSB.
 [2] Albert Angel and Nick Koudas. Efficient diversity-aware search. In Proceedings of the
     2011 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD ’11, page
     781–792, New York, NY, USA, 2011. Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/
     1989323.1989405.
 [3] Mukul S. Bansal, Eric J. Alm, and Manolis Kellis. Efficient algorithms for the reconciliation
     problem with gene duplication, horizontal transfer and loss. Bioinformatics, 28(12):i283–
     i291, 2012. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts225.
 [4] Richard Bellman. Dynamic programming treatment of the travelling salesman problem.
     Journal of the ACM, 9(1):61–63, January 1962. doi:10.1145/321105.321111.
 [5] Richard Bellman. Dynamic Programming. Dover Books on Computer Science. Dover Pub-
     lications, 2013.
 [6] Umberto Bertele and Francesco Brioschi. Nonserial Dynamic Programming. Academic
     Press, Inc., USA, 1972.
 [7] Anselm Blumer, Janet A. Blumer, David H. Haussler, Ross M. McConnell, and Andrzej
     Ehrenfeucht. Complete inverted files for efficient text retrieval and analysis. Journal of the
     ACM, 34(3):578–595, July 1987. doi:10.1145/28869.28873.
 [8] Hans L. Bodlaender. Dynamic programming on graphs with bounded treewidth. In Timo
     Lepistö and Arto Salomaa, editors, Automata, Languages and Programming, pages 105–118,
     Berlin, Heidelberg, 1988. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/3-540-19488-6_110.
 [9] Pierre E. Bonzon. Necessary and sufficient conditions for dynamic programming of combi-
     natorial type. Journal of the ACM, 17:675–682, 1970. doi:10.1145/321607.321616.
[10] Marı́lia D.V. Braga, Marie-France Sagot, Celine Scornavacca, and Eric Tannier. Exploring
     the solution space of sorting by reversals, with experiments and an application to evolution.
     IEEE/ACM transactions on computational biology and bioinformatics, 5 3:348–56, 2008.
     doi:10.1109/TCBB.2008.16.
[11] Joshua Buresh-Oppenheim, Sashka Davis, and Russell Impagliazzo. A stronger model
     of dynamic programming algorithms. Algorithmica, 60:938–968, 08 2011. doi:10.1007/
     s00453-009-9385-1.
[12] Rina Dechter and Robert Mateescu. And/or search spaces for graphical models. Artificial
     Intelligence, 171(2):73 – 106, 2007. doi:10.1016/j.artint.2006.11.003.
[13] Beatrice Donati, Christian Baudet, Blerina Sinaimeri, Pierluigi Crescenzi, and Marie-France
     Sagot. Eucalypt: efficient tree reconciliation enumerator. Algorithms for Molecular Biol-
     ogy, 10(1):3, 2015. doi:10.1186/s13015-014-0031-3.


                                                16
[14] Pedro F. Felzenszwalb and Daniel P. Huttenlocher. Pictorial structures for object recog-
     nition. International Journal of Computer Vision, 61(1):55–79, January 2005. doi:
     10.1023/B:VISI.0000042934.15159.49.
[15] Henning Fernau, Petr A. Golovach, and Marie-France Sagot. Algorithmic Enumera-
     tion: Output-sensitive, Input-Sensitive, Parameterized, Approximative (Dagstuhl Seminar
     18421). Dagstuhl Reports, 8(10):63–86, 2019. doi:10.4230/DagRep.8.10.63.
[16] Stefania Gnesi, Ugo Montanari, and Alberto Martelli. Dynamic programming as graph
     searching: An algebraic approach. Journal of the ACM, 28(4):737–751, October 1981. doi:
     10.1145/322276.322285.

[17] William K. Hale. Frequency assignment: Theory and applications. Proceedings of the IEEE,
     68(12):1497–1514, 1980. doi:10.1109/PROC.1980.11899.
[18] Michael Held and Richard M. Karp. A dynamic programming approach to sequencing
     problems. Journal of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 10(1):196–210,
     1962. doi:10.1137/0110015.

[19] Paul Helman. A common schema for dynamic programming and branch and bound algo-
     rithms. Journal of the ACM, 36(1):97–128, January 1989. doi:10.1145/58562.59304.
[20] Toshihide Ibaraki. Classes of discrete optimization problems and their decision prob-
     lems. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 8(1):84–116, 1974. doi:10.1016/
     S0022-0000(74)80024-3.

[21] Richard M. Karp and Michael Held. Finite-state processes and dynamic programming.
     SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 15(3):693–718, 1967. doi:10.1137/0115060.
[22] Hans Kellerer, Ulrich Pferschy, and David Pisinger.   Basic Algorithmic Concepts,
     pages 15–42. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004. doi:10.1007/
     978-3-540-24777-7_2.
[23] Alberto Martelli and Ugo Montanari. Optimizing decision trees through heuristically guided
     search. Communications of the ACM, 21(12):1025–1039, December 1978. doi:10.1145/
     359657.359664.
[24] Cristian Molinaro, Amy Sliva, and Vs S. Subrahmanian. Super-solutions: Succinctly rep-
     resenting solutions in abductive annotated probabilistic temporal logic. ACM Transactions
     on Computational Logic, 15(3), July 2014. doi:10.1145/2627354.
[25] Katherine Morrison. An enumeration of the equivalence classes of self-dual matrix codes.
     Advances in Mathematics of Communications, 9:415, 2015. doi:10.3934/amc.2015.9.415.

[26] Kazuyuki Narisawa, Shunsuke Inenaga, Hideo Bannai, and Masayuki Takeda. Efficient
     computation of substring equivalence classes with suffix arrays. In Bin Ma and Kaizhong
     Zhang, editors, Combinatorial Pattern Matching, pages 340–351, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007.
     Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/s00453-016-0178-z.
[27] Nils J. Nilsson. Principles of Artificial Intelligence. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg,
     Tioga, Palo Alto, CA, 1982.

[28] Roderic D. M. Page. Tangled trees: phylogeny, cospeciation, and coevolution. The University
     of Chicago Press, 2003.


                                              17
[29] Fred S. Roberts. T-colorings of graphs: recent results and open problems. Discrete Mathe-
     matics, 93(2):229–245, 1991. doi:10.1016/0012-365X(91)90258-4.
[30] Lior Rokach and Oded Z. Maimon. Data Mining with Decision Trees: Theory and Ap-
     plications. Series in machine perception and artificial intelligence. World Scientific, 2008.
     doi:10.1142/9097.

[31] David Sankoff. Minimal mutation trees of sequences. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics,
     28(1):35–42, 1975. doi:10.1137/0128004.
[32] Barry A. Tesman. List t-colorings of graphs. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 45(3):277–289,
     1993. doi:10.1016/0166-218X(93)90015-G.

[33] Olga Veksler. Stereo correspondence by dynamic programming on a tree. In 2005 IEEE
     Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’05),
     volume 2, pages 384–390, 2005. doi:10.1109/CVPR.2005.334.
[34] Robert A. Wagner and Michael J. Fischer. The string-to-string correction problem. Journal
     of the ACM, 21(1):168–173, January 1974. doi:10.1145/321796.321811.

[35] Yishu Wang, Arnaud Mary, Marie-France Sagot, and Blerina Sinaimeri. Capybara:
     equivalence class enumeration of cophylogeny event-based reconciliations. Bioinformatics,
     36(14):4197–4199, 2020. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa498.




                                               18
