                                                            What Can Be Computed Locally Revisited
                                             — First-Order Logic on Sparse Graphs in Distributed Computing∗—

                                              Lélia Blin1 , Fedor V. Fomin2 , Pierre Fraigniaud1 , Sylvain Gay1,6 , Petr Golovach2 ,
                                                             Pedro Montealegre3 , Ivan Rapaport4 , and Ioan Todinca5
                                                                1
                                                               Université Paris Cité, CNRS, IRIF, Paris, France
                                                                     2
                                                                       University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
arXiv:2411.14825v3 [cs.DS] 4 Feb 2026




                                                                 3
                                                                   Universidad Adolfo Ibañez, Santiago, Chile
                                                             4
                                                               DIM-CMM, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile
                                                 5
                                                   LIFO, Université d’Orléans and INSA Centre-Val de Loire, Orléans, France
                                                                   6
                                                                     École Normale Supérieure, Paris, France




                                                                                          Abstract
                                                  The question of “what can be computed locally?” lies at the heart of distributed computing
                                              in networks. As established in Naor and Stockmeyer’s seminal paper (STOC 1993, Edsger
                                              W. Dijkstra Prize in Distributed Computing 2025), this question is undecidable, even for graph
                                              problems whose solutions can be checked locally. In this paper, we adopt a novel perspective
                                              on the question, by asking for which classes Π of problems, and for which classes G of graphs,
                                              all problems in Π can be solved efficiently in a distributed manner in all graphs of G. This
                                              paper focuses on two natural candidates for such an approach, namely the class of problems
                                              expressible in first-order logic (FO), because they possess an intrinsic form of locality thanks to
                                              Gaifman’s theorem, and the class of graphs with bounded expansion, because they form a large
                                              class of graphs encompassing, e.g., planar, bounded-genus, bounded-treewidth, and bounded-
                                              degree graphs, as well as graphs excluding a fixed minor or topological minor, sparse Erdős–
                                              Rényi graphs (a.a.s.), and several network models such as stochastic block models for suitable
                                              parameter ranges.
                                                  The starting point of our work is the decade-old open question of Nešetřil and Ossona de
                                              Mendez (Distributed Computing 2016) on the distributed complexity of local FO formula on
                                              graphs of bounded expansion, in the standard CONGEST model of distributed computing. Recall
                                              that a formula φ(x) is local if the satisfaction of φ(x) depends only on the r-neighborhood of
                                              its free variable x, for some fixed r. For instance, the formula “x belongs to a triangle” is local.
                                              We resolve the open problem of Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez positively by showing that, for
                                           ∗
                                             The research leading to these results has been supported by the Research Council of Norway via the project
                                        BWCA (314528), and by Université Paris Cité via the Emergence project METALG. F. Fomin partially supported by
                                        European Research Council (ERC) via grant NewPC, reference 101199930. P. Fraigniaud was partially supported by
                                        the ANR projects DUCAT (ANR-20-CE48-0006), PREDICTIONS (ANR-23-CE48-0010), ENEDISC (ANR-24-CE48-
                                        7768-01), and the French PEPR integrated project EPiQ (ANR-22-PETQ-0007). P. Montealegre was supported by
                                        ECOS-ANID ECOS240020, STIC-AMSUD ECODIST AMSUD240005, Centro de Modelamiento Matemático (CMM),
                                        FB210005, BASAL funds for centers of excellence from ANID-Chile, FONDECYT 1230599 and ANID-MILENIO-
                                        NCN2024 103. I. Rapaport has received funding from FB210005, BASAL funds for centers of excellence from ANID-
                                        Chile, and FONDECYT 1220142.
every local FO formula φ(x), and for every graph class G of bounded expansion, there exists a
deterministic algorithm that identifies, for every n-vertex graph G ∈ G, all vertices v of G such
that G |= φ(v), in O(log n) rounds. The requirement of locality is unavoidable, as even the
simple FO formula “there exist two vertices of degree 3” requires Ω(D) rounds in CONGEST,
even on trees of diameter D. Nevertheless, we establish a second result, which goes beyond the
question of Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez. We show that O(D + log n) rounds are sufficient for
deciding any FO formula φ on graphs of bounded expansion. That is, the overhead to be paid
over the diameter is just O(log n). We underline that the techniques behind our two distributed
“meta-theorems” extend to distributed counting, optimization, and certification problems.
    Our results are tight in several ways. Regarding the choice of the graph class G, we show
that deciding FO formulas may have high round complexity in CONGEST on larger classes of
graphs, even if they√remain sparse. For instance, the simple local FO formula expressing C6 -
freeness requires Ω̃( n) rounds to be decided in graphs of degeneracy 2 with constant diameter.
Regarding the choice of the class Π of problems, we show that deciding problems expressible
in monadic second-order (MSO) logic may have high round complexity in CONGEST, even in
classes of graphs with bounded expansion. For example, deciding non-3-colorability requires
Ω̃(n) rounds in bounded-degree graphs with logarithmic diameter.
Keywords: Distributed computing, CONGEST model, Graph algorithms.
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                      1
  1.1 Context and Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
  1.2 Our Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
  1.3 Our Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
  1.4 Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

2 High Level Description of the Proofs                                                               13
  2.1 Deciding Local FO Formulas Locally . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       13
  2.2 Locality-preserving quantifier elimination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     19
  2.3 Model Checking, Counting, Optimization, and Certification . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          21

3 Model and Definitions                                                                              24
  3.1 The CONGEST Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        24
  3.2 First-Order Formulas on Labeled Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         24
  3.3 Local Formulas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26
  3.4 Graphs of Bounded Expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        30

4 Distributed Model Checking of Local Formulas                                                       31
  4.1 Rooted Forests of Bounded Depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        32
  4.2 Quantifier Elimination on Graphs of Bounded Treedepth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          42
  4.3 Graphs of Bounded Expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        43

5 Distributed Model Checking of General Formulas                                                     51
  5.1 Rooted Forests of Bounded Depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        51
  5.2 Quantifier Elimination on Graphs of Bounded Treedepth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          53
  5.3 Graphs of Bounded Expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        53
  5.4 Proof of Theorem 5.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   56

6 Counting and Optimization Problems                                                               56
  6.1 Proof of Lemma 6.3 and Theorem 6.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
  6.2 Proof of Theorem 6.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61

7 Distributed Certification                                                                          66
  7.1 Certifying Reduction of Trees with Bounded Depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         66
  7.2 Certifying Low-Treedepth Colorings and Skeletons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         70
  7.3 Certifying Reductions on Graphs of Bounded Expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           71
  7.4 Proof of Theorem 7.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   72

8 Lower Bounds and Impossibility Results                                                     73
  8.1 No Extension to Monadic Second-Order Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
  8.2 No Extension to First Order Logic on Graphs of Bounded Degeneracy . . . . . . . . 77

9 Conclusion                                                                                78
  9.1 Distributed Computing in Nowhere Dense Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
  9.2 Distributed Computing for Extensions of First-Order Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
1        Introduction
1.1       Context and Objective
Distributed computing in networks is primarily concerned with identifying which graph problems
can be efficiently solved “by the graphs themselves.” That is, each vertex of the graph is assumed
to be a computing device, referred to as a node, and nodes communicate by exchanging messages
along the edges of the graph. Initially, each node knows only local information (e.g., its identifier,
its degree, the weights of its incident edges if any, etc.), and it must compute its own output (e.g.,
whether it belongs to the computed minimum dominating set, or which of its incident edges belong
to the computed minimum-weight spanning tree). Each node must do so autonomously, based only
on the information obtained by exchanging data with its neighbors.
    In this framework, the nodes are typically subject to two constraints: distance and bandwidth.
The former merely expresses that exchanging information between two nodes at distance d in the
graph requires at least d rounds of communication, for traversing a path of length d between these
two nodes. The latter is motivated by the fact that network links may have limited capacity. In
n-node graphs, this is usually captured by limiting communication to transmitting a single message
of O(log n) bit per edge in each direction at each round. To sum up, distributed computation in
networks proceeds as a sequence of synchronous rounds where, at each round, every node (1) sends
O(log n)-bit messages to each of its neighbors, (2) receives the messages sent by its neighbors, and
(3) performs some individual computation. This model is commonly referred to as CONGEST in
the literature [70]. In CONGEST, each node is given an O(log n)-bit identifier, which is unique in
the network.

Local and Global Problems. Two categories of graph problems can be identified with respect to
their solvability in CONGEST. Global problems are problems that require Ω(D) rounds to be solved
in graphs of diameter D. This includes, e.g., minimum-weight spanning tree (MST), as deciding
whether an edge belong to the tree may depend on the weight of another edge, at distance Ω(D).
In contrast, local problems are problems that can be solved in polylog(n) rounds, even in graphs
with diameter Ω(n).

        • For a global problem, the typical objective is to express its round complexity as O(D + h(n))
          rounds, and to minimize the overhead function h(·). For instance, the overhead for MST is
             √
          Õ( n) rounds1 [36], and this is optimal [71]. For other examples, such as SSSP, Min-Cut,
          routing, min-weight cycles, etc., see, e.g., [18, 60, 63, 64], and see [15] for lower bounds.

        • For local problems, the challenging question of “what can be computed locally?”, to quote
          Naor and Stockmeyer’s seminal paper [65], has been mostly addressed by considering locally
          checkable labeling (LCL) problems2 Roughly, LCL problems are problems for which an as-
          signment of labels to the nodes or edges is a correct solution if and only if this assignment
          is locally correct at each node. This is for instance the case of proper k-coloring, maximal
          independent set (MIS), maximal matching, etc. In other words, LCL problems are problems
          whose solutions can be checked at each node by inspecting its ball of constant radius around
    1
     The Õ and Ω̃ notation ignores polylog(n) factors.
    2
     The paper [65] actually considered the LOCAL model [62], which is CONGEST without any restriction on the
size of the messages. Nevertheless, since then, the question as been addressed in both LOCAL and CONGEST in the
literature.


                                                      1
         it. Determining which LCL problems are locally solvable (i.e., in polylog(n) rounds) has given
         rise of an enormous amount of work during the last two decades (see, e.g., [26, 29, 41]).

    In this paper, we tackle local and global problems from a different perspective, which has the
side effect of placing these two types of problems under the same umbrella whereas they are so far
somehow treated separately in the literature (see above).

The Novel “Logical Approach” of Distributed Locality. Another line of research aiming at
identifying which problems can be solved locally in CONGEST has emerged in the years 2010s [68],
motivated by Gaifman’s locality theorem [35]. Recall that Gaifman’s theorem states that every
first-order (FO) sentence is equivalent to a Boolean combination of local sentences. That is, in
graphs, every FO sentence is equivalent to a sentence saying that there exist nodes that are far
apart from one another in the graph, and each satisfies some local condition described by an FO
formula referring to the vicinity of the node.
     Considering graph problems expressible in FO logic opens a completely new approach of locality
in distributed computing. Note that the class of problems expressible in FO is quite rich. In
particular, it includes problems as diverse as subgraph isomorphism (induced or not), k-dominating
set, k-independent set, diameter at most k, etc. For instance, triangle-freeness can be expressed as
                                                                       
                            ¬ ∃x ∃y ∃z adj(x, y) ∧ adj(y, z) ∧ adj(z, x) ,                       (1)

where adj denotes the adjacency predicate. Clearly, every FO problem expressed as the combination
of at least two local sentences cannot be decided in less than Ω(D) rounds in graphs of diameter D,
as the two local sentences may be satisfied by far away nodes in the network. For instance, the
mere problem “there exist at least two nodes of degree 3” requires Ω(D) rounds to be checked in
CONGEST, even in trees. On the other hand, FO problems expressed as a unique local sentence may
or may not be decidable in polylog(n) rounds. For instance, deciding3 whether the graph does not
contain a given tree T as a subgraph (i.e., deciding T -freeness) can be done in a constant number
of rounds [25]. However, deciding C4 -freeness cannot be decided in less than Ω(e √n) rounds [20].
This gives rise to a new question, complementary to the aforementioned question by Naor and
Stockmeyer.

  Instead of asking which problems can be solved locally in all graphs, we focus on a broad
  class of problems, namely those expressible in FO, and ask for which classes of graphs all such
  problems can be solved efficiently.


       More precisely, the paper addresses the following problem.

Problem 1.1. Which graph classes G satisfy the following two conditions?

       • Every local FO property can be decided in O(polylog(n)) rounds in the CONGEST model for
         every n-node graph belonging to the class G;
   3
   In distributed decision, a positive instance, i.e., an instance satisfying the predicate, must be accepted by all
nodes, whereas a negative instance, i.e., an instance not satisfying the predicate, must be rejected by at least one
node.



                                                         2
                                          Bounded expansion


                                     Excluded topological subgraph




                 Excluded minor                                      Bounded degree


                  Bounded genus           Bounded treewidth


                     Planar               Bounded treedepth


Figure 1: Different classes of graphs, with their mutual inclusion relations. An arrow from a class
G to a class G ′ indicates that G ′ is (strictly) included in G.


   • Every FO property can be decided in O(D + polylog(n)) rounds in the CONGEST model for
     every n-node graph of diameter D belonging to the class G.
    For instance, do the above two conditions hold for the class of planar graphs? Or for random
graphs (with some statistical guarantees)? Or for graphs with constant maximum degree ∆?
Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez [68] partially addressed this question in the more general setting of
graph classes with bounded expansion, as part of the development of their sparsity theory [66, 67].
Their findings have important applications to the subgraph isomorphism problem.

Deciding Subgraph Isomorphism in Graphs of Bounded Expansion. Graph classes with
bounded expansion form a rich graph family (see Figure 1). For instance, the class of planar graphs,
the class of graphs with bounded genus, the class of graphs of constant maximum degree ∆, and
the class of minor-free graphs and topologically minor-free graphs are all of bounded expansion, as
well as sparse Erdős–Rényi graphs (a.a.s.). Moreover, [17] demonstrated that many network models
(e.g., stochastic block models) exhibit bounded expansion for some ranges of parameters, and these
findings are even supported with empirical measurements on a corpus of real-world networks. All
these points make graph classes of bounded expansion quite attractive from both conceptual and
practical perspectives.
    In particular, the study of graphs with bounded expansion has already driven major advances
in model checking [21], parameterized complexity [66], kernelization [19, 23] and approximation
algorithms [51]. In the context of distributed computing, the subgraph isomorphism can be effi-
ciently solved in graphs of bounded expansion. Specifically, the proposition below states that, for
any fixed connected graph H (e.g., a triangle C3 ), H-freeness can be decided in O(log n) rounds in
any n-node graph G picked in a class of graphs with bounded expansion. That is, if G contains H
as a subgraph, at least one node rejects, otherwise all nodes accept.
Proposition 1.2 (Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez [68]). For every graph class G of bounded expan-
sion, and for every connected graph H, there exists a distributed algorithm that, for every n-node
graph G ∈ G, decides whether G does not contain H as a subgraph in O(log n) rounds in CONGEST.

                                                   3
    Actually, the algorithm in [68] does more than just deciding H-freeness. It actually marks all
nodes of the input graph G belonging to an isomorphic copy of H (these nodes are the ones that
reject whenever G is not H-free). Note that it is known [8, 20] that, for some H (e.g., H = C2k+1
for k > 1), deciding H-freeness requires Ω(n)
                                         e    rounds in arbitrary graphs. Instead, for all graphs H,
H-freeness can be decided in just O(log n) rounds in graphs of bounded expansion, and thus in
particular in planar graphs.

Intuition for Planar Graphs. The algorithm of Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez for subgraph
isomorphism [68] is important for our work, so we devote some space to highlight their approach.
Their algorithm works roughly as follows. We provide the intuition for the case of planar graphs.
It is known [67] that there exists a function f : N → N such that, for every integer k ≥ 1, every
planar graph G can be properly colored with f (k) colors so that, for every set S of at most k
colors, the subgraph of G induced by the nodes colored with a color in S has treedepth at most |S|.
Intuitively, treedepth measures how far a graph is from being a forest of bounded depth. (More
formally, a graph has treedepth d if there exists a rooted forest F on the same set of vertices as the
graph, in which all trees have depth at most d, such that every edge of G is between a node and one
of its ancestors in F .) Graphs of bounded treedepth are therefore appealing from an algorithmic
perspective. As a side remark, the existence of such a function f leading to colored subgraphs of
bounded treedepth characterizes the graph classes of bounded expansion, but we focus on planar
graphs here for concreteness.
     Let us fix k = |V (H)|, i.e., k is the number of nodes of H. By coloring the input graph G with
f (k) colors, there must exist a set S of k colors such that, if H is contained in G as a subgraph,
then at least one copy of H appears in the subgraph G[S], where G[S] denotes the subgraph of
G induced by the nodes with colors in S. Without going into details, since G[S] has bounded
treedepth, deciding H-freeness in G[S] can actually be done in O(1) rounds [31]. It is therefore
sufficient to test all choices of k colors among the f (k) colors of the palette, and for a node to reject
if it belongs to an isomorphic copy of H for one of these f (k)
                                                                
                                                              k   choices. The main contribution in [68]
is in fact the design of a distributed algorithm for CONGEST that, given any positive integer k,
computes an appropriate g(k)-coloring of any n-node planar graph G in O(log n) rounds, for some
function g : N → N. In fact, the algorithm works not only for planar graphs, but also for any graph
class G of expansion f : N → N. For a given k, the number of colors g(k) used by the algorithm
may be larger than f (k), but the crucial point is that the subgraph induced by any set of k colors
among the g(k) colors has bounded treedepth.

Beyond Subgraph Isomorphism. At this point, it is worth noticing that H-freeness for a
connected graph H is expressible by an FO formula of a very specific form: it is merely the negation
of an existential formula; see, e.g., Eq. (1). Therefore, checking whether such a formula holds boils
down to searching for k = |V (H)| nodes satisfying the adjacency conditions specified by H. Since
these k nodes must appear in one of the f (k)
                                                    
                                                 k    subgraphs G[S] of bounded treedepth, this is (to
some extent) straightforward. However, the situation becomes immediately more challenging once
universal quantifiers are introduced. For instance, consider checking the existence of twins in planar
graphs, that is, the existence of two nodes v and v ′ with the same neighborhood, i.e., satisfying
NG (v) ∖ {v ′ } = NG (v ′ ) ∖ {v}. The existence of twin nodes can be written as (assuming all variables




                                                    4
refer to distinct vertices):
                                                                                
                    ∃x ∃y ∀z       adj(x, z) ∧ adj(y, z) ∨ ¬adj(x, z) ∧ ¬adj(y, z) .

The formula above has only three variables, as is the case for Eq. (1). However, here the variable z is
universally quantified, whereas all variables in Eq. (1) are existentially quantified. As  a consequence,
                                                                                    f (3)
it is no longer true that it suffices to search for three nodes in each of the 3 subgraphs G[S]
of bounded treedepth in order to determine whether there are twin nodes in a planar graph G.
Indeed, two twins may each have up to Ω(n) neighbors, which may not appear together in any
subgraph of G induced by a constant number of colors.
     Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez [68] therefore posed a broader and more challenging question,
later reiterated by Pilipczuk, Siebertz, and Toruńczyk [73], and by Fomin, Fraigniaud, Montealegre,
Rapaport, and Todinca [31]. Recall that an FO formula φ(x) is local if the satisfaction of φ(x)
depends only on the r-neighborhood of its free variable x, for some fixed r. For example, in graphs,
the formula “node x has a twin” is local. Another example of a local formula φ(x) is the following,
for fixed positive integers d and k: “the distance-d neighborhood of x in G has a dominating set of
size at most k”. The question in [68] can be formulated as follows:
Question 1.3 (Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez [68]). Is there, for every local first-order (FO)
formula φ(x) and for every graph class G of bounded expansion, a distributed algorithm that, for
every n-node graph G ∈ G, marks all vertices v ∈ V (G) such that G |= φ(v) in O(log n) rounds in
the CONGEST model?
    Note that a positive answer to this question implies that all graph classes of bounded expansion
satisfy the first item of Problem 1.1.

1.2     Our Results
Our first main result resolves Question 1.3.
Theorem 1.4. For every local FO formula φ(x) on graphs, and for every class of graphs G of
bounded expansion, there exists a deterministic algorithm that, for every n-node network G ∈ G,
marks all vertices v of G satisfying G |= φ(v), in O(log n) rounds in the CONGEST model.
   In fact, the result above also holds for FO formulas on labeled graphs, i.e., graphs in which every
node is provided with labels drawn from a finite set. In other words, formulas may also include
unary predicates on node labels (see Theorem 4.1 for the formal statement). Before summarizing
the techniques used to prove Theorem 1.4, it is worth mentioning that we extend this result in
several directions.

1.2.1    Extension 1: Deciding FO formulas
Our second result concern general FO formulas, for which the dependence on the diameter D is
unavoidable. Again, the result below holds for labeled graphs too. For the sake of clarity, we state
it here for unlabeled graphs only (see Theorem 5.1 for the more general statement).
Theorem 1.5. For every FO formula φ on graphs, and for every class of graphs G of bounded
expansion, there exists a distributed algorithm that, for every n-node network G ∈ G of diameter D,
decides whether G |= φ in O(D + log n) rounds under the CONGEST model.

                                                     5
    Note that bounded degeneracy does not suffice to establish the same result as above4 . Indeed,
                                                                           √
we show that the simple FO formula expressing C6 -freeness requires Ω̃( n) rounds to be checked
in CONGEST, even in graphs of degeneracy 2 and constant diameter (see Theorem 8.4). Moreover,
our result is optimal with respect to the class of formulas, in the sense that it cannot be extended
to, e.g., MSO. In particular, we show that non-3-colorability requires Ω̃(n) rounds to be checked in
bounded-degree graphs with logarithmic diameter (see Theorem 8.2).

Take Away Message. Theorems 1.4 and 1.5 state that there are large classes of graphs satisfying
the two conditions of Problem 1.1, namely, the graph classes with bounded expansion.

  In the CONGEST model, for every graph class G of bounded expansion,

        • every local FO property can be decided in O(log n) rounds, and

        • every FO property can be decided in O(D + log n) rounds.

While the tight connections between problems expressible in FO logic and graph classes of bounded
expansion in the context of sequential model checking are well established and well understood (see
Section 1.4), prior to our work this was not the case for distributed computing. In the latter setting,
our results demonstrate that:

   1. Locality of FO formulas implies locality of distributed decision, within just O(log n) rounds;

   2. Gaifman’s locality theorem for FO formulas implies only a small O(log n)-round overhead
      beyond the unavoidable round complexity D.

Moreover, our contribution goes even beyond distributed decision, as detailed next.

1.2.2      Extension 2: Counting, Optimization, and Certification
Counting Solutions. We consider the mere problem of counting solutions of FO formulas with
free variables. We actually consider two forms of counting:

      • Local counting: Given a local formula φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) with k ≥ 1 free variables (e.g., adj(x1 , x2 )∧
        adj(x2 , x3 ) ∧ adj(x3 , x1 ), i.e., x1 , x2 , x3 form a triangle), each node v of the considered graph
        G outputs a (possibly negative) integer        P ν(v) satisfying that the number of tuples v1 , . . . , vk
        for which G |= φ(v1 , . . . , vk ) equals v∈V ν(v).

      • Global counting: Given a general formula φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) with k ≥ 1 free variables, all nodes
        output a same value equal to the number of tuples v1 , . . . , vk for which G |= φ(v1 , . . . , vk ).

The next theorem extends Theorems 1.4 and 1.5 to local and global counting. Again, the results
below also hold for labeled graphs (cf. Theorem 6.1).

Theorem 1.6. For every FO formula φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) on graphs with k ≥ 1 free variables x1 , . . . , xk ,
and for every class of graphs G of bounded expansion:
  4
    Any class of graphs with bounded expansion has bounded degeneracy, but the reciprocal does not hold. For
instance, the class of cliques with all edges subdivided once has degeneracy 2, but is not of bounded expansion.



                                                         6
   • There exists a distributed algorithm that, for every n-node network G ∈ G of diameter D,
     performs global counting in O(D + log n) rounds in CONGEST;

   • If the formula φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) is local, then there exists a distributed algorithm that performs
     local counting in O(log n) rounds in CONGEST.

    Note that, in contrast to our Theorem 1.6, the best known algorithm for (locally) counting
triangles in general graphs takes Õ(n1/3 ) rounds [10].

Optimization Problems. Some optimization problems can also be expressed as finding optimal
solutions for FO formulas with free variables, over weighted graphs, e.g., finding a maximum-
weight triangle. (If no triangles exist in the graph, then all nodes reject.) Note that, as usual in
the literature on CONGEST [70], the weights assigned to the nodes or edges are assumed to be
polynomial in the network size so that any weight can be transmitted between neighbors in a single
round of communication. Our next theorem extends Theorem 1.5 to weighted problems. For the
version of labeled graphs, see Theorem 6.2.

Theorem 1.7. For every FO formula φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) on graphs with k ≥ 1 free variables x1 , . . . , xk ,
and for every class of graphs G of bounded expansion, there exists a distributed algorithm that,
for every n-node network G = (V, E) ∈ G of diameter D, and every weight function ω : V → N,
computes a k-tuple of vertices (v1 , . . . , vk ) such that
                                                           k
                                                           X
                           G |= φ(v1 , . . . , vk ), and         ω(vi ) is maximum,
                                                           i=1

in O(D + log n) rounds under the CONGEST model. (The same holds if replacing maximum by
minimum.) If no tuples (v1 , . . . , vk ) exist such that G |= φ(v1 , . . . , vk ), then all nodes reject.

   Theorem 1.7 allows to find, for example, a monochromatic triangle of minimum weight, or a
multi-colored k-independent set of maximum weight, in a class G of c-colored graphs of bounded
expansion.

Distributed Certification. Last but not least, our results extend to distributed certification.
Roughly, a distributed certification scheme [44, 56] for a graph property φ is a pair prover-verifier.
The prover is a centralized, computationally unlimited oracle that assigns certificates to the nodes.
The verifier is a 1-round distributed algorithm whose role is to check whether the certificates
assigned to the nodes form a proof that the graph satisfies the property. A distributed certification
scheme is correct if it satisfies:

Completeness: if G |= φ, then the prover can assign certificates such that the verifier accepts at
   all nodes;

Soundness: if G ̸|= φ, then, no matter the certificates assigned to the nodes, the verifier rejects
    in at least one node.

    The main complexity measure is the size of the certificates assigned by the prover on legal
instances. In recent years, a vibrant and rapidly evolving line of research has emerged around algo-
rithmic meta-theorems for distributed certification. It began with the seminal result by Bousquet,

                                                       7
Feuilloley and Pierron [7] showing that any MSO property can be certified with O(log n)-bit certifi-
cates on graphs of bounded treedepth. This was then extended in [33] to bounded treewidth graphs,
where all MSO properties admit O(log2 n)-bit certificates. Further extensions covered dense graph
classes of bounded clique-width for MSO1 properties [32]. More recently, Baterisna and Chang [2]
achieved O(log n)-bit certificates on graphs of bounded pathwidth for MSO2 properties, and Cook,
Kim and Masařı́k [11] proved that on graphs of bounded treewidth, every MSO2 property admits
O(log n)-bit certification.
    Our work contributes to this active line of research by significantly broadening its scope. We
show that every first-order (FO) property can be certified with O(log n)-bit certificates on all graphs
of bounded expansion. As in the previous theorems, the theorem below extends to labeled graphs
(cf. Theorem 7.1).
Theorem 1.8. For every FO formula φ on graphs, and for every class of graphs G of bounded
expansion, there exists a distributed certification scheme that, for every n-node network G ∈ G,
certifies G |= φ using certificates on O(log n) bits.
    Note that, with O(log n)-bit certificates, the verifier can be implemented in a single round of
communication in the CONGEST model, as desired. Note also that our certification scheme is
actually a proof-labeling scheme [56], which is a more demanding form of distributed certification
than, e.g., locally checkable proofs [44]. As a direct consequence of Theorem 1.8, certifying C4 -
freeness can be done with O(log n)-bit certificates in graphs of bounded expansion. In contrast,
                                                    √
certifying C4 -freeness requires certificates on Ω̃( n) bits in general graphs, using the reduction
from [20]. More generally, [27] shows that every MSO formula can be certified with O(log n)-
bit certificates in graphs of bounded treedepth. Theorem 1.8 extends this result. Indeed, while
Theorem 1.8 is for FO formulas, and the result of [27] is for MSO, both logics have identical
expressive power on graphs of bounded treedepth. Last but not least, Theorem 1.8 is the best that
can be achieved. Indeed, we show that it does not extend to MSO, as certifying non-3-colorability
                            √
requires certificates of Ω̃( n) bits in planar graphs (see Theorem 8.3), and even certificates of Θ̃(n)
bits in bounded degree graphs (see Theorem 8.2).

Remark. The open problem by Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez was actually stated for the
BROADCAST CONGEST model, i.e., a weaker version of the CONGEST model in which, at ev-
ery round, each node v must send the same O(log n)-bit message to all its neighbors (see, e.g.,
[20, 55]). However, (1) the problem is not necessarily easier to solve in the general version of
the CONGEST model, and (2) we solve it anyway by the affirmative using an algorithm designed
for the BROADCAST CONGEST model, and the complexity of our algorithm is expressed under
the latter. For the sake of simplifying the notations, we simply refer to CONGEST in the state-
ments of our theorems, but all our upper bound results (except Theorem 1.7) hold under the
BROADCAST CONGEST model too5 .

1.3    Our Techniques
In this subsection, we provide a general overview of our techniques, postponing a more detailed
description to Section 2. In a nutshell, our technical contributions cover several aspect of distributed
computing and logic:
   5
    The main reason why Theorem 6.2 does not hold in BROADCAST CONGEST is that our algorithm involves an
information dissemination phase going downward a tree, in which different messages are sent to different children.


                                                        8
   • Distributed implementation of the quantifier-elimination method.

   • A new “locality-preserving technique” for quantifier-elimination.

   • A new “controlled quantifier-elimination technique” that enables extending quantifier-
     elimination to both local and global counting, and solving these problems in a distributed
     manner.

   Let us first clarify why the approach by Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez [68] for marking all
nodes v satisfying G |= φ(v) fails beyond the case of local and existential FO formula, and how we
address the challenge of going further than this specific type of formulas. Given a local existential
FO formula
                                   φ = ∃x1 . . . ∃xp ψ(x1 , . . . , xp ),
where ψ is quantifier-free, the fact that the input graph G belongs to a graph class G of expansion
f : N → N can be exploited somehow “directly” for checking whether G |= φ. Indeed, this checking
is achieved by:

   1. Computing a coloring c : V (G) → {1, . . . , f (p)} satisfying that, for every set U ⊆ {1, . . . , f (p)}
      of p colors, the subgraph G[U ] induced by the nodes of G colored with colors in U has
      treedepth p (such a coloring can be computed in O(log n) rounds in CONGEST [68]).

   2. Observing that G |= φ if and only if there exists such a set U such that G[U ] |= φ, it is
      sufficient to test all sets U ⊆ {1, . . . , f (p)} of cardinality p, and, for each of them, to check
      whether G[U ] |= φ. The latter can be performed in O(1) rounds as G[U ] has bounded
      treedepth [31].

This approach works but under two conditions only. First, the formula φ must be local. Second, it
must be existential. Instead, in this paper, we address the general case of deciding whether G |= φ
where φ is general, and in particular not necessarily local. Moreover, for local formulas, we address
the case of marking all nodes v satisfying G |= φ(v) for general local formulas, not necessarily
existential. To do so, our first contribution is a distributed algorithm for quantifier-elimination,
which is challenging as it must run under the CONGEST model, in which only adjacent nodes
can exchange messages, and where the amount of information two adjacent nodes can exchange is
limited.

Distributed quantifier-elimination. The goal is to transform φ into an equivalent quantifier-
free formula φ.
              b That is, φb is quantifier-free, and it satisfies G |= φ if and only if G
                                                                                       “ |= φ
                                                                                            b where G
                                                                                                    “ is the
same graph as G but with nodes labeled with labels taken from a finite set. One first contribution
of this paper is to prove that quantifier elimination can be performed in O(D) rounds in graphs
of bounded expansion and diameter D, using the framework developed in [73] for parameterized
circuit complexity. Computing φ   b can be done by every node without communication. The challenge
is to assign the new labels to the nodes. We show that this is doable in O(D) rounds in CONGEST.
    In essence, the reassignment of labels is performed by going from graphs of bounded expansion
to graphs of bounded treedepth (thanks to the coloring c : V (G) → {1, . . . , f (p)} where p is the
number of variables of φ), then from graphs of bounded treedepth to so-called skeletons (i.e.,
collections of forests), and then from skeletons to rooted trees of bounded depth. One quantifier


                                                      9
can be eliminated at this level, thanks to assigning new labels to each node. Handling the next
quantifier requires to return back to the level of graphs with bounded treedepth. This back-and-
forth process must be executed a constant number of times, for eliminating each quantifier one
by one. The main difficulty here is to execute this protocol, which proceeds at different levels of
abstraction, while insuring that all communications occur between neighbors in the graphs, and
that the exchanged messages are of limited size. The exact number of executions depends on the
formula φ only, and each execution is performed in O(D) rounds in graphs of diameter D.
    Overall, our distributed quantifier-elimination algorithm consumes O(D +log n) rounds in total,
where O(log n) rounds are used for coloring the graphs with f (p) colors, and O(D) rounds are
consumed for eliminating the quantifiers, and eventually evaluating the formula on the resulting
labeled graph.

Local FO formulas. For local FO formula φ(x) with one free variable, marking all nodes v
of the (possibly labeled) graph satisfying the formula, i.e., for which G |= φ(v) holds, is also
performed via quantifier elimination. However, quantifier elimination faces an obstacle when it
comes to eliminating universal quantifiers in subformulas of the form ∀y ψ(x, y, z1 , . . . , zq ). A basic
example is marking all nodes having a twin. Indeed, quantifier elimination proceeds in a standard
way by rewriting the formula using only existential quantifiers, and negations. E.g., the formula is
rewritten as ¬∃y ¬ψ(x, y, z1 , . . . , zq ). As a result, locality is lost. For instance,
                                                                              
                                Twin(x) = ∃y ∀z adj(x, z) ⇔ adj(y, z)

can be rewritten as Twin(x) = ∃y ¬NoTwins(x, y), with
                                                                                   
              NoTwins(x, y) = ∃z (adj(x, z) ∧ ¬adj(y, z)) ∨ (¬adj(x, z) ∧ adj(y, z)) .

The formula NoTwins(x, y) is however not local around x, even with x fixed, as there may exist
y and z at arbitrarily large distance from x such that NoTwins(x, y) holds. As a consequence,
performing quantifier elimination blindly incurs an overhead of Ω(D) rounds. This is not an issue
for general formulas, for which a round-complexity Ω(D) cannot be overcame, but this is a severe
problem for local formulas.
    The main challenge here is to show how to perform quantifier-elimination in a distributed man-
ner while preserving locality. To prevent dependencies between distant vertices introduced during
quantifier elimination, we adopt a redundant relativization of quantifiers. Instead of ranging over
the entire structure, each quantified variable is evaluated only within a bounded region. This
requires to generalize locality with respect to more than one variable, and to revisit the entire
quantifier elimination process. We show that our local quantifier-elimination process can be imple-
mented in O(log n) rounds in CONGEST, which allows us to eventually solve the open problem by
Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez (cf. Question 1.3).

Controlled quantifier-elimination for counting. Quantifier elimination is not sufficient in
itself, even in its local form, when it comes to solving counting problems. Let us explain why. In
the context of counting, quantifier elimination is applied to a formula φ(x) that involves several free
variables, x = (x1 , . . . , xk ), k ≥ 1. This produces an equivalent quantifier-free formula φ(x)
                                                                                              b    defined
over a skeleton structure (i.e., a collection of rooted forests) that captures all bounded–distance
relations among the vertices of x. Indeed, quantifier-elimination actually occurs at the level of


                                                    10
the skeleton. However, counting operates at the level of labeled graphs. Therefore, φ             b must be
translated back to the world of graphs, which requires to overcome many obstacles. In particular,
formulas in skeletons use predicates such as lcai (x, y), expressing “the common ancestor of x and y
is at depth i” (of some tree in a forest). Reformulating such predicates with adjacency and equality
predicates can be done thanks to an existential formula expressing, e.g., “there exist w1 , . . . , wq
forming a path between x and y such that one of the w’s is at depth i”. The issue is that when
one performs counting in the resulting formula ∃w ψ(x, w), all the variables are involved, including
the newly introduced variable w = (w1 , . . . , wq ). If these w1 , . . . , wq were unique, we would be fine,
but this is not necessarily the case. Controlling uniqueness is one of the challenges that we had to
address.
    For limiting the effect of new variables introduced in the process of quantifier-elimination, we
design a new mechanism referred to as controlled quantifier-elimination. The main idea is to use
the uniqueness of a node’s parent in each tree of the skeleton to enforce the uniqueness of each wi
(given fixed x1 , . . . , xk ). To that end, we encode the structure of the skeleton into additional labels
for each node of the graph. Then, we rewrite our existential formula ∃w ψ(x, w) to make sure that
each wi is the parent of some wj , j ̸= i, or of one of the xj s in some tree of the skeleton. This
guarantees that, for each tuple x satisfying ∃w ψ(x, w), there exists a unique tuple w such that
ψ(x, w) holds.
    Note that, even for quantifier-free formulas, another important issue must be addressed. When
testing all subset U of colors, i.e., all subgraphs G[U ] of bounded treedepth, the same tuple v may
appear in several subsets U as it may not be the case that the vertices v1 , . . . , vk instantiating the
variables x1 , . . . , xk are colored with distinct colors. This causes over counting. For avoiding over
counting, we use the inclusion–exclusion principle over the family of color sets. Finally, since each
subgraph G[U ] has bounded treedepth, the existential formula can be evaluated by performing
dynamic programming over a rooted forest decomposition of bounded depth, which takes O(1)
rounds [31].

Optimization and Certification. For optimization problems, we follow the same guideline as
the one sketched above, where every vertex v has a weight w(v) provided as input. Dynamic
programming can be used to compute the optimal value for every subset U of colors, and the global
optimum is the maximum (or minimum) over all sets U . For each U , the maximum (or minimum)
value can be computed by aggregating the values of all connected components (as G[U ] may not
be connected) in O(D) rounds thanks to a breadth-first search (BFS) tree.
    For certification we let the prover provide each vertex with the transcript of the execution of
quantifier elimination as certificate. This includes, among other parameters, colors, forest member-
ship, labels, etc. The verifier checks consistency of the transcript using O(log n)-bit certificates for
bounded-treedepth graphs [7], and it verifies any residual global aggregation along a certified BFS
tree [56].

1.4    Related Work
The results of our paper lie at the intersection of two research directions. The first is the study
of distributed computing and distributed certification schemes on sparse networks, such as planar
graphs, or graphs excluding a fixed minor, for fundamental graph optimization problems. The
second is the development of meta-theorems for sparse graph classes in centralized computation.


                                                     11
1.4.1   Distributed Computing on Sparse Networks
The class of graphs with bounded expansion was introduced by Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez as
part of the sparsity theory they developed [67]. One of the major research areas in distributed com-
puting concerns the study of classical combinatorial problems on sparse networks, including planar
graphs, bounded-degree graphs, graphs of bounded treewidth, and graphs excluding a fixed minor.
In this context, a central goal is to design distributed algorithms that exploit structural sparsity to
achieve improved efficiency—compared to general networks—particularly in terms of the number
of communication rounds. Typical problems studied in this context include coloring, matching,
dominating sets, cuts, spanning trees, and network decompositions. Research directions focus on
understanding how sparsity affects the complexity of these problems in standard distributed models
such as LOCAL and CONGEST, and on designing algorithms with optimal or near-optimal round
complexity. This line of work often builds on structural properties of sparse networks, revealing
deep and fruitful connections between structural graph theory and distributed computation.
    Examples of work in this direction include distributed algorithms for maximal matchings, max-
imal independent sets (MIS) and graph colorings in bounded-degree graphs [69]; depth-first search
(DFS) in planar graphs [42]; minimum spanning tree (MST) and min-cut in planar, bounded genus,
and H-minor-free graphs [38, 39, 40, 48, 49, 50]; minimum dominating set on planar and H-minor-
free graphs [1, 4, 13, 14, 61], and MIS for graphs excluding a fixed minor [9].
    The Õ(D) round complexity we achieved in Theorem 1.5, is considered a “gold standard” for
algorithms on sparse graphs in the CONGEST model. This complexity has been obtained, for
instance, for MST on planar graphs and, more generally, on H-minor-free graphs [38, 39, 40, 48,
49, 50]. Algorithms with Õ(D) complexity in the CONGEST model have also been developed for
bounded-treewidth graphs for a variety of problems, including matching, directed single-source
shortest paths, bipartite unweighted maximum matching, and girth [54].
    We are not aware of any meta-theorem in the CONGEST model that combines both logical and
combinatorial constraints, with one exception. The paper [31] shows that every MSO formula can
be decided in a constant number of rounds on graphs of bounded treedepth. The results of [31] are
incomparable to Theorems 1.4 and 1.5. Indeed, Theorems 1.4 and 1.5 apply to graph classes that
are significantly more general than graphs of bounded treedepth, whereas the number of rounds in
the algorithm of [31] is completely independent of the number of vertices. We incorporate some of
the methods developed in [31] into our work.
    Regarding distributed algorithms on graphs of bounded expansion, the foundational work in
this area is due to Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez [68]. In the CONGEST model, they presented a
distributed algorithm that computes a low-treedepth decomposition of graphs of bounded expansion
in O(log n) rounds. We use this construction as a subroutine in our algorithms. In the same paper,
Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez also used this decomposition to design an algorithm for checking
whether a graph of bounded expansion contains a given connected subgraph H of constant size,
also in O(log n) rounds. Theorem 1.4 significantly extends this result.
    Approximation algorithms for the minimum dominating set problem on graphs of bounded
expansion in the LOCAL model were developed in [1, 52, 58]. In [76], Siebertz and Vigny study the
complexity of the model-checking problem for first-order logic on graphs of bounded expansion, in
the CONGESTED CLIQUE model.
    Distributed certification is a very active area of research; see [28] for a survey. Several meta-
theorems are known in this setting. A significant result in the field was achieved in [27], which
proved that any MSO property can be locally certified on graphs of bounded treedepth using only


                                                  12
a logarithmic number of bits per node, a result widely regarded as a gold standard in certification.
This theorem has numerous implications; for more details we refer to [27]. In particular, the FO
property of C4 -freeness and the MSO property of non-3-colorability, which in general graphs require
polynomial-size certificates, can be certified using just O(log n) bits per node on bounded treedepth
graphs. The result by Bousquet et al. has since been extended to broader graph classes, including
graphs excluding a small minor [7], graphs of bounded treewidth [2, 11, 33], and graphs of bounded
cliquewidth [32].

1.4.2    Centralized Meta-Theorems
Meta-theorems, according to Grohe and Kreutzer [46], are results stating that certain model-
checking problems for formulas of a given logic are tractable (in some sense) on specific classes
of graphs. One of the most celebrated examples of a meta-theorem is Courcelle’s theorem, which
asserts that graph properties definable in MSO are decidable in linear time on graphs of bounded
treewidth [12]. There is a long line of meta-theorems for FO logic on sparse graph classes in the
centralized model of computation. The starting point is Seese’s theorem [75], which establishes
the linear-time decidability of FO properties on graphs of bounded degree. Fricke and Grohe
[34] presented linear-time algorithms for planar graphs and all apex-minor-free graph classes, as
well as O(n1+ε ) algorithms for graphs of bounded local treewidth. Flum and Grohe [30] proved
that deciding FO properties is fixed-parameter tractable on graph classes with excluded minors.
The next step, to classes of graphs locally excluding a minor was achieved by Dawar, Grohe, and
Kreutzer [16].
    The sparsity theory of [67] opened new horizons for model checking on sparse graphs. In [21] it
was proved that FO properties can be decided in linear time on graph classes of bounded expansion.
Further extensions of these results are known for nowhere-dense graphs [47] and graphs of bounded
twinwidth [5]. See [57] and [45] for surveys.
    From a technical perspective, the most important aspect for our work is the quantifier elimina-
tion procedure introduced in [21] and [46], as well as in [73]. Similar to these works, we apply the
idea of modifying the structure by adding new unary relations and functions without changing the
Gaifman graph.


2     High Level Description of the Proofs
Let us first focus on sketching the proof of Theorem 1.4.

2.1     Deciding Local FO Formulas Locally
We first recall structural tools that allow us to work with bounded-expansion graphs in the dis-
tributed setting. These lead naturally to low-treedepth colorings, which will be the foundation for
the construction of skeletons and for the distributed quantifier-elimination method developed later.

Low-treedepth colorings. We recall the notion of low-treedepth colorings introduced by Nešetřil
and Ossona de Mendez. Given a graph G and an integer p ∈ N, a proper coloring c : V (G) → N is a
p-treedepth coloring if, for every set U ⊆ N with |U | ≤ p, the subgraph of G induced by the vertices
{u ∈ V (G) : c(u) ∈ U } has tree-depth at most |U |. The minimum number of colors required
for such a coloring is denoted by χp (G). A graph class G has bounded expansion if there exists a

                                                 13
function f : N → N such that, for every G ∈ G and every p ∈ N, χp (G) ≤ f (p), i.e., every G ∈ G
admits a p-treedepth coloring using at most f (p) colors.
   For the rest of the section, let us fix a graph class G of expansion bounded by f : N → N. We
denote by Col(p) the family of sets U ⊂ [1, f (p)] with cardinality at most p.

Subgraph detection via treedepth colorings. Let H be a connected graph on p vertices, and
let us first assume we are given a p-treedepth coloring of a graph G. To detect whether G contains
H as a subgraph, we can then check, for every U ∈ Col(p), whether H appears in G[U ], i.e., in
the subgraph of G induced by the nodes with colors in U . If G contains a copy of H, then there
must exist a color set U such that G[U ] contains H. Moreover, as H is connected, H lies in a
single component of G[U ]. Since G[U ] has bounded treedepth, this check can be done efficiently in
the CONGEST model [31]. Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez [68] showed that, for every bounded-
expansion class G with expansion function f , there is a CONGEST algorithm that computes a
p-treedepth coloring with f (p) colors, in O(log n) rounds. It follows that there exists a CONGEST
algorithm that marks every vertex belonging to a copy of H in G, in O(log n) rounds [68].
    The reasoning above extends to every property expressible by an existential first-order formula
(∃FO) that is local, i.e., a formula of the form
                                 φ(x) = ∃y1 . . . ∃yk ψ(x, y1 , . . . , yk ),
where (1) ψ is quantifier-free with k+1 free variables, and (2) the satisfiability of φ(u) depends
only on the structure of a ball of constant radius around vertex u in the graph. As in subgraph
detection, a solution is determined by k+1 vertices, and thus k+1 colors. Given a (k+1)-treedepth
coloring, it suffices to search within connected subgraphs of bounded treedepth. It is known [31]
that any FO property can be decided in O(1) rounds on graphs of bounded treedepth in CONGEST.
Therefore, as for subgraph detection, combining [68] and [31] yields an O(log n)-round CONGEST
algorithm for any local existential FO property.

Beyond existential FO properties. For general local FO formulas, with both existential and
universal quantifiers, the situation is more intricate. Indeed, the solution may no longer be deter-
mined by a fixed set of vertices, and thus restricting the search to a bounded-treedepth subgraph
may not be sufficient. Let us revisit the aforementioned twin problem, with free variable x, asking
whether there is a node y with exactly the same neighborhood as x. That is, let us consider the
formula                                                               
                               Twin(x) = ∃y ∀z adj(x, z) ⇔ adj(y, z) ,
where it is assumed that x, y, and z refer to different vertices (for the sake of clarifying the presen-
tation, we omit these constraints in the definition of Twin(x)). Since the neighborhood of a vertex
may have Ω(n) nodes, not all neighbors z of x and y may lie in a region of bounded treedepth
resulting from a low-treedepth coloring. Twin is however local as it suffices to inspect the ball of
radius at most 3 around vertex u to decide Twin(u). Yet, the logical structure of Twin, which
includes the variable z quantified by a universal quantifier, prevents a direct application of the
technique applicable to local existential FO formula. To proceed further, let us rewrite Twin using
De Morgan’s laws:
                                                           
              Twin(u) = ∃v ¬∃w ¬ adj(u, w) ⇔ adj(v, w)
                                                                                      
                       = ∃v ¬∃w adj(u, w) ∧ ¬adj(v, w) ∨ ¬adj(u, w) ∧ adj(v, w) .


                                                     14
Note that the negation between the first and second quantifier still prevents us from using the
reasoning for local ∃FO. Let us thus focus on the inner existential part of Twin(u), denoted by
                                                                                 
            NoTwins(u, v) = ∃w adj(u, w) ∧ ¬adj(v, w) ∨ ¬adj(u, w) ∧ adj(v, w) .

The trick is to apply quantifier elimination, that is, removing the existential quantifier from
NoTwins, as explained hereafter.

Quantifier elimination. From this point on, we consider labeled graphs (G, ℓ), where each vertex
u carries a set of labels ℓ(u) where the labels are taken from a set Λ of constant size. We now consider
labeled graphs because quantifier-elimination induces labeling the nodes. First-order formulas over
(G, ℓ) use adjacency, equality, and unary label predicates labλ (x), which hold whenever λ ∈ ℓ(x). A
first-order formula over unlabeled graphs can thus be regarded as a particular case without unary
predicates.
     Quantifier elimination removes quantifiers while preserving equivalence within the class of struc-
tures under consideration. This technique is at the core of recent advances in algorithmic model
checking on sparse graphs [21, 46, 73]. Let φ be an existential FO formula with free variables
x1 , . . . , xk , and quantified variables y1 , . . . , yt , i.e.,

                         φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) = ∃y1 . . . ∃yt ψ(x1 , . . . , xk , y1 , . . . , yt ),

where ψ is quantifier-free. Quantifier elimination maps φ into a quantifier-free FO formula φ  b over
an enriched structure, which, in our setting, will later correspond to the so-called skeletons [73].

Skeletons. Given an integer p, which corresponds to the size of the sets U ∈ Col(p), a p-skeleton
is a collection {F1 , . . . , Fs } of labeled rooted forests, each of depth at most d, where both s and d
depend only on p. All forests share the same vertex set V , corresponding to that of the underlying
labeled graph (G, ℓ). Each vertex u ∈ V retains its set of labels ℓ(u) ⊆ Λ, while the structural
relations between vertices are captured by the following predicates:

• Label predicates labλ (x), already defined to hold whenever λ ∈ ℓ(x).

• Least-common-ancestor (lca) predicates lcaij (x, y), which hold when x and y belong to the same
  tree of the i-th forest Fi , and their least common ancestor lca(x, y) lies at depth j in Fi . The
  predicate lcai−1 (x, y) holds when x and y lie in distinct trees of Fi .

   The sets of label predicates, and lca predicates are both finite, depending only on p and |Λ|,
where Λ is the set of original labels. An FO formula over p-skeletons uses only these two kinds of
predicates. In particular, it does not use adjacency predicates. It was proved in [73] that, for any
graph class G of bounded expansion, any existential formula

                         φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) = ∃y1 . . . ∃yt ψ(x1 , . . . , xk , y1 , . . . , yt )

and any G ∈ G, there exist a quantifier-free FO formula φ         b on skeletons and a (t+k)-skeleton S(G)
                                                                                                      b
such that, for every k-tuple (v1 , . . . , vk ) of vertices of G,

                        (G, ℓ) |= φ(v1 , . . . , vk )     ⇐⇒        S(G)
                                                                    b    |= φ(v
                                                                            b 1 , . . . , vk ).


                                                            15
A central result (Lemma 5.5) in our paper further shows that, for local existential FO formulas,
the skeleton S(G)
             b    can be constructed in a distributed manner in O(log n) rounds in the CONGEST
model.
    Before performing quantifier elimination, we first define a canonical p-skeleton S(G) associated
with each graph G. The purpose of this construction is to provide a representation of G by a
bounded number of forests of bounded depth. This intermediate structure serves as a bridge be-
tween graphs of bounded expansion and trees, allowing us to apply the known quantifier-elimination
techniques that operate on tree-like structures. Once quantifiers are eliminated, we obtain a new
skeleton S(G)
          b    that captures, in a quantifier-free way, the properties expressed in the original for-
mula.

Construction of the Skeleton. For G ∈ G and p ∈ N, the p-skeleton S(G) is built as follows.
Let us fix a p-treedepth coloring c : V (G) → [f (p)] = {1, . . . , f (p)} of G. For every U ∈ Col(p), we
compute a spanning forest F U of G[U ] by performing a depth-first search (DFS) traversal in each
connected component of G[U ], starting from the node of minimum identifier in that component.
Since G[U ] has treedepth at most p, the trees of F U have depth at most d = 2p (see Proposi-
tion 4.11). The forests of S(G) are those in the set {F U : U ∈ Col(p)}. New labels are assigned as
follows.

   • For every node u, its color label c(u) is added to its new set of labels ℓ(u), that is, the color
     c(u) of node u is included in its collection of labels ℓ(u).
   • For every U ∈ Col(p), if u is at depth i ∈ [d] in F U , then the label (depth, i, U ), denoted by
     depthU
          i for short, is added to ℓ(u), that is, every vertex colored by U has its depth in F
                                                                                                     U

     included in its collection of labels.
   • F U is a collection of DFS trees. Therefore, every edge in E(G[U ]) connects a vertex to one
     of its ancestors in F U . For every such edge {u, v} with u a descendant of v, and v at depth i,
     the label (level, i, U ), abbreviated into levelU
                                                     i , is added to ℓ(u). That is, for each ancestor v
     of u that is adjacent to u in G[U ], ℓ(u) contains levelU                                   U
                                                               i , where i is the depth of v in F .

Remark. It follows from the last item that every edge of G is represented in S(G) by a label
attached to one of its endpoints. Indeed, let e = {u, v} be an edge of G, and let U ∈ Col(p) be
a color set containing the colors of both endpoints of e. Assume that u lies at depth j and v at
depth i < j in the forest F U . Then the edge e is encoded as the label levelU
                                                                             i attached to the deeper
vertex u.
   Any FO formula φ over labeled graphs can then be translated into an equivalent FO formula
φ
e over p-skeletons by rewriting adjacency and equality predicates as Boolean combinations of lca
and label predicates. For instance,
                    _       _ h                                                               
      adj(x, y) =                   labdepthU (x) ∧ labdepthU (y) ∧ lcai (x, y) ∧ lablevelU (y)
                                                i              j                          i
                   U ∈Col(p) 0≤i<j≤d
                                                                                                   i
                                       ∨ labdepthU (y) ∧ labdepthU (x) ∧ lcai (x, y) ∧ lablevelU (x) .
                                                    i              j                          i

The equality predicates can be rewritten in a similar way. Therefore, for every assignment v to the
free variables,
                                (G, ℓ) |= φ(v) ⇐⇒ S(G) |= φ(v),
                                                             e

                                                        16
That is, φ and φ e are semantically equivalent. One refers to labeled graphs while the other refers
to skeletons, i.e., φ
                    e is the syntactic rewriting of the formula φ into the language of skeletons.
We explain next how to remove quantifiers from φ    e to get the desired quantifier-free formula φ.
                                                                                                 b
Quantifier elimination is performed on skeletons.

Quantifier elimination in skeletons.                 Recall that we start from an existential formula

                          φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) = ∃y1 . . . ∃yt ψ(x1 , . . . , xk , y1 , . . . , yt ),

where ψ is quantifier-free. We have that, for every assignment v = v1 , . . . , vk and u = u1 , . . . , ut of
the variables such that (G, ℓ) |= ψ(v, u) holds, there exists U ∈ Col(p) where p = t + k such that
the colors of all ui and vj are in U . Hence, it follows from the previous discussion that

                       (G, ℓ) |= ψ(x, y) ⇐⇒ ∃U ∈ Col(p) : (G[U ], ℓ) |= ψ(x, y)
                                         ⇐⇒ ∃U ∈ Col(p) : S(F U ) |= ψeU (x, y),

where ψeU refers to nodes colored with colors in U only, and S(F U ) denotes the skeleton S(G)
restricted to F U . Thus the elimination of existential quantifiers from formulas on skeletons reduces
to the elimination of these quantifiers from formulas on forests of bounded depth.

Quantifier elimination in bounded-depth forests. We eliminate existential quantifiers one
at a time. Concretely, that is, we consider a subformula of the form

                                                 ∃y ψ(x1 , . . . , xk , y),

and we remove the quantifier for this single variable y before proceeding to the next one. The
quantifier-elimination procedure on bounded-depth forests relies on the notion of types (see Defini-
tion 4.3). For a rough definiton of what we mean by type, recall that, in forests of bounded depth,
the structural relations between vertices can be expressed using the predicates lcai (x, y) indicating
that the lowest common ancestor of x and y lies at depth i (in what follows we omit the super-
indices on the lca predicates). On a forest of depth d, a first-order formula therefore depends only
on (i) the labels that are held by each vertex, and (ii) how the vertices of the tuple x = (x1 , . . . , xk )
are positioned with respect to one another in this ancestor hierarchy. These local configurations
are captured thanks to different types. For a tuple of variables x, a type is determined by

          a label map γ : [k] → 2Λ , and an ancestry map δ : [k] × [k] → {−1, 0, . . . , d − 1}

that jointly describe which labels each variable xi carries, and at which depths its ancestors stand.
Each consistent pair (γ, δ) defines a conjunction ζ(x, y) of atomic predicates fixing both the label and
ancestral structure of the tuple. Since there are finitely many such combinations, every quantifier-
free formula over lca and label predicates can be rewritten as a finite disjunction of types. This
presentation is referred to as the basic normal form of the formula (see Lemma 4.5). To eliminate
an existential quantifier ∃y ψ(x, y), we proceed type by type. For a fixed type ζ(x, y), we identify
a variable xs closest to y, and we distinguish three cases.

   • If y is an ancestor of xs at depth t, then we mark each vertex with an ancestor at depth t and
     carrying the appropriate labels by a new unary predicate good. We then replace the formula
     by the restriction of the type to x conjoined with the predicate labgood (xs ).

                                                             17
       • If y lies in the subtree of a child of xs , then we mark all nodes whose subtrees contain a
         potential witness 6 , and attach a counter with bounded values indicating how many such
         subtrees exist, reducing the existential to a finite disjunction over child patterns.

       • If y belongs to a different tree than all x, then we label as active the roots of all trees
         that contain a suitable witness, and we propagate this information across components by
         communicating along the edges of G.

In all cases, we obtain a quantifier-free formula ψ(x)
                                                  b    with a few additional labels, unary predicates,
and bounded counters.

Local vs. non-local formulas. Before going further, let us clarify how the locality of the formula
affects the running time of quantifier elimination. Recall that our algorithm runs in O(log n) rounds
for local formulas, and in O(D + log n) rounds for general ones, where D denotes the diameter of
the communication graph. The following intuition explains this difference.
    If ψ is local, then all occurrences of its variables lie within the same tree, at a bounded distance
from one another. Hence, whether a node v should receive a new label (as part of eliminating the
quantifier in ψ) can be decided by v using only local information from its own tree, whose depth is
bounded. In the distributed setting, both the computation of these new labels and the evaluation
of the resulting quantifier-free formula take place entirely within each tree, requiring only O(1)
communication rounds in the CONGEST model.
    If ψ is non-local, however, a witness for some tuple x may lie in a different tree. Then, the
label assigned to a node v after eliminating the quantifier may depend on information carried by
active roots located outside v’s component, potentially at distance Ω(D) in the original graph G.
Quantifier elimination for non-local formulas may thus require communication across components,
along edges of G, at distances up to D, leading to a total complexity of O(D + log n) rounds.

From existential to general formulas. So far, we have described how to eliminate quantifiers
from a formula of the form ∃y1 . . . ∃yk ψ(x1 , . . . , xk , y1 , . . . , yk ). To handle arbitrary FO formulas,
which may alternate existential and universal quantifiers, we follow a standard transformation:
every universal quantifier is rewritten as the negation of an existential one. This allows us to apply
the existential elimination procedure iteratively. The process can be illustrated with the search for
twins. Recall that
                               Twin(x) = ∃y ∀z (adj(x, z) ⇔ adj(y, z)).
We first rewrite the universal quantifier as a negated existential:

                                 Twin(x) = ∃y ¬∃z ¬(adj(x, z) ⇔ adj(y, z)).

We then focus on the innermost existential subformula,

                                NoTwins(x, y) = ∃z ¬(adj(x, z) ⇔ adj(y, z)).
   6
     In this context, a witness for a tuple x in a formula ∃y ψ(x, y) is simply a vertex v such that ψ(x, v) holds. That
is, v is a node whose existence makes the existential statement true. During quantifier elimination we never select this
vertex explicitly. Instead, we locally encode, through additional labels, whether such a witness exists in the relevant
part of the forest.




                                                          18
At this point, we eliminate the quantifier ∃z using the procedure described before, producing a
quantifier-free formula
                                         ⁄ y),
                                         NoTwins(x,
which, through new labels, encodes whether there exists a vertex z distinguishing x and y by
adjacency. Our elimination procedure never identifies this witness explicitly. Instead, it records
locally, via additional labels, whether such a witness exists within the neighborhood of the relevant
variable. Substituting this expression into the original one yields the formula

                                         ∃y ¬NoTwins(x,
                                             ⁄ y).

Before eliminating the next quantifier ∃y, the formula ¬NoTwins(x,
                                                             ⁄ y), which is expressed over
p-skeletons, must be translated back into the standard structure of labeled graphs. This translation
replaces each lca-predicate by an equivalent existential formula using only adjacency, equality and
label predicates (cf. Lemma 5.5). After this translation, we obtain again an existential formula
ψ ′ (x, y) over labeled graphs. Adding the outer quantifier ∃y preserves this existential form, yielding
again a formula of the type ∃y ψ ′ (x, y). We can therefore apply the same quantifier-elimination
procedure once more. The outcome of this second elimination is a quantifier-free formula with a
single free variable x, denoted by
                                               Twin(x).
                                               ’

The resulting formula is expressed as a Boolean combination of unary predicates, each corresponding
to a label on x that records whether a suitable witness y existed at a previous step.
    This iterative process, alternating quantifier elimination and negation, extends the existential
elimination method to arbitrary FO formulas. Each quantifier, regardless of its type, is ultimately
replaced by local labels and Boolean combinations of unary predicates. But, there is a big but:
                        this procedure does not necessarily preserve locality!
Additional care is thus required for ensuring that each intermediate formula remains local. This is
our second contribution, described next.

2.2   Locality-preserving quantifier elimination
Standard quantifier elimination at the core of model checking on sparse graphs [21, 46, 73] may not
preserve locality. That is, even if the input formula is local, the resulting quantifier-free formula
may refer to nodes that are arbitrarily far apart in the graph. Before illustrating this issue, let us
first formalize what we mean by locality for formulas with several free variables.

Local formulas and distance predicates. Let r ≥ 0 be an integer. A formula ψ(x, ȳ), with
ȳ = (y1 , . . . , yk ), is said to be r-local around x if the following two conditions hold:

  (i) Whenever (G, ℓ) |= ψ(x, ȳ), all variables ȳ are interpreted within the r-ball of x, that is,

                                    (G, ℓ) |= ψ(x, ȳ) =⇒ ȳ ⊆ BG (x, r),

      where BG (x, r) denotes the set of vertices at distance at most r from x in G.



                                                   19
 (ii) The truth of ψ depends only on the labeled structure inside this ball: for any two labeled
      graphs (G, ℓ) and (G′ , ℓ′ ), and vertices x ∈ V (G), x′ ∈ V (G′ ), if there exists a label-preserving
      isomorphism h : BG (x, r) → BG′ (x′ , r) with h(x) = x′ , then

                               (G, ℓ) |= ψ(x, ȳ) ⇐⇒ (G′ , ℓ′ ) |= ψ(h(x), h(ȳ)).

In formulas with several free variables, the distinguished variable x is called the reference vertex,
and locality is always defined with respect to it.
    In practice, enforcing r-locality syntactically is difficult. To make the dependence explicit, we
use distance predicates ball(y, x, r), meaning that y isVat distance at most r from x. By extension,
for a tuple of variables y, we write ball(y, x, r) for z∈y ball(z, x, r). During quantifier elimina-
tion, quantified variables are guarded by appropriate ball predicates, and these guards are kept
redundantly so that locality is preserved even under negation.

Failure of standard elimination.       The loss of locality can be seen on the Twin property:
                                                                     
                               Twin(x) = ∃y ∀z adj(x, z) ⇔ adj(y, z) ,

which can be rewritten as
                                                                                   
              NoTwins(x, y) = ∃z (adj(x, z) ∧ ¬adj(y, z)) ∨ (¬adj(x, z) ∧ adj(y, z)) ,

so that
                                   Twin(x) = ∃y ¬NoTwins(x, y).
The formula NoTwins(x, y) is not local around x: even with x fixed, there may exist y (and the
witnessing z) at arbitrarily large distance from x.

Relativizing quantifiers. To prevent dependencies between distant vertices introduced during
quantifier elimination, we adopt a redundant relativization of quantifiers. Instead of ranging over
the entire structure, each quantified variable is evaluated only within the bounded region centered
at the reference vertex, which is then translated to a tree of bounded depth. The relativization is
expressed syntactically through distance predicates.
    Formally, we define a local form for local formulas by induction on quantifier depth, as follows.
A formula φ(x, y) is in r-local form if one of the following conditions holds:

   • φ(x, y) = ψ(x, y) ∧ ball(y, x, r), where ψ is quantifier-free,

   • φ(x, y) = ∃z ψ(x, y, z), where ψ is in r-local form, or

   • φ(x, y) = ball(y, x, r) ∧ ¬∃z ball((y, z), x, r) ∧ ¬ψ(x, y, z) where ψ is in r-local form.

Note how the universal quantifier requires a particular care, as it is handled as a negated existential
quantifier. This formulation introduces negations, which do not preserve locality, as illustrated by
the Twin example. This is why we introduce redundant ball predicates that guarantee syntactically
the locality property.




                                                    20
     Given a labeled graph (G, ℓ), and an FO formula φ in local form, our locality-preserving quan-
tifier elimination procedure produces an updated labeling ℓb and a quantifier-free formula φ b such
that, (1) for every vertex v ∈ V (G),

                                  (G, ℓ) |= φ(v) ⇐⇒ (G, ℓ)
                                                        b |= φ(v),
                                                             b

and (2) every intermediate formula produced by the process remains in local form. That is we
maintain explicit ball predicates throughout the transformation. All computations and commu-
nications therefore occur within the bounded-depth tree (or r-ball) associated with the reference
vertex.
    A key result in this paper is that any local formula can be rewritten in local form. Let us run
through this transformation for the Twin formula.
                                                                                                   
Example: rewriting Twin in local form. Recall that Twin(x) = ∃y ∀z adj(x, z) ⇔ adj(y, z)
is 3-local. We start by relativizing each quantifier. This way, the locality of y and z with respect
to x is explicit:
                                             h                                      i
             Twinr (x) = ∃y ball(y, x, 3) ∧ ∀z ¬ball(z, x, 3) ∨ adj(x, z) ⇔ adj(y, z)    .

Note that the formula above is logically equivalent to Twin, i.e., Twin(x) ≡ Twinr (x). For
handling the universal quantifier ∀z, that is, rather, for handling the negated existential quantifier
¬∃z, we introduce a redundant ball(y, x, 3) predicate. This yields
                                       h                                       i
    Twin(x) ≡ ∃y ball(y, x, 3) ∧ ¬∃z ball(z, x, 3) ∧ ¬ adj(x, z) ⇔ adj(y, z)
                                       h                                                     i
              ≡ ∃y ball(y, x, 3) ∧ ¬∃z ball(y, x, 3) ∧ ball(z, x, 3) ∧ ¬ adj(x, z) ⇔ adj(y, z)
                                       h                                           i
              ≡ ∃y ball(y, x, 3) ∧ ¬∃z ball((y, z), x, 3) ∧ ¬ adj(x, z) ⇔ adj(y, z)

At this point, one more step is needed for obtaining a formula in local form, as the innermost part
of the formula, i.e., adj(x, z) ⇔ adj(y, z), still requires a ball predicate to enforce its locality. This
yields
                                    h                                                                i
Twin(x) ≡ ∃y ball(y, x, 3) ∧ ¬∃z ball((y, z), x, 3) ∧ ¬ ball((y, z), x, 3) ∧ adj(x, z) ⇔ adj(y, z)       .

This process successfully eventually produces a formula in 3-local form, as desired. In particular,
note that, wherever there is a negation, there is a corresponding ball predicate whose role is to
enforce locality not only before but also after the negation.

2.3   Model Checking, Counting, Optimization, and Certification
Model Checking General FO Predicates. For checking whether G |= φ in CONGEST, for a
given FO formula φ, and a given labeled graph G ∈ G, we use the same techniques as the ones used
to mark all nodes satisfying a given local FO formula. That is, the proof of Theorem 1.5 follows
the same guidelines as the ones used to establish Theorem 1.4. On the one hand, the approach is
simplified as one does not need to care about relativization. On the other hand, the ”non-locality”
of the formula requires checking properties that potentially occur at nodes that are far away from

                                                   21
each other in the graph (e.g., the presence of at least two nodes of degree 3). In the context of
quantifier elimination, this translates into counting the number of nodes in which unary predicates
are satisfied. This counting is merely achieved along the edges of a breadth-first search (BFS)
tree, in O(D) rounds. We show that all other operations involved in quantifier elimination can be
performed in O(log n) rounds, for a total of O(D + log n) rounds.

Counting and Optimization. Establishing Theorem 1.6, i.e., showing how to efficiently count
the number of k-tuples of vertices (v1 , . . . , vk ) such that (G, ℓ) |= φ(v1 , . . . , vk ), requires more work.
For the global counting problem, we proceed in two stages.
Stage 1: Quantifier-free formulas. As for model checking, we use the fact that there exists an integer
function g depending only on the class G such that, for any graph G ∈ G, and any constant p, G
admits a coloring with g(p) colors such that any subset of at most p colors induces a subgraph of
treedepth at most p. For p = k, each k-uple of vertices (v1 , . . . , vk ) of the labeled graph in (G, ℓ)
satisfying the formula φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) covers some set U of colors, with |U | ≤ p. Assuming given an
O(D+log n)-round algorithm counting the solutions of φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) on labeled subgraphs (G[U ], ℓ)
of treedepth at most k, we show how to count the solutions on the whole labeled graph (G, ℓ). For
any two sets of colors U1 , U2 , the set of solutions of φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) on (G[U1 ∩ U2 ], ℓ) is exactly the
intersection of the set of solutions for (G[U1 ], ℓ) and for (G[U2 ], L). This holds thanks to the fact
that φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) has no variables other than (x1 , . . . , xk ). As a consequence, by counting the
solutions on (G[U ], ℓ) for every set U of at most k colors, and then using the inclusion-exclusion
principle, we are able to count solutions of φ on (G, ℓ).
Stage 2: General formulas. In order to use the previous stage on quantifier free formulas, we
first proceed with quantifier elimination. This introduces label and lca predicates, which prevents
us from directly applying the previous stage. To overcome this difficulty, we eliminate the lca
predicates by introducing new variables, which are existentially quantified. To avoid over-counting,
we enforce unicity, i.e., at most one instance of each newly introduced variable may satisfy the
formula. Informally, it is as if every existential quantifier “there exists y such that” was replaced
by “there exists a unique y such that”.
     To establish Theorem 1.7, we first utilize the entire quantifier elimination machinery developed
for distributed model-checking in CONGEST. We emphasize that, during the process, the variables
of the quantifier-free formula φ     b are precisely the free variables of φ(x̄), but φ
                                                                                      b may have a new set
y of existentially-quantified variables. Let p = |x| + |y|. We construct now a coloring of G using
g(p) colors in O(log n) rounds, and we observe that, for any k-uple of vertices (v1 , . . . , vk ) of G,
we have (G, ℓ) |= φ(v1 , . . . , vk ) if and only if there exists a set U of at most p colors such that
        b |= φ(v
(G[U ], ℓ)    b 1 , . . . , vk ). Indeed, U is obtained by guessing not only the colors of v1 , . . . , vk , but
also the colors of the tuple of vertices u1 , . . . , up−k assigned to y. Optimizing the solution of φ on G
boils down to optimizing over all optimal solutions of φ       b on graphs (G[U ], ℓ)
                                                                                   b of treedepth at most p.
     Based on the above, it remains to deal with optimization and global counting for FO formulas on
labeled subgraphs G[U ] of G, each of which has a constant treedepth. For this purpose, we extend
the results from [31] stating that counting and optimization of FO formulae can be achieved on
connected labeled graphs of bounded treedepth, in a constant number of rounds. Indeed, we show
that one can perform optimization and counting for FO formulae over an induced (not necessarily
connected) subgraph of constant treedepth of the labeled graph G, in O(D) rounds. In [31],
the algorithm starts by constructing a tree decomposition of small width of the graph, and then


                                                       22
performs dynamic programming over this tree decomposition. If the input graph of small treedepth
is connected, this directly enables the construction of a rooted tree decomposition of constant depth
and constant width. Moreover, the decomposition tree is a spanning tree of the graph, which allows
communications to proceed with dynamic programming bottom-up the tree in a constant number of
rounds. The root of the tree can then compute the output by simulating the centralized algorithm
for optimization and counting on graphs of bounded treewidth of [6]. However, in our case, the
graphs G[U ] may not be connected, and thus we must deal with a forest decomposition F instead
of a mere tree decomposition. A BFS tree rooted at an arbitrary vertex can span all the roots
of the trees in the forest F , resulting in a rooted tree of depth D + O(1). This tree can serve
as a base for constructing a tree-decomposition of G[U ]. Moreover, since the nodes of the tree-
decomposition correspond to vertices of G, the centralized dynamic programming algorithm of [6]
can be simulated for counting and optimization on G[U ], in D + O(1) rounds. The information
stored in the dynamic programming tables can indeed be computed in a sequence of rounds, starting
from the leaves, upward to the root of the tree decomposition by communicating along the edges
of G. Altogether, the whole process for counting and optimization for formula φ on the pair (G, ℓ)
costs O(D + log n) rounds in CONGEST.
    Our method for local counting follows the same lines as that for global counting. That is, we first
reduce the study to quantifier-free formulas, using the (locality preserving) quantifier elimination
method. Similarly to the case of global counting, this reduction introduces lca-predicates, which
need to be eliminated in a locality-preserving fashion. It turns out that the method applied to the
case of global counting happens to preserve locality, although the proof is somewhat technical. For
quantifier-free formulas, we essentially apply the same idea as for global counting, based on the
inclusion-exclusion principle. However, we also use the fact that the formula is local, by considering
some set of colors U , and a tuple of vertices v such that (G[U ], ℓ) satisfies φ(v). Then, since φ is
local, all vertices in v belong to the same connected component of G[U ], which implies that we only
need to count the solutions to φ in the connected components of G[U ]. The latter are connected
graphs of bounded treedepth, and thus counting is achieved in O(1) rounds using the algorithm
in [31].

Distributed Certification. At a high level, our certification scheme for an FO formula φ and
a class of graphs G with bounded expansion essentially consists of the prover providing each node
with the transcript of the execution of our distributed model-checking algorithm at this node. The
role of the verifier is then to check (in a distributed manner) whether this transcript encodes a
correct execution of our algorithm. Note that the certification scheme does not have to certify
the bounded expansion property of G, which is a promise. However, given a coloring of the input
graph G = (V, E) ∈ G, the certification scheme must certify that any set U of k = |φ| colors does
induce a subgraph with treedepth k. This is done in a specific manner, using an algorithm by
Bousquet et al. [7] for certifying MSO formulas on graphs of bounded treedepth with certificates
of size O(log n). The main difficulty is to encode the transcript of the quantifier elimination
procedure, i.e., the transformation from (φ, G) to (φ,
                                                     b ℓ)
                                                       b with φ  b quantifier-free. Each lca predicate
refers to a local condition, and the value of such a predicate can be certified locally at each node,
in forests of bounded depth. On the other hand, the unary predicates may refer to non-local
properties. Nevertheless, we demonstrate that verifying the correctness of the unary predicates
can be accomplished using a spanning tree whose root is capable of making decisions. (Certify a
spanning tree is standard using O(log n)-bit certificates [56].)


                                                  23
3     Model and Definitions
In this section, we recall basic concepts of distributed computing, logic, and graphs. Readers
familiar with these frameworks may skip the first two sub-sections, but Section 3.3, which introduces
and extends the notion of local formulas, and Section 3.4, which recalls properties of graphs with
bounded expansion, may require special attention.

3.1     The CONGEST Model
The CONGEST model is a standard model of distributed computation in networks [70]. The
network is modeled as a connected simple (i.e., no self-loops nor multiple edges) graph G = (V, E).
The n ≥ 1 vertices of G model the processing nodes in the networks, and its edges models the
communication links. In the following, we may indistinguishably use “node” of “vertex” for referring
to the processing elements in the network. Each node is assigned an identifier, which is assumed to
be unique in the network. The identifiers may not be between 1 and n, but the CONGEST model
assumes that each identifier can be stored on O(log n) bits in n-node networks. In fact, it is usually
assumed that all the nodes of a graph G are given a polynomial upper bound N = poly(n) on the
number n of vertices in G, with all identifiers in {1, . . . , N }.
    Computation proceeds in lockstep, as a sequence of synchronous rounds. All nodes start si-
multaneously, at the same round. At each round, every node v sends an O(log n)-bit message to
each of its neighbors, receives the messages sent by all its neighbors, and performs some individual
computation. The round-complexity of an algorithm A is the function RA (n) = max|V (G)|≤n RA (G)
where RA (G) denotes the number of rounds performed by the nodes executing A in G until all of
them terminate.
    As said before, it is worth mentioning the BROADCAST CONGEST model, that is, the weaker
variant of the CONGEST model in which, at every round, each node must send the same O(log n)-
bit message to all its neighbors. For the sake of simplifying the notations, we solely refer to the
CONGEST model in the statements of our results. Yet, all our upper bound results also holds in
the weaker BROADCAST CONGEST model, apart from Theorem 6.2.

Remark. Throughout the paper, we will use the following convention regarding the inputs and
outputs of our algorithms. When an algorithm receives a “global value” as input, whether it be an
integer p, a logical formula φ, or a function (e.g., a bound f : N → N on the expansion), we assume
that all nodes are given this global value as input. Instead, when an algorithm receives as input a
node labeling function ℓ, we assume that each node v is only given its label ℓ(v). Similarly, when
an algorithm returns a node-labeling function ℓ,  b we mean that each node v returns its label ℓ(v).
                                                                                               b

3.2     First-Order Formulas on Labeled Graphs
3.2.1    Definition
Recall that a first-order (FO) formula over graphs is a combination (conjunction, disjunction, and
negations) of Boolean predicates over variables, which may be quantified or not. Every variable
represents a vertex of a graph, and there are two binary predicates: equality x = y, and adjacency
adj(x, y), where the latter states whether or not there is an edge between the two vertices x and y.
The variables of an FO formula can be quantified with existential or universal quantifiers. Non-
quantified variables are called free variables. Given an FO formula φ with free variables x1 , . . . , xk ,

                                                    24
we make explicit that the latter are free by denoting φ = φ(x1 , . . . , xk ). In the following, FO
denotes the set of all first order formulas over undirected graphs.
     Throughout the paper, a tuple (x1 , . . . , xk ) is abbreviated in x. The length k of a tuple
(x1 , . . . , xk ) is then denoted by |x|. Expressions such as ∃x or ∀x are shorthand for ∃x1 . . . ∃xk
and ∀x1 . . . ∀xk , respectively. We may also abuse notation in context where no confusions may
occur by letting x denote the set {x1 , . . . , xk }.
     Given an FO formula φ and a graph G, G |= φ denotes that G satisfies φ (i.e., G is a model
for φ). The negation of G |= φ is denoted by G ̸|= φ. Given an FO formula φ(x) with free variables,
a graph G = (V, E), and a set of vertices v ∈ V k where k = |x|, we say that G satisfies φ(x) for
vertices v, denoted by G |= φ(v), if the formula is satisfied by G whenever assigning v to the free
variables of φ(x).
     A graph property is called a first-order (FO) property if it can be expressed by a first-order
formula with no free variables. For example, the property “the graph contains a triangle” is clearly
an FO property: it holds whenever there is a set of three pairwise adjacent vertices in the graph.
Indeed, it can be written as the formula
                                                                                       
                          φ = ∃x1 ∃x2 ∃x3 adj(x1 , x2 ) ∧ adj(x2 , x3 ) ∧ adj(x1 , x3 ) .

More generally, the property of containing a fixed graph H as a subgraph (sometimes called “sub-
graph isomorphism”) is an FO property. Its negation—namely, the property that a graph does not
contain H as a subgraph (often called “H-freeness”)—is also an FO property, since first-order logic
is closed under negation.
    A formula with free variables expresses properties over graphs and tuples of vertices. As an
example, the following formula ψ(x) holds whenever x is a node in a triangle, formulated as

                          ψ(x) = ∃y1 ∃y2 , adj(x, y1 ) ∧ adj(x, y2 ) ∧ adj(y1 , y2 ).

The graph G with vertex set V = {a, b, c, d}, and edge set E = {{a, b}, {a, c}, {b, c}, {c, d}} satisfies
G |= φ as the vertices {a, b, c} form a triangle. Similarly, G |= ψ(a), but G ̸|= ψ(d) as d is not in
any triangle.

3.2.2   FO Formulas for Labeled Graphs
The formalism of FO properties can be extended to labeled graphs. Let Λ be a finite set, whose
elements are called labels. A Λ-labeled graph is a pair (G, ℓ) where G = (V, E) is a graph, and
ℓ : V → 2Λ is an assignment of a set of labels to each vertex of G. An FO formula over Λ-labeled
graphs is a first order formula φ over graphs, extended with predicates of the form labλ (x) for every
λ ∈ Λ. The predicate labλ (x) is true if vertex x contains λ as one of its labels. Such predicates are
called label predicates. Whenever labλ (x) holds, we say that x is labeled with λ. Note that since
ℓ assigns a set of labels to each vertex, it may be the case that labλ (x) ∧ labλ′ (x) holds for two
different labels λ and λ′ . It may thus be convenient to define the predicates labS for sets S ⊆ Λ,
as follows. Given S ∈ Λ, labS (x) holds if and only if ℓ(x) = S. In particular, labS (x) ∧ labS ′ (x) is
necessarily false whenever S ̸= S ′ . The set of all first-order logic formulas over Λ-labeled graphs is
denoted FO[Λ].
    Given a Λ-labeled graph (G, ℓ), and a subgraph G′ of G, we abuse notation and denote (G′ , ℓ)
the Λ-labeled graph defined by the restriction of ℓ to the nodes in G′ . For instance, let Λ = {0, 1},


                                                      25
and let us consider the following graph property on labeled graphs: “existence of a triangle with a
node labeled 1”. This property can be expressed by the formula:

                    φ = ∃x1 ∃x2 ∃x3 , adj(x1 , x2 ) ∧ adj(x2 , x3 ) ∧ adj(x1 , x3 ) ∧ lab1 (x1 ).

We may also consider formula with free variables, such as

                       ψ(x) = ∃y1 ∃y2 , adj(x, y1 ) ∧ adj(x, y2 ) ∧ adj(y1 , y2 ) ∧ lab1 (x).

The graph G with vertex set V = {a, b, c, d} and edge set E = {{a, b}, {a, c}, {b, c}, {c, d}} with
labels ℓ(a) = {0}, ℓ(b) = {0}, ℓ(c) = {1}, and ℓ(d) = {1} satisfies (G, ℓ) |= φ as the nodes {a, b, c}
form a triangle where c is labeled 1. For the same reason, we have that (G, ℓ) |= ψ(c). However,
(G, ℓ) ̸|= ψ(a) as a is not labeled 1 (even if it is in a triangle), and (G, ℓ) ̸|= ψ(d) as node d is not
in a triangle (even if it is labeled 1).
    For φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) ∈ FO[Λ], and a Λ-labeled graph (G, ℓ), we denote by true(φ, G, ℓ) the set of
all tuples of vertices (v1 , . . . , vk ) satisfying that (G, ℓ) |= φ(v1 , . . . , vk ). If φ has no free variables
then true(φ, G, ℓ) is equal to the truth value of (G, ℓ) |= φ. Two FO[Λ] formulas φ1 and φ2 are
equivalent if true(φ1 , G, ℓ) = true(φ2 , G, ℓ) for every Λ-labeled graph (G, ℓ). The following basic
definitions play a central role in this paper.
    • A formula φ(x) ∈ FO[Λ] is called quantifier-free if it has no quantifiers, i.e., it can be expressed
      as a boolean combination of predicates involving only the free variables in x.
    • A formula φ(x) ∈ FO[Λ] is existential if it can be written as φ(x) = ∃y ψ(x, y), where ψ(x, y)
      is quantifier-free formula in FO[Λ].
Furthermore, a formula φ(x) is in prenex normal form if it can be written in the form

                                        φ(x) = Q1 y1 . . . Qt yt ψ(x, y),

where ψ(x, y) ∈ FO[Λ], and Q1 , . . . , Qt are existential or universal quantifiers. The value of t is the
quantifier depth of φ. Every FO formula admits an equivalent formula in prenex normal form (see,
e.g., [24]). This fact can be easily established by induction on the length of the formula, and it can
be extended to FO[Λ], i.e., first order formulas for labeled graphs, in a straightforward manner.

Notation. For every family G of graphs, and every finite set Λ, we denote by G[Λ] the set of all
Λ-labeled graphs (G, ℓ) with G = (V, E) ∈ G, and ℓ : V → 2Λ .

3.3    Local Formulas
Local formulas can be defined as follows. For a graph G = (V, E) and a vertex v ∈ V , let BG (v, r)
denote the r-neighborhood of v in G, that is, the subgraph of G induced by vertices at distance at
most r from v. By extension, when considering a labeled graph (G, ℓ), BG (v, r) is also a labeled
graph: each node u ∈ BG (v, r) is labeled by the same set of labels ℓ(u).
Definition 3.1. Let Λ be a finite set of labels, and let r ≥ 0 be an integer. A formula φ(x) ∈ F O[Λ]
with one free variable is r-local if, for any two Λ-labeled graphs (G, ℓ) and (G′ , ℓ′ ), and for any two
vertices v ∈ V (G) and v ′ ∈ V (G′ ), we have
                                                                                     
                 BG (v, r) = BG′ (v ′ , r) =⇒ (G, ℓ) |= φ(v) ⇐⇒ (G′ , ℓ′ ) |= φ(v ′ ) .

                                                         26
where BG (v, r) = BG′ (v ′ , r) means that there exists a label-preserving isomorphism h : BG (v, r) →
BG′ (v ′ , r) such that h(v) = v ′ .
   We say φ(x) is local if there exists r ≥ 0 such that φ(x) is r-local.

    For technical reasons that will appear clear later, we need to extend the notion of local formulas
to formulas φ(x, y) with more than a single free variable. Our notion of locality is defined with
respect to the first free variable x of the formula: intuitively, we require that each variable is in a
ball centered on x. This is different from the notion of Gaifman-locality [35], in which quantified
variables are required to be in a ball centered on any of the free variables.

Definition 3.2. Let Λ be a finite set of labels, and let r ≥ 0 be an integer. A formula φ(x, y) ∈
F O[Λ] is r-local if, for any Λ-labeled graph (G, ℓ) with G = (V, E), the following two properties are
satisfied:

   • for every pair (v, u) ∈ true(φ, G, ℓ), it holds that u ⊆ BG (v, r);

   • for every Λ-labeled graph (G′ , ℓ′ ) with G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ), for every vertices v ∈ V, v ′ ∈ V ′ , u ⊆
     BG (v, r) and u′ ⊆ BG′ (v ′ , r), if there exists a label-preserving isomorphism h : BG (v, r) →
     BG′ (v ′ , r) such that h(v) = v ′ and h(u) = u′ , then:

                                    (G, ℓ) |= φ(v, u) ⇐⇒ (G′ , ℓ′ ) |= φ(v ′ , u′ )

    We shall often write φ(x) instead of φ(x, y), in which case it is x1 that takes the particular role
of x in the definition above.
    The above definition is, unfortunately, very difficult in practice, because it provides little in-
formation on the form of the considered formula. We therefore define the notion of local form in
Definition 3.3. To that end, let us introduce the new predicate ball(y, x, r) defined as

                                    G |= ball(u, v, r) ⇐⇒ u ∈ BG (v, r).

More generally, for y = (y1 , . . . , yk ), we define
                                                         |y|
                                                         ^
                                       ball(y, x, r) =         ball(yi , x, r).
                                                         i=1

These predicates will be referred to as distance predicates. Note that they can easily be written as
existential FO formulas, see Lemma 3.5. We use distance predicates to relativize quantifiers with
respect to the r-neighborhood of a given vertex (relativization of quantifiers is standard technique,
see for example [53, 22]): let us then consider an existential r-local formula φ(x) = ∃y ψ(x, y).
Since φ(x) is r-local, it can be rewritten as
                                                                   
                                  φ(x) = ∃y ψ(x, y) ∧ ball(y, x, r) .

Such a formula, where the locality is enforced explicitly by a distance predicate, is referred to as a
formula in r-local form. The following definition formalizes this notion.

Definition 3.3. Let r ≥ 0 be an integer. A formula φ(x, y) ∈ F O[Λ] with at least one free variable
is in r-local form if

                                                         27
   • φ(x, y) = ψ(x, y) ∧ ball(y, x, r), where ψ ∈ F O[Λ] is quantifier-free, or

   • φ(x, y) = ∃z ψ(x, y, z), where ψ ∈ F O[Λ] is in r-local form, or

   • φ(x, y) = ball(y, x, r) ∧ ∀z ¬ball((y, z), x, r) ∨ ψ(x, y, z) where ψ ∈ F O[Λ] is in r-local form.
                                                                  

We say φ(x, y) is in local form if there exists r ≥ 0 such that φ(x, y) is in r-local form.
    When considering a formula with several free variables, we say it is (r-)local if it can be rewritten
in (r-)local form.

Remark. The last case of Definition 3.3 introduces a lot of redundancy, with two distance pred-
icates, in addition to requiring that ψ must be in r-local form. The main motivation for this
redundancy is to guarantee that every “subformula” of φ remains local. Thanks to this redun-
dancy, all the formulas below are local, despite the fact that negation does not preserve locality for
formulas with several free variables. In particular, the following two formulas are equivalent, where
the universal quantifier is merely replaced by a negated existential quantifier:
                                                                     
                  ball(y, x, r) ∧ ∀z ¬ball((y, z), x, r) ∨ ψ(x, y, z)
                                                                                      
                                ≡ ball(y, x, r) ∧ ¬∃z ball((y, z), x, r) ∧ ¬ψ(x, y, z) .

Similarly, the formulas
                                                    
                 ∃z ball((y, z), x, r) ∧ ¬ψ(x, y, z) , and ball((y, z), x, r) ∧ ¬ψ(x, y, z)

are both local. In other words, the implicit or explicit presence of negations forces us to introduce
redundancies in the distance predicates for “balancing” the potential loss of the locality property.
    The following result establishes the consistency of Definitions 3.2 and 3.3.
Lemma 3.4. For every integer r ≥ 0, every r-local formula can be rewritten in r-local form.
Proof. Let φ(x, y) be r-local formula, and assume, w.l.o.g, that it is written in prenex normal form
φ(x, y) = Q1 z1 . . . Qt zt ψ(x, y, z). First, we rewrite φ by relativizing the quantifier with respect
to the r-neighborhood of x. Intuitively, we replace existential quantification ∃z by ∃z ∈ BG (x, r),
i.e., z must be in the ball of radius r around x in G. Similarly universal quantification ∀z is
replaced by ∀z ∈ BG (x, r), i.e., the formula is checked only for nodes z close to x. Formally, for
the r-local formula φ(x, y), we define φr (x, y) by induction on quantifier depth. If φ is quantifier
free, then φr = φ. If φ(x, y) = ∃z, ζ(x, y, z), then φr (x, y) = ∃z, ball(z, x, r) ∧ ζ r (x, y, z). Finally, if
φ(x, y) = ∀z, ζ(x, y, z), then φr (x, y) = ¬∃z, ball(z, x, r) ∧ ¬ζ r (x, y, z).
     By definition, for v ∈ V and u ⊆ BG (v, r),

                  G |= φr (v, u) ⇐⇒ BG (v, r) |= φr (v, u) ⇐⇒ BG (v, r) |= φ(v, u).

By locality of φ, we deduce that

               G |= ball(u, v, r) ∧ φr (v, u) ⇐⇒ BG (v, r) |= φ(v, u) ⇐⇒ G |= φ(v, u).

It only remains to show that the formula ball(y, x, r) ∧ φr (x, y) can be rewritten in r-local form.
Once again, we proceed by induction on quantifier depth. By definition of φr , there are only three
cases to consider.

                                                      28
Case 1: φ is quantifier free. Then φr = φ and ball(y, x, r) ∧ φ(x, y) is already in local form.

Case 2: φ(x, y) = ∃z ψ(x, y, z). Then,

                    ball(y, x, r) ∧ φr (x, y) = ball(y, x, r) ∧ ∃z ball(z, x, r) ∧ ψ r (x, y, z)
                                                                                                         

                                              = ∃z ball((y, z), x, r) ∧ ψ r (x, y, z)
                                                                                      


      By induction, we can rewrite ball((y, z), x, r) ∧ ψ r (x, y, z) in r-local form.

Case 3: φ(x, y) = ∀z, ψ(x, y, z). Then,

      ball(y, x, r) ∧ φr (x, y) = ball(y, x, r) ∧ ¬∃z ball(z, x, r) ∧ ¬ψ r (x, y, z)
                                                                                     
                                                                                                    
                                = ball(y, x, r) ∧ ¬ ball(y, x, r) ∧ ∃z ball(z, x, r) ∧ ¬ψ r (x, y, z)
                                = ball(y, x, r) ∧ ¬∃z ball((y, z), x, r) ∧ ¬ψ r (x, y, z)
                                                                                          

                                = ball(y, x, r) ∧ ∀z ¬ball((y, z), x, r) ∨ ψ r (x, y, z)
                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
                                = ball(y, x, r) ∧ ∀z ¬ball((y, z), x, r) ∨ ball((y, z), x, r) ∧ ψ r (x, y, z)

      By induction, ball((y, z), x, r) ∧ ψ r (x, y, z) can be rewritten in r-local form.

The study of these three cases completes the proof.

   We conclude this section by some simple observation that will be useful at several places in the
paper.

Lemma 3.5. Let r ∈ N, and let x = (x1 , . . . , xk ). There exists an existential FO formula

                                             βr (x) = ∃y ψ(x, y),

where ψ is quantifier free such that, for every graph G, and every k-tuple v̄ of vertices of G,

                                   G |= βr (v) ⇐⇒ G |= ball(v, v1 , r).

Moreover, for every r′ ≥ r, every graph G, and every k-tuple v̄ of vertices of G,

                                    G |= βr (v) ⇐⇒ G |= βr,r′ (v),

where βr,r′ (x) = ∃y ψ(x, y) ∧ ball((x, y), x1 , r′ ) .
                                                     

Proof.
  V It is sufficient to describe βr (x, y) with two variables only, as βr (x1 , . . . , xk ) can be written
as kj=2 βr (x1 , xj ). We define
                                                                                                   
                                                         r 
                                                         _                   j−1
                                                                             ^                    
                βr (x, y) = ∃z0 . . . ∃zr (x = z0 ) ∧         (y = zj ) ∧         adj(zi , zi+1 )  .
                                                         j=0                 i=0

In this formula, j is the distance between x and y, and z0 , . . . , zj represents the path from x to y.
This formula satisfies the first item of Lemma 3.5. Let us now prove that it satisfies the second
item. Let r′ ≥ r. By definition, if G |= βr,r′ (u, v) then G |= βr (u, v). Conversely, let us assume

                                                     29
that G |= βr (u, v). Then, there exists some w = w0 , . . . , wr such that G |= ψ(u, v, w). Moreover,
there exists j ∈ [0, r] such that
                                                                  j−1
                                                                  ^
                              G |= (u = w0 ) ∧ (v = wj ) ∧              adj(wi , wi+1 ).
                                                                  i=0

For every i ∈ [0, j], let wi′ = wi , and, for every i ∈ [j + 1, r], let wi′ = u. By definition, every vertex
wi′ satisfies ball(wi′ , u, r), and thus ball(wi′ , u, r′ ) since r′ ≥ r. This implies that
                                                   j−1
                                                   ^
                  G |= (u = w0′ ) ∧ (v = wj′ ) ∧         adj(wi′ , wi+1
                                                                    ′
                                                                        ) ∧ ball((u, v, w′ ), u, r′ ).
                                                   i=0

As a consequence, G |= ψ(u, v, w′ ) ∧ ball((u, v, w′ ), u, r′ ), and thus G |= βr,r′ (u, v).

Lemma 3.6. Let Λ be a set of labels, and let φ(x) ∈ FO[Λ] be a r-local, quantifier-free formula. If
φ(x) = φ1 (x) ∨ φ2 (x) for some formulas φ1 and φ2 , then both φ1 and φ2 must be r-local.
Proof. Since φ1 and φ2 play symmetric roles, we only prove that φ1 is local. Since φ is quantifier
free, and therefore φ1 as well, checking the r-locality of φ1 is equivalent to checking that, for all
Λ-labeled graphs (G, ℓ),
                                 (G, ℓ) |= φ1 (v) =⇒ v ⊆ BG (v1 , r).
This holds trivially as, by locality of φ,

                        (G, ℓ) |= φ1 (v) =⇒ (G, ℓ) |= φ(v) =⇒ v ⊆ BG (v1 , r),

which completes the proof.

3.4    Graphs of Bounded Expansion
Recall that a graph G = (V, E) has treedepth at most d if there exists a forest F of rooted trees
with depth at most d satisfying that there exists a one-to-one mapping f : V → V (F ) such that,
for every edge {u, v} ∈ E, f (u) is an ancestor of f (v) in a tree of F , or f (v) is an ancestor of f (u)
in a tree of F . The treedepth of a graph is the smallest d such that such a mapping f exists.
    It has been recently shown in [31] that decision, counting and optimization of FO formulas can
be performed in O(1) rounds in CONGEST, for connected labeled graphs of bounded treedepth.
Proposition 3.7 ([31]). Let G[Λ] be a class of connected labeled graphs of bounded treedepth, and
let φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) ∈ F O[Λ]. Then, for any and any (G, ℓ) ∈ G[Λ], the following problems can be
solved by a distributed algorithm running in O(1) rounds in CONGEST:
- Deciding φ: deciding whether           it   exists      a    k-uple     of   vertices    (v1 , . . . , vk )   such   that
     (G, ℓ) |= φ(v1 , . . . , vk ).

- Counting the solutions of φ: computing the number of k-uples (v1 , . . . , vk ) such that
     (G, ℓ) |= φ(v1 , . . . , vk ).

- Optimizing φ: assuming n-node graphs G = (V, E) are provided with a weight function
     ω : V → N satisfying ω(v) = O(nc )Pfor some c ≥ 0, computing a k-tuple of vertices (v1 , . . . , vk )
     such that G |= φ(v1 , . . . , vk ), and ki=1 ω(vi ) is maximum (or minimum).

                                                          30
    Graphs of bounded expansion [67] can be defined in term of local minors, and degeneracy. It
is however more convenient for us to use the following characterization. A class G of graphs has
bounded expansion if there exists a function f : N → N such that, for every G ∈ G, and for every
k ∈ N, there exists a coloring of the vertices of G with colors in [f (k)] = {1, . . . , f (k)} such that,
for every set U ⊆ [f (k)] of cardinality at most k the subgraph of G induced by the nodes colored
by a color in U has treedepth at most |U |. In particular, each subset of at most k colors induces a
subgraph of treedepth at most k. For every positive integers p and k, a (p, k)-treedepth coloring of
a graph G is a k-coloring of G satisfying that each set U ⊆ [k] of at most p colors induces a graph
of treedepth at most |U |.
Definition 3.8. Given a function f : N → N, a class of graphs G has expansion f if, for every
p ∈ N>0 , every G ∈ G has a (p, f (p))-treedepth coloring. A class of graphs has bounded expansion
if it has expansion f for some function f : N → N.
   A class of graphs has effective bounded expansion if it has expansion f for some Turing-
computable function f . In the following, we always assume that the considered functions f are
Turing-computable. Interestingly, treedepth colorings can be efficiently computed in the CONGEST
model.
Proposition 3.9 ([68]). Let G be a class of graphs of bounded expansion f . There exists a function
g : N → N such that, for any graph G ∈ G, and any constant positive integer p, a (p, g(p))-treedepth
coloring of G can be computed in O(log n) rounds in the CONGEST model.
    The algorithm of [68] takes as input the function f , and an integer p, and outputs a (p, g(p))-
treedepth coloring of the actual graph G in a distributed manner. The function g may however be
different from the given bound f on the expansion of the class G, which may itself be different from
the “best” expansion function for the class G.


4    Distributed Model Checking of Local Formulas
We have now all the ingredients to solve the open problem in [68].
Theorem 4.1. Let Λ be a finite set. For every local FO formula φ(x) on Λ-labeled graphs, and for
every class of graphs G of bounded expansion, there exists a deterministic algorithm that, for every
n-node network G = (V, E) ∈ G and every labeling ℓ : V → 2Λ , marks all vertices v ∈ V such that
(G, ℓ) |= φ(v), in O(log n) rounds in the CONGEST model.
    Our algorithm runs on labeled graphs (G, ℓ) ∈ G[Λ]. Initially, every node v ∈ V of an n-node
labeled graph (G, ℓ) ∈ G[Λ] is only given its identifier id(v) on O(log n) bits, which is unique in
the graph, and its labels ℓ(u) ∈ 2Λ (in addition to a polynomial upper bound on the number n of
vertices, as specified in the CONGEST model). At the end of the execution of our algorithm, every
node v outputs ⊤ if (G, ℓ) |= φ(v), and ⊥ otherwise.
    We prove Theorem 4.1 by adapting the (centralized) quantifier elimination technique of [73] (see
also [21, 46]) to the distributed setting. Let (G, ℓ) be a labeled graph with G ∈ G and ℓ : V → 2Λ ,
on which we aim at checking a local formula φ(x) at every node. Quantifier elimination proceeds by
induction on the depth of the formula. The formula considered at any stage of the induction may
thus have several free variables x with x1 = x. We therefore describe a distributed algorithm that,
in O(log n) rounds, transforms both the formula φ(x) and the node-labeling ℓ into a new formula
φ(x)
b     and a new node labeling ℓb such that:

                                                   31
   • φ(x)
     b    is quantifier-free, but uses new unary and binary predicates,
   • ℓb uses a new set of labels Λ
                                 b ⊇ Λ for the nodes of G, using additional labels involved in the
     new unary and binary predicates, and
   • the transformation preserves locality, and, for any tuple v of |x| vertices of G, we have:
                                  (G, ℓ) |= φ(v) ⇐⇒ (G, ℓ) b |= φ(v).
                                                                 b

Note that, while the transformation preserves locality, it might be the case that φ is r-local for
some r, where as φ b is r′ -local for some r′ ≥ r. Quantifiers are eliminated one by one, and the main
difficulty consists in the elimination of the existential quantifiers. As in [73], the proof works in
three steps.
   • First, the transformation from (φ, ℓ) to (φ,
                                               b ℓ)
                                                  b is performed on rooted forests of constant depth
     (cf. Subsection 4.1). This is the most technical part of the quantifier elimination process.
   • Second, the quantifier elimination is performed on graphs of bounded treedepth (cf. Subsec-
     tion 4.2), by reducing the analysis of graphs of bounded treedepth to the analysis of rooted
     forests. This is where the set of labels is enriched.
   • Third, the analysis of graphs of bounded expansion is reduced to the analysis of graphs
     of bounded treedepth thanks to a (p, f (p))-treedepth coloring (cf. Subsection 4.3), for an
     appropriate p. This is the steps for which the preservation of the locality property needs
     particular care.
    We emphasis that, at each step of the transformation of the original formula φ, and the original
labeled graph (G, ℓ), the computations must be efficiently performed in the CONGEST model.
Typically, one needs to make sure that adding new labels to the graph can be done efficiently
in CONGEST. The rooted forests involved in Subsection 4.1, as well as the graphs of bounded
treedepth involved in Subsection 4.2, are subgraphs of the communication graph G, and thus all
communications passing through the edges of the former can be implemented along the edges of
the latter.

4.1   Rooted Forests of Bounded Depth
In this section we adapt the quantifier elimination procedure from [73] for rooted forests of constant
depth (i.e., every tree in the forest is rooted and has constant depth) to the case of local formulas,
and show how to implement this procedure in CONGEST. The basic idea for eliminating the
quantifiers is to encode information about the satisfiability of the formula in node-labels. This
approach does increase the size of the label set. Nevertheless, by taking advantage of the simple
structure of FO formulas on forests of constant depth, it is possible to bound the number of labels
by a constant. This constant depends solely on the size of the formula, and on the depth of the
trees.
    As the locality property focuses on distances between nodes, the diameter of each tree plays
an important role. Therefore, instead of considering forests with depth at most d for some d, we
consider forests in which each tree has diameter at most d − 1 for some d. For every d ∈ N, let
us denote by Fd the set of forests in which each tree has diameter at most d − 1. Note that, in
particular, all forests of Fd have depth at most d. For a set of labels Λ, let us denote by Fd [Λ] the
set of all Λ-labeled graphs (G, ℓ) such that G ∈ Fd .

                                                 32
4.1.1    First-Order Formulas on Forests of Bounded Depth
Let Λ be a (finite) set of labels, and let d be a positive integer. It is convenient to consider a
specific way of encoding formulas, suitable for Fd [Λ]. For each i ∈ {−1, 0, 1, . . . , d − 1}, we define
the predicate lcai (x, y) (for least common ancestor) as the predicate with free variables x and y
that holds if the path Px from x to the root of the tree containing x, and the path Py from y to
the root of the tree containing y share exactly i + 1 nodes. Moreover, we set lca−1 (x, y) to be true
whenever x and y are in different trees. Note that lcai (x, x) holds if and only if x is a node at
depth i in its tree. In particular, lca0 (x, x) holds if and only if x is a root. The predicates lcai are
called lca-predicates. As opposed to the label predicates, for which it may be the case that labλ (x)
and labλ′ (x) both hold for two different labels λ ̸= λ′ , we have that, for every x and y, lcai (x, y)
holds for exactly one index i ∈ {−1, 0, 1, . . . , d − 1}.
     A formula φ ∈ F O[Λ] is said to be lca-expressed if it contains solely predicates of the form
lcai (x, y) (lca predicates), and labλ (x) (label predicates). In other words, in a lca-expressed formula,
there are no predicates of type adj(x, y) or x = y. The following is a direct consequence of the
definitions.

Lemma 4.2. Every formula φ ∈ FO[Λ] to be evaluated in Fd [Λ] can be lca-expressed by replacing
every equality predicate x = y by
                               _                                         
                                   lcai (x, x) ∧ lcai (x, y) ∧ lcai (y, y) ,
                               i∈[0,d−1]

and every adjacency predicate adj(x, y) by
             _                                                                                
                    lcai (x, y) ∧ (lcai (x, x) ∧ lcai+1 (y, y)) ∨ (lcai+1 (x, x) ∧ lcai (y, y)) .
             i∈[0,d−2]

   Given a fixed set Λ of labels, a formula φ ∈ FO[Λ] is called lca-reduced if (1) it is lca-expressed,
and (2) it is quantifier-free. In other words, an lca-reduced formula is a Boolean combination of
label and lca predicates on free variables.

Definition 4.3. Let x = (x1 , . . . , xk ) be a k-tuple of variables. For any two functions γ : [k] → 2Λ ,
and δ : [k] × [k] → [−1, d − 1], let us define the formula

                                              typeγ,δ (x) ∈ FO[Λ]

as the lca-reduced formula defined by the conjunction of the following two predicates:
                                                    ^              ^
                  Predicate 1: ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , k},   labλ (xi ) ∧      ¬labλ (xi ),
                                                       λ∈γ(i)              λ∈Λ∖γ(i)

and
                           Predicate 2: ∀(i, j) ∈ {1, . . . , k}2 , lcaδ(i,j) (xi , xj ).
We call such predicate lca-type, and we denote by Type(k, d, Λ) the set of all lca-type predicates with
k variables.




                                                        33
                                                                            2
    Observe that the size of Type(k, d, Λ) is at most 2k|Λ| (d + 1)k , and that it can be computed
from k, d and Λ. Note also that, given γ and δ, it may be the case that the formula typeγ,δ (x) is
always false. This is typically the case when the function δ yields a conjunction of incompatible
lca predicates (e.g., δ(i, j) = 5, δ(i, i) = 2, and δ(j, j) = 1, or merely any function δ such that
δ(i, j) ̸= δ(j, i)). In such cases, i.e., when typeγ,δ (x) is always false, we say that the formula is
trivial.
    For any non-trivial lca-type formulas φ(x) = typeγ,δ (x), we have that δ and γ induce a labeled
forest (Fφ , ℓφ ) ∈ Fd [Λ], as follows. Each i ∈ [k] is identified with a node ui in Fφ , and each leaf of
Fφ belongs to the k-tuple uφ = (u1 , . . . , uk ). Furthermore, for every (i, j) ∈ [k] × [k], lcaδ(i,j) (ui , uj )
holds in Fφ . Finally, for every i ∈ [k], ℓφ (ui ) = γ(i), and ℓφ (v) = ∅ whenever v ∈  / uφ .
    For any labeled forest (F, ℓ) with F = (V, E), any integer k, and any set of vertices v ∈ V k , let
us denote by F [v] the subgraph of F induced by all the nodes in v, and their ancestors.
Lemma 4.4. Let (F, ℓ) ∈ Fd [Λ] with F = (V, E), and let φ(x) = typeγ,δ (x) be a non-trivial lca-type
formula with k free variables. For every v = (v1 , . . . , vk ) ∈ V k , (F, ℓ) |= φ(v) if and only if there
exists a graph isomorphism f between F [v] and Fφ such that, for every i ∈ [k], ℓφ (f (vi )) = ℓ(vi ).
Proof. Recall that uφ = (u1 , . . . , uk ) includes the leaves of Fφ . Let v = (v1 , . . . , vk ) be a set of k
vertices of F . Suppose first that (F, ℓ) |= φ(v). Then, for every (i, j) ∈ [k] × [k],

                                   γ(i) = ℓ(vi ), and lca(vi , vj ) = δ(i, j).

Let f be the function that, for every i ∈ [k], f (vi ) = ui , and, for every r ∈ {1, . . . , δ(i, i) − 1}, f
maps the ancestor of vi in F at distance r from vi to the corresponding ancestor of ui in Fφ . By
construction f is an isomorphism between F [v] and Fφ . Moreover, for every i ∈ [k], we do have
ℓφ (f (vi )) = ℓφ (ui ) = γ(i) = ℓ(vi ), as claimed.
    Conversely, let us assume that there exists a graph isomorphism f between F [v] and Fφ such
that, for every i ∈ [k], ℓφ (f (vi )) = ℓ(vi ). Then we directly infer that, for every (i, j) ∈ [k] × [k],
γ(i) = ℓ(vi ) and lca(vi , vj ) = δ(i, j). This implies that (F, ℓ) |= φ(v), as claimed.

   The following statement establishes that every lca-reduced formula can be expressed as a dis-
junction of lca-types.
Lemma 4.5. For every lca-reduced formula φ(x) ∈ FO[Λ], there exists a set I ⊆ Type(|x|, d, Λ),
and a formula                                 _
                                     φ′ (x) =   ψ(x)
                                                        ψ∈I

such that, for every (F, ℓ) ∈ Fd [Λ], true(φ, F, ℓ) = true(φ′ , F, ℓ). Moreover, φ′ (x) can be computed
given only d, Λ, and φ. The formula φ′ (x) is called the basic normal form of φ.
Proof. Let φ(x) be an lca-reduced formula with k free variables, and let (F, ℓ) ∈ Fd [Λ]. Let
v = (v1 , . . . , vk ) be a tuple of nodes such that (F, ℓ) |= φ(v). Let us define the function

                                          δv : [k] × [k] → [−1, d − 1]

by δv (i, j) = h if the path from vi to the root of the tree of F [v] containing vi , and the path from vj
to the root of the tree of F [v] containing vj share exactly h + 1 nodes. We also define the function
γv by
                                               γv (i) = ℓ(vi )

                                                       34
for every i ∈ [k]. We obtain that
                                                  (F, ℓ) |= typeγv ,δv (v).
Now let I ⊆ Type(k, d, Λ) be the set of all possible lca-types typeγv ,δv that can be defined from a
labeled forest (F, ℓ) ∈ Fd , and a tuple of vertives v ∈ true(φ, F, ℓ). By construction, the function
                                                     _
                                            φ′ (x) =    ψ(x)
                                                               ψ∈I

satisfies true(φ, F, ℓ) = true(φ′ , F, ℓ) for every (F, ℓ) ∈ Fd [Λ].

Example. Let us consider the following formula using labels in {0, 1}, hence the two predicates
lab0 and lab1 :

               φ(x1 , x2 , x3 ) = adj(x1 , x2 ) ∧ adj(x1 , x3 ) ∧ lab1 (x1 ) ∧ lab0 (x2 )) ∧ lab0 (x3 ),

which holds when x1 is adjacent to x2 , x1 is labeled 1, and x2 and x3 are both labeled 0. This
formula can be rewritten as the lca-reduced formula
                     Ñ                       é Ñ                         é Ñ                      é
                       _                         _                           _
 φ̃(x1 , x2 , x3 ) =      ξi1 (x1 , x2 , x3 ) ∨       ξi2 (x1 , x2 , x3 ) ∨    ξi3 (x1 , x2 , x3 )
                     i∈[0,d−2]                              i∈[0,d−3]                           i∈[0,d−3]

where
                                          Å
                     ξi1 (x1 , x2 , x3 ) = lcai (x1 , x1 ) ∧ lcai+1 (x2 , x2 ) ∧ lcai+1 (x3 , x3 )∧

                                              lcai (x1 , x2 ) ∧ lcai (x1 , x3 ) ∧ lcai (x2 , x3 )∧
                                                                                     ã
                                              lab1 (x1 ) ∧ lab0 (x2 ) ∧ lab0 (x3 ) ,

                                          Å
                     ξi2 (x1 , x2 , x3 ) = lcai+1 (x1 , x1 ) ∧ lcai (x2 , x2 ) ∧ lcai+2 (x3 , x3 )∧

                                              lcai (x1 , x2 ) ∧ lcai+1 (x1 , x3 ) ∧ lcai (x2 , x3 )∧
                                                                                    ã
                                              lab1 (x1 ) ∧ lab0 (x2 ) ∧ lab0 (x3 ) ,

and
                                             Å
                     ξi3 (x1 , x2 , x3 ) =    lcai+1 (x1 , x1 ) ∧ lcai+2 (x2 , x2 ) ∧ lcai (x3 , x3 )∧

                                              lcai+1 (x1 , x2 ) ∧ lcai (x1 , x3 ) ∧ lcai (x2 , x3 )∧
                                                                                    ã
                                              lab1 (x1 ) ∧ lab0 (x2 ) ∧ lab0 (x3 ) .

Observe that φ̃ is the basic normal form of φ. Indeed, for every i ∈ [0, d − 2], ξi1 is an lca-type
formula, and, for every i ∈ [0, d − 3], ξi2 and ξi3 are lca-type formulas. For instance, ξi1 = typeγ,δ
with
                                γ(1) = {1}, γ(2) = {0}, γ(3) = {0},

                                                             35
and with

         δ(1, 1) = i, δ(2, 2) = i + 1, δ(3, 3) = i + 1, δ(1, 2) = i, δ(1, 3) = i and δ(2, 3) = i.

Figure 2 depicts Fξ1 , Fξ2 , and Fξ3 . If a labeled forest (F, ℓ) with label set {0, 1} satisfies φ, then F
                    i    i         i
contains a forest isomorphic to Fξ1 , Fξ2 or Fξ3 , for some i ∈ [0, d − 2].
                                        i        i   i




                          i                              i                 i

                                   x1                             x2           x3


                                                                  x1           x1
                              x2        x3

                                                                  x3           x2



                          Figure 2: Fξ1 (left), Fξ2 (middle), and Fξ3 (right).
                                             i           i             i




4.1.2   Quantifier Elimination of lca-Expressed Formulas
In this section, we show that it is possible to eliminate existential quantifiers on lca-expressed
formulas, by augmenting the set of labels.
Definition 4.6. Let Λ be a finite set of labels, and let d be a positive integer. A formula φ(x) ∈
FO[Λ] is said reducible on Fd [Λ] if there exists a set Λ,
                                                        b and an lca-reduced formula φ(x)
                                                                                       b    ∈ FO[Λ]b
such that (1) Λ and φ
               b      b depend only on Λ, φ, and d, and (2) for every (F, ℓ) ∈ Fd [Λ], there exists a
Λ-labeling
b          ℓb of F such that
                                    true(φ, F, ℓ) = true(φ,
                                                         b F, ℓ).
                                                              b

   Each element in the triplet (Λ,
                                 b φ,  b of Definition 4.6 is called the reduction on Fd [Λ] of Λ, φ,
                                    b ℓ)
and ℓ, respectively. We define a similar notion for local formulas.
Definition 4.7. Let Λ be a finite set of labels, and let d be a positive integer. A formula φ(x) ∈
F O[Λ] is said r-local reducible on Fd [Λ] if there exists a set Λ,
                                                                 b and an lca-reduced formula φ(x)
                                                                                              b    ∈
FO[Λ] such that (1) Λ and φ
    b                  b      b depend only on Λ, φ, and d, and (2) for every (F, ℓ) ∈ Fd [Λ], there
exists a Λ-labeling
         b          ℓb of F such that

                      true(φ, F, ℓ) = true(φ,
                                           b F, ℓ)       b ∧ ball(x, x1 , r), F, ℓ).
                                                b = true(φ                       b

    In Definition 4.7, one insists on the fact that the reduction φ
                                                                  b of φ must be r-local. This is called
a r-local reduction.

Remark. The fact that both Definitions 4.6 and 4.7 require Λ        b and φ b to depend only on Λ, φ
and d is not crucial for deciding (local) formulas, but will be used for the design of our certification
scheme later in the paper (the prover gives Λ b and φb to the nodes as constant-size certificates).
   The following lemma is at the core of quantifier elimination.

                                                             36
Lemma 4.8. Every formula φ(x) = ∃y ζ(x, y) in FO[Λ], where ζ is an lca-reduced formula, is
reducible on Fd [Λ].

Proof. Without loss of generality, let us assume that |x| = k ≥ 1. (In the case where φ has no free-
variables, we can create a formula φ(z) = φ for a dummy variable z.) We only deal with the case
where |y| = 1, i.e., with the elimination of a single quantified variable. Indeed, for the case where
|y| > 1 we can iteratively eliminate the quantifiers one by one, until we obtain a quantifier-free
(actually an lca-reduced) formula. Using Lemma 4.2 we can assume without loss of generality that
ζ is lca-reduced. Moreover, thanks to Lemma 4.5, we can also assume that ζ(x, y) isWexpressed in
the basic normal form. That is, there exist I ⊆ Type(k + 1, d, Λ) such that ζ(x, y) = ψ∈I ψ(x, y).
Since the existential quantifier commutes with the disjunction, we get that
                                                _
                                        φ(x) =      ∃y ψ(x, y).
                                                   ψ∈I

Let us fix an arbitrary labeled graph (F, ℓ) ∈ Fd [Λ]. Let us first assume that each formula ψ ∈ I is
reducible on Fd [Λ] (we show how to do this reduction later in the proof). Under this assumption,
let us denote by Λb ψ , ψ,
                        b and ℓbψ the resulting reductions. We can relabel every set Λψ , for ψ ∈ I, so
              b ψ ∖ Λ are pairwise disjoint. Let us then define:
that the sets Λ
                     [             _                                         [
               Λ
               b=        Λbψ, φ
                              b=       b and, for every node u ∈ F , ℓ(u)
                                      ψ,                               b =       ℓbψ (u).
                     ψ∈I           ψ∈I                                            ψ∈I


We get that Λ,b φ,b and ℓb are reductions on Fd [Λ] of Λ, φ, and ℓ, respectively. Therefore, it just
remains to prove that every ψ ∈ Type(k + 1, d, Λ) is reducible.
    Let γ and δ be such that ψ(x, y) = typeγ,δ (x, y) ∈ Type(k + 1, d, Λ), where y is identified with
variable numbered k + 1 in the definitions of γ and δ. Let s ∈ [k] such that δ(s, k + 1) is maximum
(this value exists because φ has at least one free variable). We define

                        h = δ(s, k + 1), hs = δ(s, s), and hy = δ(k + 1, k + 1).

In other words, xs is at depth hs , y is of depth hy , and the least common ancestor of xs and y (if
exists) is at depth h in Fψ . We consider three cases, depending on the value of δ(s, k + 1), and on
the relative values of hy and h.

Case 1: δ(s, k + 1) ≥ 0 and hy = h. In this case y is an ancestor of xs in Fψ . Let (F, ℓ) ∈ Fd [Λ].
A node w at depth h is called a candidate if ℓ(w) = γ(k +1). A node at depth hs having an ancestor
that is a candidate is called a good node. Let Λb ψ = Λ ∪ {good}. We define a Λ
                                                                              b ψ -labeling ℓbψ of F
as follows:                        ß
                           ψ         ℓ(u) ∪ {good} if u is a good node,
                          ℓ (u) =
                          b
                                     ℓ(u)            otherwise.

     Let us now construct an lca-reduced formula ψb that is equivalent to ψ. Let us denote by
b : [k] → 2Λ and δb : [k] × [k] → [−1, d − 1] the restrictions of γ and δ to [k] (i.e., for each i, j ∈ [k],
γ
γ
b(i) = γ(i) and δ(i, b j) = δ(i, j)). Let ξ = type b. Since hy = h, we have that Fξ = Fψ , and
                                                     γ
                                                     b ,δ
ℓξ (uξ ) = ℓψ (uψ ). Now, given a tuple of vertices v = (v1 , . . . , vk ), we have that (F, ℓ) |= ∃y, ψ(v, y)
if and only if the following conditions hold:


                                                     37
   • F [v] is isomorphic to Fψ (which equals Fξ ),
   • for every i ∈ [k], ℓ(vi ) = γ(i) = γ
                                        b(i), and
   • the ancestor of vs at level h in F [v] is labeled γ(k + 1), i.e., vs is a good node.
From Lemma 4.4 we obtain that the first two conditions imply that (F, ℓ) |= ψ(v). The third
condition can be expressed as good ∈ ℓ(v1 ). Therefore, ψb is defined as the conjunction of the two
previous expressions, that is,
                                ψ(x)
                                 b   = typeγb,δb(x) ∧ labgood (xs ).
                                b F, ℓbψ ) for every Λ-labeled forest (F, ℓ) of depth at most d.
Therefore, true(ψ, F, ℓ) = true(ψ,

Case 2: δ(s, k + 1) ≥ 0 and hy > h. Let (F, ℓ) ∈ Fd [Λ]. In this case, a node v at depth hy is
called a candidate if ℓ(v) = γ(k + 1). A node v at depth greater than h is called a good node if at
least one of its descendants is a candidate node. Finally, a node v at depth h is called a pivot, and
we denote by κ(v) the number of children of v that are good nodes.
    We define γ b, δ,
                    b and ξ = type b the same way than in Case 1. Under the assumptions of Case 2,
                                   γ
                                   b ,δ
Fξ is however not necessarily equal to Fψ . In fact Fξ is a sub-forest of Fψ . Indeed, Fψ can be
obtained from Fξ by adding a path that connects a pivot node in Fψ to a candidate node not in Fψ .
    Given a tuple v of k vertices, checking whether F [v] is isomorphic to Fξ can be achieved by
merely using formula ξ. Let z be the pivot in F [v], that is, z is the ancestor of vs at level h. Let
κ(z, v) be the set of good children of z contained in F [v]. To eliminate the existential quantifier in
φ(x), it is sufficient to check whether one can extend F [v] by plugging a path from z to a candidate
node not contained in F [v]. This condition holds if κ(z, v) < κ(z), and it is exactly what is checked
when considering the formula ψ.   b
    Let us define Λ   ψ                                                   b ψ -labeling ℓbψ of F defined
                     b = Λ ∪ [0, k + 1] ∪ {good}, and let us consider the Λ
as follows. Initially, for every node u of F , ℓbψ (u) = ℓ(u). We then update the label ℓbψ (u) of every
node u as follows.
   • If u is a node at depth hs , then let us denote v the ancestor of u at depth h. The label λ is
     added to ℓbψ (u) where
                                             ®
                                               κ(v)    if κ(v) ≤ k
                                        λ=
                                               k + 1 otherwise.

   • If u is a good node, the label good is added to ℓbψ (u).
Observe that the two conditions above are not necessarily exclusive, and it may be the case that
both labels λ and good are added to the set of labels of a the same node u.
   Let us suppose that there exists an lca-reduced Λ    b ψ -formula α(x) that checks whether κ(z) >
                                                                                            b ψ -formula
κ(z, x) where z is the ancestor at level h of xs . We can then define ψb as the lca-reduced Λ

                                      ψ(x)
                                      b    = typeγb,δb(x) ∧ α(x),

where

           _ ïÅ      _                 ã       _         Å^ _                          ^ ^                     ãò
  α(x) =                     labm (xs ) ∧                            labgood (xj ) ∧             ¬labgood (xj ) .
           q∈[p]   q≤m≤k+1                  S∈K(p,q−1)    i∈S j∈Xi                      / j∈Xi
                                                                                       i∈S


                                                     38
    We claim that true(ψ, F, ℓ) = true(ψ, b F, ℓbψ ) for every Λ-labeled forest (F, ℓ) ∈ Fd . Indeed,
observe first that κ(z, x) ≤ k as the forest Fξ has degree at most k (because it has at most k
leaves). Therefore, α(x) holds whenever κ(z) > k, which is equivalent to the predicate labk+1 (xs ).
If κ(z) ≤ k then the value of κ(z) is stored in the label of xs . Let us denote by z1 , . . . , zp the
p ≤ k children of z in Fψ . For every i ∈ [p], let us denote by Xi the set of variables in x that are
descendants of zi . For every q ∈ [p], we also denote by K(p, q) the set of all subsets of [p] of at
most q elements. If q = κ(z) and t = κ(z, x), then checking q > t can be done by checking the
existence of set S ∈ K(p, q − 1) satisfying that, for every i ∈ S, Xi contains a good node, and, for
every i ∈
        / S, Xi does not contain a good node.

Case 3: δ(s, k + 1) = −1. In this case, the node y in Fψ has no common ancestors with any of
the nodes x1 , . . . , xk . In other words, y is in a tree of Fψ that is different from any of the trees
containing x1 , . . . , xk . Let (F, ℓ) ∈ Fd [Λ]. Like in previous cases, a node u at depth hy is called
a candidate if ℓ(u) = γ(k + 1). A root r of F is said to be active if some descendant of r is a
candidate node. A node is called good if it is a descendant of an active root.
    Let γb, δb and ξ = typeγb,δb be defined as in Case 1. In Case 3, Fξ is a sub-forest of Fψ , where Fψ
can be obtained from Fξ by adding a path from an active root r not contained in Fξ to a candidate
node.
    Let v = (v1 , . . . , vk ) be a set of vertices of F , and let ρ(F ) be the number of active roots in F .
Similarly, let ρ(F, v) be the number of active roots in F [v]. It follows that (F, ℓ) |= ∃y, ψ(v, y) if
and only if F [v] is isomorphic to Fξ , ℓ(vi ) = γ(i) for each i ∈ [k], and F contains an active root not
contained in F [v]. The first two conditions can be checked using ξ, and the latter is equivalent to
ρ(F ) > ρ(F, v).
    Let Λ b = Λ ∪ [0, k + 1] ∪ {good} be a set of labels, and let us consider the Λ    b ψ -labeling ℓbψ of F
                                                                          ψ
defined as follows. Initially, for every node u in F , let us set ℓ (u) = ℓ(u). We then update the
                                                                         b
label ℓbψ (u) of every node u as follows.
   • For every node u, the label λ is added to ℓbψ (u), where
                                          ®
                                            ρ(F )     if ρ(F ) ≤ k
                                       λ=
                                            k + 1 if ρ(F ) > k.

   • If u is a good node, then the label good is added ℓbψ (u).
   Let us suppose that there exists an lca-reduced Λ    b ψ -formula α(x) that checks whether ρ(F ) >
                                                                                            b ψ -formula
ρ(F, x) where z is the ancestor at level h of x1 . We can then define ψb as the lca-reduced Λ

                                         ψ(x)
                                         b    = typeγb,δb(x) ∧ ξ(x),

where

          _ ïÅ       _               ã        _         Å^ _                          ^ ^                        ãò
 ξ(x) =                     labm (x1 ) ∧                            labgood (xj ) ∧             ¬labgood (xj )        (2)
          q∈[p]   q≤m≤k+1                  S∈K(p,q−1)    i∈S j∈Xi                      / j∈Xi
                                                                                      i∈S

                                       b F, ℓbψ ) for every Λ-labeled forest (F, ℓ) ∈ Fd . Indeed,
   We claim that true(ψ, F, ℓ) = true(ψ,
observe that Fξ can contain at most k roots. Therefore α is true if ρ(F ) > k, which is equivalent

                                                        39
the predicate labk+1 (x1 ). If ρ(F ) ≤ k then the value of ρ(F ) is stored in the label of x1 . Let
r1 , . . . , rp denote the p ≤ k roots of Fξ . For every i ∈ [p], let Xi be the set of variables in x that
are descendants of ri . We obtain that checking whether q = ρ(F ) > ρ(F, x) is equivalent to check
the existence of a set S ∈ K(p, q − 1) such that, for every i ∈ [p], Xi contains a good node if and
only if i ∈ S, from which the expression of ξ follows.

    Finally, the following lemma is a refined version of Lemma 4.8 enforcing locality.
                                                                                
Lemma 4.9. Let d ∈ N, r ≥ d, and φ(x) = ∃y ζ(x, y) ∧ ball({x, y}, x1 , r) be an r-local lca-
expressed existential formula in FO[Λ], i.e., ζ is a lca-reduced formula in FO[Λ]. It holds that φ is
d-local reducible on Fd [Λ].
Proof. Since all trees in the forests F ∈ Fd have diameter at most d, and since r ≥ d, we get that
ball(z, x1 , r) holds if and only if x1 and z are in the same tree, which is equivalent to ¬lca−1 (x1 , z).
We define:                                               ^
                                 φ1 (x) = ∃y, ζ(x, y) ∧     ¬lca−1 (x1 , z)
                                                         z∈x,y

We have true(φ, F, ℓ) = true(φ1 , F, ℓ). We can now apply Lemma 4.8 on φ1 . (Note that there were
three cases the proof of Lemma 4.8, but the third case cannot happen here as this case corresponds
to the case where two variables are not in the same connected components of F , which is forbidden
by the terms of the form ¬lca−1 (x1 , z).) By Lemma 4.8, we obtain an lca-reduced formula φ b and a
labeling ℓb such that true(φ1 , F, ℓ) = true(φ,
                                             b F, ℓ).
                                                  b Now, as mentioned above, each xi is in the same
component as x1 . Since each tree has diameter at most d, this mere fact implies that ball(xi , x1 , d)
holds for every i. As a consequence, true(φ,  b F, ℓ)       b ∧ ball(x, x1 , d), F, ℓ).
                                                   b = true(φ                       b

4.1.3   Quantifier Elimination of lca-Reduced Formulas in CONGEST
We now show that the quantifier elimination on local formulas described in the proof of Lemma 4.9
can be computed in O(1) rounds in the CONGEST model.
Lemma 4.10. Let Λ be a finite set of labels, d ∈ N and       r ≥ d. For every r-local lca-expressed
existential formula φ(x) = ∃y ζ(x, y ∧ ball({x, y}, x1 , r)) in FO[Λ], there exists a set of labels Λ,
                                                                                                    b
a lca-reduced formula φ b and a distributed algorithm performing in O(1) round in the CONGEST
model satisfying the following. For every Λ-labeled graph (G, ℓ), every subgraph F ∈ Fd of G:
   • every node v ∈ V (G) is given as input: a set of labels ℓ(v) ⊆ Λ, whether it belongs to F , and,
     if applicable, its depth and parent in F ;

   • every node v ∈ V (G) outputs a set of labels ℓ(v)
                                                  b ⊆Λ b such that Λ,
                                                                   b φ,
                                                                      b ℓb form a d-local reduction
     of Λ, φ, ℓ.
Proof. Let k = |x|. As for the proof of Lemma 4.8, we assume w.l.o.g. that k ≥ 1, and we treat
only the case where |y| = 1 (as the general case |y| ≥ 1 can be obtained by iteratively eliminating
the |y| quantifiers one by one). In the same way they are defined in Lemma 4.8, let us define the
                                                               b ψ , the lca-reduced formula ψ,
set I ⊆ Type(k + 1, D, Λ), and, for each ψ ∈ I, the label sets Λ                             b and
      ψ            ψ
the Λ̂ -labeling ℓb of F . Furthermore, we define
                     [            _                                          [
                Λ
                b=      bψ, φ
                        Λ    b=      b and, for every node u ∈ F , ℓ(u)
                                     ψ,                              b =        ℓbψ (u).
                     ψ∈I           ψ∈I                                          ψ∈I


                                                    40
We then extend ℓb to the nodes of G ∖ F by merely defining ℓ(v)    b = ℓ(v) for all v ∈   / V (F ). Since
                                                                                             b ψ , and the
Type(k + 1, d, Λ) is a finite set, it is enough to show that, for every ψ ∈ I, the label set Λ
           b      bψ
formulas ψ and ℓ can be computed in O(1) rounds. In fact, the definitions of the set I, Λ,          b and
φ
b do not depend in the sub-forest F of G, so I, Λ,   b and φ b can be computed at every node without
any communication. It remains to show how to compute, for any given ψ ∈ I, the value of ℓbψ (v)
at all nodes v in a constant number of rounds.
    Initially the algorithm sets ℓbψ (v) = ℓ(v) at every node. Let γ and δ be the functions such that
ψ = typeγ,δ . Let s, hs , hy , and h be as defined in the proof of Lemma 4.8. Observe that every
node knows φ, and thus every node can compute ψ, hs , hy , and h without any communication.
Furthermore, every node knows whether its depth is equal to h, hs , or hy , or none of these three
values.
    We now revisit the three cases treated in the proof of Lemma 4.8.

Case 1: δ(s, k + 1) ≥ 0 and hy = h. In this case, the algorithm just needs to identify the
good nodes in F . To do so, for every i ∈ [p], every node v at depth hy in Ti checks whether it
is a candidate node. Every such nodes does not need any communication for this, as it knows its
depth in Ti , as well as ℓ(v) and γ(v). Then, the algorithm broadcasts ping messages (on a single
bit) downward every tree, from every candidate node. These ping messages are forwarded by their
descendants downward every Ti , for hs − h rounds. More precisely, each candidate node sends a
ping as a single bit 1 to all its children, and, for hs − h − 1 rounds, each node that receives that
ping from its parent forwards it to all its children. Finally, every node u at depth hs that receives
the ping know that their ancestor at level hy are candidates, and thus they mark themselves as
good nodes. Moreover, every such node u sets ℓbψ (u) = ℓ(u) ∪ {good}. Every other node u in F sets
ℓbψ (u) = ℓ(u). All these operations consume hs − h = O(d) rounds.

Case 2: δ(1, k + 1) ≥ 0 and hy > h. In this case the algorithm is divided in two phases. Similar
to previous case, the candidate nodes can identify themselves without any communication. In the
first phase, ping messages are broadcast upward in each tree Ti , starting from the candidate nodes,
during h − hy rounds. In other words, the candidate nodes send a single bit to their parents, and,
for h − hy − 1 more rounds, each node that receives a ping in the previous round forwards it to its
parent. During this phase, every node u at depth > h that receives a ping message is marked as a
good node, and it adds good to ℓbψ (u). This phase takes h − hy = O(d) rounds. During the second
phase, each pivot node z (i.e., every node at depth h) computes κ(z) as the number of children that
sent a ping message during the last round of the first phase. Then, each pivot node z broadcasts
the value ℓ(κ(z)) downward the trees, for h − hs rounds. After h − hs rounds, every node u at depth
hs has received the message ℓ(κ(z)) from its pivot ancestor z, and it adds this label to ℓbψ (u). This
phase takes h − hs = O(d) rounds.

Case 3: δ(1, k + 1) = −1.     As mentioned in the proof of Lemma 4.9, this case cannot happen for
local formulas.
   We conclude that for every ψ ∈ I, every node u can compute ℓψ (u), in O(d) rounds. Therefore,
                                                                                           2
the total number of rounds sufficient for computing ℓb is O(d · |I|) = O(d · 2k|Λ| (d + 1)k ).




                                                   41
4.2   Quantifier Elimination on Graphs of Bounded Treedepth
Given a graph G = (V, E), a decomposition forest F of G is a rooted spanning forest of G satisfying
that for every edge e ∈ E, one of its endpoints is an ancestor of the other in F . Observe that if G
is connected then any decomposition forest of G is actually a tree, and every DFS tree of G is a
decomposition tree of G. For every t > 0, any induced subgraph H of G with treedepth at most t
is called a treedepth-t induced subgraph.
    We stress the fact that a decomposition forest F of G must be a subgraph of G, which is very
convenient for distributed algorithms because this enables communication along the edges of F .
Note that there exist graphs of treedepth t in which any decomposition forest is of diameter Ω(2t ).
This is for example the case of paths on 2t − 1 vertices. Nevertheless, graphs of treedepth at most t
have paths of at most 2t − 1 vertices. In particular, for any class of graphs of bounded treedepth, all
possible decomposition forests also have trees of constant (although exponentially larger) diameter.
Proposition 4.11 ([67]). Any decomposition forest of a graph of treedepth at most t belongs to F2t .
    In the following lemma, we show that any distributed algorithm aiming at checking a quantifier-
free formula in a treedepth-t induced subgraph H of a labeled graph G, may rather check an
equivalent formula on a decomposition forest of H.
Lemma 4.12. Let Λ be a finite set of labels, and let t > 0. For every quantifier free formula
φ(x) ∈ FO[Λ], there exists a finite set Λb depending only on t and Λ, and an lca-reduced formula
φ(x)
 b    ∈ FO[Λ] depending on φ, Λ, and t, such that, for every Λ-labeled treedepth-t induced subgraph
            b
(H, ℓ) of a Λ-labeled graph (G, ℓ), and for every decomposition forest F of H, there exists a Λ- b
labeling ℓ of G such that
         b
                                    true(φ, H, ℓ) = true(φ,
                                                         b F, ℓ).
                                                              b
Moreover, there is a 1-round CONGEST algorithm that computes ℓ,     b assuming each node v is given
as input ℓ(v), whether it belongs to F and, if applicable, its depth and parent in F .
Proof. Each node u initially knows Λ, φ, ℓ(u), t, whether it belongs to H, and, if applicable, its
depth and parent in F . Node u returns Λ,  b φ,
                                              b and ℓ(u).
                                                    b     Let d = 2t , and let us consider a Λ-labeled
graph (G, ℓ), a treedepth-t induced subgraph H of G, and a decomposition forest F of H. The
idea of the construction is the following. Each node u of F can be labeled by a subset of [0, d − 1]
indicating the set of levels of F containing a neighbor of u in H. Then, the adj(x, y) predicate can
be transformed into label and lca predicates on x and y. More precisely, for every node v ∈ V (H),
let Levels(v) ⊆ [d] be the set of levels of F containing ancestors u of v such that {u, v} ∈ E(H).
Then, let Λb = Λ ∪ [0, d − 1] (we assume w.l.o.g. that Λ ∩ [0, d − 1] = ∅), and let us consider the
Λ-labeling ℓb of G defined by
b
                                       ®
                                b = ℓ(v) ∪ Levels(v) if v ∈ V (F ),
                                ℓ(v)
                                         ℓ(v)             otherwise.

For each i ∈ [0, d − 1], we denote by leveli (x) the predicate labi (x), which is true when x has a
neighbor at depth i. Finally, we define φ
                                        b by replacing each adj(x, y) predicates by

                   "Å                                    ã   Å                                      ã#
           _
                     lcaj (x, x) ∧ lcai (y, y) ∧ leveli (x) ∨ lcai (x, x) ∧ lcaj (y, y) ∧ leveli (y) ,
       1≤i<j≤d−1



                                                    42
and every equality predicate by lca predicates as we explained in Lemma 4.2. In this way, we obtain
a lca-reduced formula φ b such that true(φ, H, ℓ) = true(φ,
                                                         b F, ℓ).
    Finally, observe that every node u can compute Λ, b φ,
                                                        b and ℓ(u)
                                                               b in a single communication round.
In fact Λ,
        b φ,
           b and ℓ(u)
                   b     for every u ∈ V (G) ∖ V (H) are computed without any communication, as
these values do not depend on the instance. To compute ℓ(u) b     for u ∈ V (F ), each node broadcasts
its depth in F to all its neighbors. After this communication round, Levels(u) can be set as the set
of neighbors with a smaller depth in F , and the computation of ℓ(u)b = ℓ(u) ∪ Levels(u) follows.

    We now prove that existential quantifier in formulas on graphs of bounded treedepth can be
eliminated efficiently. The reduction results in a lca-reduced formula to be checked on a decompo-
sition forest of the considered graph.

Lemma 4.13. Let Λ be a set of labels, φ(x) = ∃y, ζ(x, y) ∧ ball((x, y), x1 , r) be a r-local existential
formula in FO[Λ], where r ∈ N and ζ is a quantifier free formula. There exists a set of labels Λ,b and
an lca-reduced formula φ(x)
                        b    such that, for every treedepth-t induced subgraph (H, ℓ) of a Λ-labeled
graph (G, ℓ), and for every decomposition forest F of H, there exists a Λ-labeling
                                                                         b            ℓb such that:

                      true(φ, H, ℓ) = true(φ,
                                           b F, ℓ)       b ∧ ball(x, x1 , 2t ), F, ℓ).
                                                b = true(φ                         b

Moreover, there exists an algorithm computing ℓb in O(1) CONGEST rounds, assuming each node v
is given as input ℓ(v), whether it belongs to F and, if applicable, its depth and parent in F .

   The lemma above considers both a graph H of bounded treedepth, and a decomposition forest F .
The distances in both structures are not the same, and two vertices may be further apart in F than
they are in H. However, the connected components remain the same in both graphs.

Proof. We are assuming that each node u initially knows Λ, φ, ℓ(u), whether it belongs to H, and,
if applicable, its depth and parent in F . We consider graphs of treedepth at most t, thus their
connected components have diameter at most 2t . If r < 2t , then, by Lemma 3.5 we can rewrite
ball(z, x1 , r) as an existential formula of the form ∃w, ψ(x1 , z, w)∧ball((z, w), x1 , 2t ). Thus, without
loss of generality, we consider the case r ≥ 2t . Therefore, the balls of radius r are then exactly the
connected components of H.
    By Lemma 4.12, there exists an lca-reduced formula ζ1 (x, y) such that, for every induced labeled
subgraph (H, ℓ) of treedepth at most t, for every decomposition forest F of H, there exists a labeling
ℓ1 such that true(ζ, H, ℓ) = true(ζ1 , F, ℓ1 ), and ℓ1 can be computed in O(1) rounds. Moreover, since
connected components are the same in H and F , we also have

                 true(ζ ∧ ball((x, y), x1 , r), H, ℓ) = true(ζ1 ∧ ball((x, y), x1 , r), F, ℓ1 ).

The proof is completed by applying Lemma 4.10 to the formula ∃y, ζ1 (x, y) ∧ ball((x, y), x1 , r).

4.3    Graphs of Bounded Expansion
Let us fix a graph class G of expansion f . Given a set of labels Λ, let G[Λ] be the set of Λ-labeled
graphs (G, ℓ) such that G ∈ G. Let (G, ℓ) ∈ G[Λ] be the input instance. For every integer p, let
Col(p) be the collection of sets U ⊆ [f (p)] with cardinality at most p.




                                                       43
4.3.1   Skeletons
We introduce a central notion for our proof of Theorem 4.1.
Definition 4.14. Let p ∈ N, and let G be a graph of expansion f . A p-skeleton of G is a triple
S = (G, c, δ) where c is (p, f (p))-treedepth coloring of G, and δ is a function mapping every U ∈
Col(p) to a decomposition forest F U of the subgraph G[U ] induced by nodes with colors in U . Labeled
p-skeletons are pairs (S, ℓ), where S = (G, c, δ) is a p-skeleton, and ℓ is a labeling of G.
    Note that, by definition of a (p, f (p))-treedepth coloring c, the graph G[U ] is of treedepth at
most p for every U ∈ Col(p). Hence, by Proposition 4.11, we have F U ∈ F2p . The following lemma
states that a p-skeleton can be computed in O(log n) rounds in the CONGEST model, where the
big-O notation hides constants depending only of p, and of the expansion of the class.
Lemma 4.15. For every p ∈ N, there exists an algorithm that constructs a p-skeleton of G in
O(log n) rounds in CONGEST. Specifically, at the end of the algorithm, each node knows its own
color, and, for every set U ∈ Col(p) containing its color, its parent and depth in the forest F U
corresponding to the skeleton.

Remark. In the remaining of the paper, when an algorithm takes a skeleton as input, or outputs
a skeleton, it is assumed that the skeleton is represented in a distributed manner, in the way the
algorithm in Lemma 4.15 computes it.

Proof. The algorithm of Proposition 3.9 enables to compute a (p, f (p))-treedepth coloring c of G,
in O(log n) rounds. After running this algorithm, each node u knows c(u). Let us order the sets in
Col(p) lexicographically. The rest of the algorithm runs in N = |Col(p)| ≤ 2f (p) phases, where each
phase takes at most 22p+1 rounds. The i-th phase consists of dealing with the ith set U ∈ Col(p).
Let us fix one such set U . For every u ∈ V (G), if c(u) ∈/ U , then u does not participate in that
phase (it remains idle, and, in particular, it does not forward any messages). Only the nodes u
such that c(u) ∈ U exchange messages during phase U . The phase is divided in two steps.

   • In the first step, each node u ∈ G[U ] performs 2p rounds during which it broadcasts the value
     of a variable min-id(u). Initially, min-id(u) = id(u). In the subsequent rounds, min-id(u) is
     the minimum identifier of a node in the component of G[U ] containing u (i.e., the minimum
     identifier received by u from a neighbor in U ). Observe that G[U ] is a graph of diameter at
     most 2p , and thus min-id(u) is eventually the smallest identifier in the whole component of
     G[U ] containing u. After the first 2p rounds of the phase, the node with identifier min-id(u)
     is the root of the tree containing u. Let V1 , . . . , Vh be the components of G[U ], and, for every
     i ∈ [h], let ri be the node of minimum identifier id(ri ) among all nodes in Vi . Note that, after
     step 1 has completed, every node u ∈ Vi has min-id(u) = id(ri ).
   • In the second step, the algorithm runs in parallel in all components Vi , i ∈ {1, . . . , h} for
     computing a decomposition tree Ti of G[U ] rooted at ri . For this purpose, we use the algorithm
     from [31] (cf. Lemma 11 therein). This algorithm performs in 22p rounds.

    At the end of these two steps, every node u knows its depth in its tree Ti , as well as the identifier
of its parent in Ti . Observe that the collection of trees {Ti | i ∈ [h]} is a decomposition forest F U
of G[U ]. This completes the description of the phase for set U . The whole algorithm runs in
O(log n) + |Col(p)| · 22p+1 = O(log n) rounds.

                                                   44
4.3.2   Reducibility on Graphs of Bounded Expansion
We now define a specific notion of quantifier elimination, denoted reducibility, for graphs of bounded
expansion. For this purpose, similarly to how FO formulas on treedepth-t graphs are transformed
into FO formulas on their decomposition forests, we will transform FO formulas on graphs of G into
FO formulas on their p-skeletons. For this purpose, we define additional predicates for describing
the structure of p-skeletons.
   • For each k ∈ [f (p)], the predicate colork (x) checks whether the considered vertex x has color
     k in the skeleton.
   • For every U ∈ Col(p), and every j ∈ [−1, d − 1], the predicate lcaU    j (x, y) is equivalent to the
                                  U             U
     lcaj predicates, but on F . That is, lcaj (x, y) is true whenever x and y are colored by colors
     in U , and lcaj (x, y) is true on F U . Such predicates are called lcaU predicates.
A formula φ(x) ∈ FO[Λ] is called p-lca-reduced if it is a quantifier-free, and it contains only label,
color and lcaU predicates, for some collection of sets U ∈ Col(p). For such a formula, one can ask
whether a labeled p-skeleton (S, ℓ) satisfies φ on some vertices v ∈ S, i.e., one can ask whether

                                             (S, ℓ) |= φ(v),

where S = (G, s, δ) is a labeled p-skeleton. The set true(φ, S, ℓ) is then defined accordingly. Note
that we abusedly write v ∈ S instead of v ∈ G, which itself is an abuse of notation for v ∈ V , where
V is the set of vertices of G.
Definition 4.16. A formula φ ∈ FO[Λ] is called reducible on G if there exists a positive integer p,
a set of labels Λ,
                b and a p-lca-reduced formula φ b such that, for every labeled graph (G, ℓ) ∈ G[Λ],
and every p-skeleton S of G, there exists a Λ-labeling
                                            b          ℓb of S such that

                                     true(φ, G, ℓ) = true(φ,
                                                          b S, ℓ).
                                                               b

Given a graph G and a p-skeleton S, the tuple (p, Λ,
                                                  b φ,
                                                     b ℓ)
                                                       b is called the reduction of (Λ, φ, ℓ) on S.

   Importantly, when considering local formulas, it is also required that the reduction φ
                                                                                        b be a local
formula too.
Definition 4.17. An r-local formula φ(x̄) ∈ FO[Λ] is said locally reducible on G if there exists
r′ ∈ N, such that, for every (G, ℓ) ∈ G[Λ], and every p-skeleton S of G, there exists a reduction
(p, Λ,
    b φ,
       b ℓ)
         b of (Λ, φ, ℓ) on S such that:

                     true(φ, G, ℓ) = true(φ,
                                          b S, ℓ)       b ∧ ball(x, x1 , r′ ), S, ℓ).
                                               b = true(φ                         b

Note that, when considering distance predicates on a skeleton S = (G, c, δ), we use the distances
on the underlying graph G. Our goal is now to show that every (local) formula can be efficiently
reduced in G by a distributed algorithm. We first establish this result for existential formulas.
Lemma 4.18. Let Λ be a set of labels, and let φ(x) = ∃y, ψ(x, y) ∧ ball((x, y), x1 , r) be an r-local
existential formula in FO[Λ], where ψ is a quantifier free formula. For every integer p ≥ r·(|x|+|y|),
there exists a set of labels Λ,
                             b and a p-lca-reduced formula φ(x)
                                                              b    satisfying that, for every (G, ℓ) ∈
G[Λ], and for every p-skeleton S of G, there exists a Λ-labeling of ℓb such that
                                                        b

                     true(φ, G, ℓ) = true(φ,
                                          b S, ℓ)       b ∧ ball(x, x1 , 2p ), S, ℓ).
                                               b = true(φ                         b


                                                   45
Moreover, there exists an algorithm that computes ℓb in O(1) rounds in CONGEST, assuming S and
ℓ are given as input.
Proof. Let p ≥ r(|x| + |y|). We apply Lemma 4.13 to φ, which says that there exists a set of
labels Λ1 , and a lca-reduced formula φ1 (x) such that, for every labeled graph (H, ℓ) of treedepth
at most p, and for every decomposition forest F of H, there is a Λ1 labeling ℓ1 of F such that

                   true(φ, H, ℓ) = true(φ1 , F, ℓ1 ) = true(φ1 ∧ ball(x, x1 , 2p ), F, ℓ1 ).

Let us now consider now a p-skeleton S = (G, s, δ). For each U ∈ Col(p), the induced subgraph
G[U ] has treedepth at most p, and F U = δ(U ) is a decomposition forest of G[U ]. Thus, we can
compute the corresponding labeling ℓU  1 in O(1) rounds. Let us denote by φ  bU (x) the p-lca-reduced
          U                            U
formula φ1 (x)∧colorU (x). That is, φ1 is the formula φ1 in which all lca predicates of were replaced
by lcaU predicates. Finally, let us define
                                                 _
                                        φ(x)
                                         b   =        bU (x),
                                                      φ
                                                    U ∈Col(p)

and, for every node u,                                 [
                                            ℓ(u)
                                            b =                 ℓU
                                                                 1 (u),
                                                    U ∈Col(p)

where, w.l.o.g., we assume that the formulas φU use disjoint sets of labels. Let us prove that this
formula has the desired property. Let (G, ℓ) ∈ G[Λ], and let S be a p-skeleton of G. We prove the
equivalence of the following three statements:
  (i) (G, ℓ) |= φ(v),
          b |= φ(v),
 (ii) (S, ℓ)   b     and

               b ∧ ball(v, v1 , 2p ).
          b |= φ(v)
(iii) (S, ℓ)
The implication (iii) ⇒ (ii) is obvious. Let us prove (i) ⇒ (iii). For this purpose, let us assume
that
                                (G, ℓ) |= ψ(v, w) ∧ ball((v, w), v1 , r)
for some v, w ⊆ V (G). Since p ≥ r · (|v| + |w|), there exists U ∈ Col(p) such that G[U ] contains
both v and w, and also, for every u ∈ v, w, a path of length at most r from v1 to u. We get that

                                  (G[U ], ℓ) |= ψ(v, w) ∧ ball((v, w), v1 , r).

The first of the following series of implications is a direct consequence of the latter, and the second
implication follows from Lemma 4.13:

     (G, ℓ) |= φ(v) =⇒ ∃U ∈ Col(p), v ⊆ G[U ] ∧ (G[U ], ℓ) |= φ(v)
                        =⇒ ∃U ∈ Col(p), v ⊆ G[U ] ∧ (F U , ℓU                             p
                                                            1 ) |= φ1 (v) ∧ ball(v, v1 , 2 )
                           î                               ó î                                     ó
                        =⇒ ∃U ∈ Col(p), (S, ℓU       bU (v) ∧ ∃U ∈ Col(p), F U |= ball(v, v1 , 2p )
                                              1 ) |= φ
                           î             ó
                               b |= φ(v)
                        =⇒ (S, ℓ)   b      ∧ [S |= ball(v, v1 , 2p )]
                                    b ∧ ball(v, v1 , 2p )
                               b |= φ(v)
                        =⇒ (S, ℓ)


                                                       46
Finally we prove (ii) ⇒ (i). We have
                       b |= φ(v)
                   (S, ℓ)   b    =⇒ ∃U ∈ Col(p), (S, ℓU      bU (v)
                                                      1 ) |= φ
                                   =⇒ ∃U ∈ Col(p), v ⊆ G[U ] ∧ (F U , ℓU
                                                                       1 ) |= φ1 (v)
                                   =⇒ ∃U ∈ Col(p), v ⊆ G[U ] ∧ (G[U ], ℓ) |= φ(v)
                                   =⇒ (G, ℓ) |= φ(v)

where the penultimate implication follows from Lemma 4.13, and the last from the fact that φ is
existential (i.e., if the quantified variables exist in a subgraph, then they exist in G). This completes
the proof.

Lemma 4.19. Let p ∈ N, let Λ be a set of labels, and let φ(x) be a p-lca-reduced formula. There
                       b and there exists a quantifier free formula ψ(x, y) such that, for every G ∈ G,
exists a set of labels Λ,
for every Λ-labeling ℓ of G, and for every p-skeleton S of G, there exists a labeling ℓb of G for which
                                                             
                             true (φ ∧ ball(x, x1 , r)), S, ℓ = true(φ,
                                                                     b G, ℓ)
                                                                          b

where
                                  = ∃y ψ(x, y) ∧ ball((x, y), x1 , r + 2p ) .
                                                                           
                             φ(x)
                             b

Moreover, ℓb can be computed without any communication, assuming S and ℓ are given as inputs.

   The main idea of the proof is to replace each lcaU -predicate of φ by an existential FO formula
on the graph G underlying the (labeled) p-skeleton (S, ℓ). To that end, we augment the labeling
ℓ with additional labels, which encode the structure of S. Finally, we add distance predicates to
enforce the locality of the resulting formula.

Proof. Let us assume that φ is written in conjunctive normal form (CNF). Let d = 2p . We have
that                                                         _
                  ¬lcai (x, y) ≡ ¬colorU (x) ∨ ¬colorU (y) ∨       lcaj (x, y).
                                                               j∈[−1,d]\{i}

Therefore, we can assume that φ does not have any predicate of the form ¬lcai (x, y), as it suffices
to replace each occurrence of such predicates by the corresponding disjunction of predicates. Note
that the formula we obtain is still in conjunctive normal form. It only remains to replace each
predicate lcaU
             i (x, y) by an equivalent existential formula: since φ is in conjunctive normal form and
no lcaU predicate is negated, the formula we obtain is existential. To that end, we add to Λ new
labels representing the structure of the p-skeleton: let
                    b = Λ ∪ {colork , k ∈ [f (p)]} ∪ {depthU , U ∈ Col(p), k ∈ [2p ]}.
                    Λ                                      k

We assume w.l.o.g. that Λ does not already contain these labels. We construct the labeling ℓb as
follows, without any communication. Each node v adds its own color to its labeling, and, for each
U ∈ Col(p) that contains v’s color, node v adds its depth in F U to its label.




                                                   47
    Consider now a predicate lcaU                                  U
                                    i (y, z). We define a formula ζi ∈ FO[Λ] such that (S, ℓ) |=
                                                                          b
   U                      U
lcai (u, v) ⇐⇒ (G, ℓ) |= ζi (u, v).
                   b

                                                                       _
      ζiU (y, z) = ∃(y0 , . . . , yd ) ∃(z0 , . . . , zd )                                 (ya = y) ∧ (zb = z)
                                                             (a,b)∈[max{0,i},d−1]2
                           ^                               ^                  
                      ∧              ys = zs ∧                           ys ̸= zs ∧ depthU              U
                                                                                         0 (y0 ) ∧ depth0 (z0 )
                           s∈[0,i]                   s∈[i+1,min(a,b)]
                                                                                                                                 !
                           ^                                                  ^                                           
                      ∧              depthU
                                          s (ys ) ∧ adj(ys−1 , ys ) ∧                       depthU
                                                                                                 s (zs ) ∧ adj(zs−1 , zs )       .
                           s∈[1,a]                                                s∈[1,b]


Indeed, a (resp. b) is the depth of y (resp. z) in F U , and y0 , . . . , ya (resp. z0 , . . . , zb ) correspond to
the path from the root of y’s tree to y (resp. from the root of z’s tree to z). The equality predicates
on the first line, and the depth predicates on the second line guarantee that the endpoints of the
path are as expected. The equality predicates on the second line guarantee that both paths share
exactly i+1 vertices. The depth and adjacency predicates on the third line guarantee that, for every
s ∈ [1, a] (resp., every s ∈ [1, b]), ys−1 (resp., zs−1 ) is the parent of ys (resp., zs ). By construction,
we can assume that each of the yi (resp., zi ) we introduced are at distance at most d from y (resp.,
z).
    We would like to replace each occurrence of lcaU                          U
                                                                   i in φ by ζi , while preserving locality. To that
                                                                    U
end, we add a distance predicate to the formula ζi , which enforces locality. Recall that we are
interested by the formula φ∧ball(x, x1 , r). Whenever the formula is satisfied, every xi is at distance
at most r from x1 . This implies that every ys and zs introduced in ζiU (y, z) is at distance at most
r + d from x1 . We thus replace each lcaU             i (y, z) predicate in φ by the following formula:
                                                                                       "
                                                                             _
    ∃(y0 , . . . , yd ) ∃(z0 , . . . , zd ) ball((y, z), x1 , r + d) ∧                  (ya = y) ∧ (zb = z)
                                                                             (a,b)∈[max(0,i),2p ]2
                     ^                                ^                     
                   ∧    ys = zs ∧                                      ys ̸= zs ∧ depthU              U
                                                                                       0 (y0 ) ∧ depth0 (z0 )
                        s∈[0,i]                  s∈[i+1,min{a,b}]
                                                                                                                                 #!
                     ^                                            ^                                                    
                   ∧              depthU
                                       s (ys ) ∧ adj(y s−1 , ys )  ∧                        depthU
                                                                                                 s (zs ) ∧ adj(z s−1 , zs )
                        s∈[1,a]                                                  s∈[1,b]

Let us denote by φ̃(x) this formula. By the definition of βr,r′ in Proposition 3.5, we can then define

                                     φ(x)
                                     b    = φ̃(x) ∧ βr,r+d (x) ∧ ball(x, x1 , r + d).

By construction, φ
                 b is existential, and thus

         true(φ,
              b G, ℓ)
                   b = true(φ,   b ∩ true(ball(x, x1 , r), G, ℓ)
                            b G, ℓ)                           b = true(φ ∧ ball(x, x1 , r), S, ℓ),

which completes the proof.

    We now tackle the general case.



                                                                  48
Lemma 4.20. Let Λ be a set of labels, and let φ(x) be an FO formula in r-local form. There
exists p ∈ N, a set of labels Λ,
                              b and a p-lca-reduced formula φ(x)
                                                              b    such that, for every labeled graph
(G, ℓ) ∈ G[Λ], and for every p-skeleton S of G, there exists a Λ-labeling
                                                                b         ℓb for which

                       true(φ, G, ℓ) = true(φ,
                                            b S, ℓ)       b ∧ ball(x, x1 , 2p ), S, ℓ)
                                                 b = true(φ                         b

Moreover ℓb can be computed in O(log n) rounds in the CONGEST model, assuming S and ℓ are
given as inputs.

Proof. The proof proceeds by induction on the structure of the formulas written in local form as
defined (in an inductive way) in Definition 3.3. We consider the three cases occurring in Defini-
tion 3.3.

Case 1 (base case). φ(x) = ψ(x) ∧ ball(x, x1 , r), where ψ is quantifier free. We can directly
apply Lemma 4.18 with |y| = 0, to compute ℓb from the skeleton S and labeling ℓ given as inputs.

Case 2. φ(x) = ∃y ψ(x, y), where ψ is in local form. By induction, there exists p′ , Λ1 , and
ψ1 (x, y) such that, for every (G, ℓ) ∈ G[Λ], and every p′ -skeleton S ′ of G, there exists a Λ1 -labeling
ℓ1 for which
                                                                                         ′
                 true(ψ, G, ℓ) = true(ψ1 , S ′ , ℓ1 ) = true(ψ1 ∧ ball((x, y), x1 , 2p ), S ′ , ℓ1 )

By Lemma 4.15, a p′ -skeleton S ′ of G can be constructed in O(log n) rounds in CONGEST. By
induction, the corresponding labeling ℓ1 can be computed in O(log n) rounds. For eventually
                                                                                          ′
applying Lemma 4.18 on ∃y ψ1 (x, y), we first apply Lemma 4.19 on ψ1 , with r = 2p . Thanks to
this lemma, there exists a set of labels Λ2 , a quantifier-free formula ρ2 (x, y, z), and a labeling ℓ2
that can be constructed from ℓ1 such that
                                                       ′
                      true(ψ1 ∧ ball((x, y), x1 , 2p ), S ′ , ℓ1 ) = true(ψ2 (x, y), G, ℓ2 ),
                                                                ′
where ψ2 (x, y) = ∃z ρ2 (x, y, z) ∧ ball((x, y, z), x1 , 2p +1 ). Let us then define φ2 (x) = ∃y ψ2 (x, y).
This is formula is existential since ψ2 is existential. We can thus apply Lemma 4.18 to φ2 , from
which the induction step follows. In particular, we can compute ℓb from the skeleton S given as
input.
                                                                 
Case 3. φ(x) = ball(x, x1 , r) ∧ ∀y ¬ball(x, y), x1 , r) ∨ ψ(x, y) where ψ is in r-local form. We
can rewrite φ as
                 φ(x) = ball(x, x1 , r) ∧ ¬∃y, ball((x, y), x1 , r) ∧ ¬ψ(x, y).
By induction on ψ, there exist p′ ∈ N, a set of labels Λ1 , and a p′ -lca-reduced formula ψ1 (x, y)
such that, for every labeled graph (G, ℓ) ∈ G[Λ], and for every p′ -skeleton S ′ of G, there exists a
Λ1 -labeling ℓ1 satisfying
                                  true(ψ, G, ℓ) = true(ψ1 , S ′ , ℓ1 ).
By Lemma 4.15, a p′ -skeleton S ′ of G can be constructed in O(log n) rounds in the CONGEST
model. By induction, the labeling ℓ1 can thus be computed in O(log n) rounds. Let us then take
the negation of ψ1 . Note that the resulting formula ¬ψ1 is still a p′ -lca-reduced formula. We


                                                           49
then apply Lemma 4.19 to ¬ψ1 , which results in a set of labels Λ2 , an existential formula ρ2 in
(r + 2p )-local form, and a Λ2 -labeling ℓ2 of G such that
                            true(¬ψ1 ∧ ball(x, x1 , r), S ′ , ℓ1 ) = true(ρ2 , G, ℓ2 ).
As a consequence, we get
                                                                                                           
   (G, ℓ) |= ball((v, u), v1 , r) ∧ ¬ψ(v, u) ⇐⇒          G |= ball((v, u), v1 , r) ∧ (S ′ , ℓ1 ) |= ¬ψ1 (v, u)
                                              ⇐⇒ (S ′ , ℓ1 ) |= ball((v, u), v1 , r) ∧ ¬ψ1 (v, u)
                                              ⇐⇒ (G, ℓ2 ) |= ρ2 (v, u)
where the first equivalence is by induction, and the last by application of Lemma 4.19.
   Let us now focus on the formula
                                             η2 (x) = ∃y ρ2 (x, y).
                                                       ′
Since ρ2 is existential, and since it is in (r + 2p )-local form, the formula η2 is also existential and
          ′
in (r + 2p )-local form. By Lemma 4.18, there exists an integer p ≥ r · |x|, a set of labels Λ3 , and a
p-lca-reduced-formula η3 (x) such that, for every p-skeleton S of G (and in particular the skeleton
S given as input), there exists a labeling ℓ3 for which
                                      true(η2 , G, ℓ2 ) = true(η3 , S, ℓ3 ).
Once again, the negation of η3 is still p-lca-reduced.
    We also need to transform the first half of φ, namely ball(x, x1 , r), into a p-lca-reduced formula.
The formula ball(x, x1 , r) is in fact an existential formula in r-local form (with zero existential
quantifiers). Therefore, we can apply Lemma 4.18. We can even apply this lemma with the same
p since p satisfies the required condition p ≥ r|x|. Thus, there exists a set of label Λγ , and a
p-lca-reduced formula γ(x) such that, for every G ∈ G, and every p-skeleton S of G, there exists a
Λγ -labeling ℓγ for which
                true(ball(x, x1 , r)), G) = true(γ, S, ℓγ ) = true(γ ∧ ball(x, x1 , 2p ), S, ℓγ ).
             b = Λγ ∪ Λ3 where, w.l.o.g., we assume that Λγ and Λ3 are disjoint, let
Finally, let Λ
                                           φ(x)
                                           b    = γ(x) ∧ ¬η3 (x),
                          b = ℓγ (v) ∪ ℓ3 (v). We get
and for every node v let ℓ(v)
                                                                                                
      true(φ, G, ℓ) = true ball(x, x1 , r), G, ℓ ∩ true ¬∃y ball((x, y), x1 , r) ∧ ¬ψ(x, y) , G, ℓ
                                                 
                    = true ball(x, x1 , r), G, ℓ2 ∩ true(¬η2 , G, ℓ2 )
                                                             
                    = true γ(x), S, ℓγ ∩ true ¬η3 (x), S, ℓ3
                                  
                    = true φ,
                           b S, ℓb .
Moreover, since true(γ, S, ℓγ ) = true(γ ∧ ball(x, x1 , 2p ), S, ℓ), we also have
                                                   b ∧ ball(x, x1 , 2p ), S, ℓb .
                                                                               
                             true(φ,
                                   b S, ℓ)
                                        b = true φ

   We complete the proof by studying the round-complexity of computing the labeling ℓb in CONGEST.
For each of the lemmas used in the proof, the construction of the labeling is performed in O(1)
rounds. For cases 2 and 3, we also need to construct a skeleton, which can be done in O(log n)
rounds. Thus, the overall round complexity is O(log n), as claimed.

                                                           50
4.3.3    Proof of Theorem 4.1
Let φ(x) be a r-local formula. By Lemma 3.4, it can be rewritten in r-local form. Then, by
Lemma 4.20, for some p ∈ N φ can be reduced in O(log n) rounds to a p-lca-reduced formula φ(x).
                                                                                          b
Using Lemma 4.15, we can build a p-skeleton S in O(log n) rounds. Then, from an input labeling
ℓ, the reduced labeling ℓb can be computed in O(log n) rounds. It satisfies:

                                       (G, ℓ) |= φ(v) ⇐⇒ (S, ℓ)
                                                             b |= φ(v)
                                                                  b

   Since φ(x)
          b    is quantifier free, each node v can check locally without additional communication
whether it satisfies φ,
                     b which completes the proof.


5       Distributed Model Checking of General Formulas
In this section, we establish Theorem 1.5, generalized to labeled graphs, as formaly stated below.
Theorem 5.1. Let Λ be a finite set. For every FO formula φ on Λ-labeled graphs, and for every
class of graphs G of bounded expansion, there exists a distributed algorithm that, for every n-node
network G = (V, E) ∈ G of diameter D, and every ℓ : V → 2Λ , decides whether (G, ℓ) |= φ in
O(D + log n) rounds under the CONGEST model.
    Actually, we show a result stronger than Theorem 5.1. Given a formula φ(x) with one free
variable, we provide a CONGEST algorithm that marks all nodes of n-node graphs with bounded
expansion that satisfy the formula, in O(D + log n) rounds, where D is the diameter of the input
graph7 . To prove the result, we need to revisit the proof of Theorem 4.1, which involves quantifier
elimination of existential formulas first over forests of bounded-depth, then over graphs of bounded
tree-depth, and finally over graphs with bounded expansion. Fortunately, once we have resolved
quantifier elimination over forests bounded-depth, the extensions to the other two cases will follow
from the arguments already developed in the previous section for local formulas. Therefore, it will
be sufficient to revisit quantifier elimination for existential formulas on forests of bounded-depth,
and then proceed by induction to cover the general case.

5.1     Rooted Forests of Bounded Depth
As established in the proof of Lemma 4.8, an existential formula over bounded-depth forests cor-
responds to checking the presence of “subpatterns” (representing subforests) in which the free
variables of the formula can be mapped onto. One of these free variables, quantified existentially,
is to be eliminated. Depending on the position of this existentially quantified variable y, we distin-
guish three cases. In the first two case, y shares common ancestors with the other free variables —
these cases are the “connected cases”. In the third case, y belongs to a connected component that
is different from all the other variables in the formula. When dealing with local formulas, we only
needed to handle the connected cases. However, for general formulas, we must also address the
remaining case. This is for this “disconnected case” that our algorithm requires O(D) additional
rounds.
    7
     This problem is more challenging than simply checking whether the graph satisfies a formula φ, i.e., stronger than
the model checking problem as, given an FO formula φ without free variables, one can define a logically equivalent
formula φ′ (x) by adding a dummy free variable, so that the graph satisfies φ if and only if it satisfies φ′ (v) at each
of its nodes v.


                                                          51
Lemma 5.2. Let φ(x) = ∃y ζ(x, y) be a formula in FO[Λ]. There exists Λ,   b a lca-reduced formula
φ(x)
b     and a distributed algorithm performing in O(D) rounds in the CONGEST model satisfying the
following. For every Λ-labeled graph (G, ℓ) of diameter D, and for every subgraph F ∈ Fd of G,

   • every node v ∈ V (G) is given as input its labeling ℓ(v), whether it belongs to F , and whether
     it is a root of a tree in F (if not, it also receives as input its depth and parent in F );

   • every node v ∈ V (G) outputs a set of labels ℓ(v),
                                                  b     such that Λ,
                                                                  b φ,
                                                                     b ℓb form a reduction of Λ, φ, ℓ.

Proof. We follow the same guidelines as in the proof of Lemma 4.10 for Cases 1 and 2. It is thus
sufficient to consider Case 3, as described in Lemma 4.8. We use the same notations as in these
lemmas. Recall that Case 3 assumes

                                          δ(1, k + 1) = −1.

The algorithm consists in four phases.

  1. During the first phase, the algorithm aims at identifying the active roots. First, the candidate
     nodes are identified in the same way as in the previous cases 1 and 2. By broadcasting a ping
     message upward each tree from the candidate nodes for hy rounds, each root becomes aware
     of the presence of a candidate node in its tree. The roots that receive a ping message mark
     themselves as active roots. This phase takes O(d) rounds.

  2. During the second phase, the algorithm aims at identifying the good children, by broadcasting
     a ping message downward from every active root. Every node u that receives such ping
     message on this phase marks itself as good, and adds the label good to ℓbψ (u). This phase
     takes O(d) rounds. At this point, the algorithm constructs a BFS tree T of G, rooted at
     node r1 . This procedure takes O(D) rounds.

  3. During the third phase, the root r1 gets the number ρ(F ) of active roots in F , by counting
     upward T . More specifically, let us denote by dT = O(D) the depth of T . The counting
     proceeds in dT + 1 round. For each node u in T , let a(u) be 1 if u is an active root, and 0
     otherwise. In the first round, each node u at depth dT set val(u) = a(u), and sends val(u)
     to its parent in T . Then, Pat round i + 1 with i ∈ [dt ], every node u of T at depth dT − i
     computes val(u) = a(u) + v∈C(u) val(u), where C(u) is the set of children of u in T , and
     sends val(u) to its parent. At the end of this phase, we have val(r1 ) = ρ(F ). Observe that,
     for every node u, val(u) ≤ n, and thus this value can be communicated in one round under
     the CONGEST model. Therefore, the third phase runs in O(D) + dT + 1 = O(D) rounds.

  4. Finally, during the fourth phase, the root r1 broadcast ρ(F ) downward the tree T , to all
                                                                            “ψ (u). This phase
     nodes in G. Then, each node u in F adds the label min(ρ(F ), k + 1) to F
     takes dT = O(D) rounds.

  We conplete the proof by noticing that, for every ψ ∈ I, every node u can compute ℓψ (u) in
O(D) rounds. Therefore, the total number of rounds sufficient for computing ℓb is
                                                              2
                                   |I| · D ≤ c · 2k|Λ| (d + 1)k · D,

where c is a constant not depending on either d, Λ, ψ, or D.

                                                  52
5.2   Quantifier Elimination on Graphs of Bounded Treedepth
We now deal with the quantifier elimination on graphs of bounded treedepth.

Lemma 5.3. Let Λ be a set of labels, and let φ(x) = ∃y, ζ(x, y) be an existential formula in FO[Λ],
where ζ is a quantifier free formula. There exists a set of labels Λ,
                                                                   b and a lca-reduced formula φ(x)
                                                                                                  b
such that, for every induced subgraph (H, ℓ) of treedepth t of a Λ-labeled graph (G, ℓ), and for every
decomposition forest F of H, there exists a Λ-labeling
                                             b          ℓb such that:

                                     true(φ, H, ℓ) = true(φ,
                                                          b F, ℓ)
                                                               b

Moreover, there exists an algorithm computing ℓb in O(D) rounds in the CONGEST model, each
node u is given as input ℓ(u), whether it belongs to H and, if applicable, its depth and parent in F .

Proof. By Lemma 4.12, there exists an lca-reduced formula ζ1 (x, y) such that, for every induced
labeled subgraph (H, ℓ) of treedepth at most t, for every decomposition forest F of H, there exists
a labeling ℓ1 such that true(ζ, H, ℓ) = true(ζ1 , F, ℓ1 ), and ℓ1 can be computed in O(1) rounds in
the CONGEST model. It is thus sufficient to merely apply Lemma 5.2 to the formula ∃y, ζ1 (x, y),
which takes O(D) CONGEST rounds.

5.3   Graphs of Bounded Expansion
We can now directly treat the case of graphs of bounded expansion. As we did in the local case,
we consider first the case of existential formulas. Let G be a class of graphs, of bounded expansion.

Lemma 5.4. Let Λ be a set of labels, and let φ(x) = ∃y ψ(x, y) be an existential formula in FO[Λ],
where ψ is quantifier-free. For every p ≥ |x| + |y|, there exists a set Λ  b of labels, and a p-lca-
reduced formula φb such that, for every (G, ℓ) ∈ G[Λ], and for every p-skeleton S of G, there exists
a Λ-labeling ℓ such that
  b          b
                                    true(φ, G, ℓ) = true(φ,
                                                         b S, ℓ).
                                                              b

Moreover, there exists a distributed algorithm that computes ℓb in O(D) rounds in CONGEST, as-
suming ℓ and S are given as input.

Proof. Let us fix an integer p ≥ |x| + |y|. By applying Lemma 5.3 to φ, we get that there exist
a set of labels Λ1 , and an lca-reduced formula φ1 (x) such that, for every labeled graph (H, ℓ) of
treedepth at most p, and for every decomposition forest F of H, there exists a Λ1 -labeling ℓ1 of F
such that
                                   true(φ, H, ℓ) = true(φ1 , F, ℓ1 ).
Let us now consider a p-skeleton S of (G, ℓ). For each U ∈ Col(p), the induced subgraph G[U ] has
treedepth at most p, and F U is a decomposition forest of G[U ]. Thus, the corresponding labeling
ℓU
 1 can be computed in O(D) rounds. Let us consider the p-lca-reduced formula

                                    bU (x) = φU
                                    φ         1 (x) ∧ colorU (x).

                                                                                U
Note that φU1 is the formula φ1 in which all lca predicates were replaced by lca predicates. We
also define                                     _
                                     φ(x)
                                     b    =          bU (x).
                                                     φ
                                               U ∈Col(p)


                                                 53
Finally, for each node u, we set                                     [
                                                        ℓ(u)
                                                        b =                   ℓU
                                                                               1 (u),
                                                                  U ∈Col(p)

where it is assumed, w.l.o.g., that the formulas φU use disjoint sets of labels. Let us now prove
that the formula φ(x)
                  b   has the desired property. Let (G, ℓ) ∈ G[Λ], let S be a p-skeleton of G, and
let us prove that
                                 (G, ℓ) |= φ(v) ⇐⇒ (S, ℓ)
                                                       b |= φ(v).
                                                             b
For this purpose, let us assume that (G, ℓ) |= ψ(v, w) for some v, w ⊆ V (G). Since p ≥ |v| + |w|,
there exists U ∈ Col(p) such that G[U ] contains both v and w. Therefore, (G[U ], ℓ) |= ψ(v, w).
Furthermore,

                          (G, ℓ) |= φ(v) ⇐⇒ ∃U ∈ Col(p), v ⊆ G[U ], (G[U ], ℓ) |= φ(v)
                                                 ⇐⇒ ∃U ∈ Col(p), v ⊆ G[U ], (F U , ℓU
                                                                                    1 ) |= φ1 (v)
                                                 ⇐⇒ ∃U ∈ Col(p), (S, ℓU      bU (v)
                                                                      1 ) |= φ

                                                 ⇐⇒ (S, ℓ)
                                                        b |= φ(v)
                                                             b

where the second equivalence is thanks to Lemma 5.3.

   Next, we adapt Lemma 4.19 to the case of general (i.e., non necessarily local) formulas.

Lemma 5.5. Let p ∈ N, let Λ be a set of labels, and let φ(x) be a p-lca-reduced formula. There
                       b and a quantifier free formula ψ(x, y) such that, for every G ∈ G, every
exists a set of labels Λ,
p-skeleton S of G, and every Λ-labeling ℓ of G, there exists a labeling ℓb of G for which

                                                    true(φ, S, ℓ) = true(φ,
                                                                         b G, ℓ).
                                                                              b

Moreover, for every p, Λ and φ, there exists a distributed algorithm that, given S and ℓ as inputs,
computes ℓb without any communication.

Proof. This lemma is a direct consequence of the arguments in the proof of Lemma 4.19. Indeed,
we follow the same steps as in that proof, until the predicates lcaU
                                                                   i (y, z) has to be replace by the
similar existential formula
                                                     _
     ∃(y0 , . . . , yd ) ∃(z0 , . . . , zd )                      (ya = y) ∧ (zb = z)
                                               (a,b)∈[i,2p −1]2
                              ^                                ^                   
                         ∧               ys = zs ∧                            ys ̸= zs ∧ depthU              U
                                                                                              0 (y0 ) ∧ depth0 (z0 )
                               s∈[0,i]                     s∈[i+1,min(a,b)]
                                                                                                                                     !
                              ^                                                      ^                                        
                         ∧               depthU
                                              s (ys ) ∧ adj(ys−1 , ys )           ∧             depthU
                                                                                                     s (zs ) ∧ adj(zs−1 , zs )
                               s∈[1,a]                                                s∈[1,b]

This completes the proof.

   We are now ready to deal with quantifier elimination of general first-order formulas.



                                                                    54
Lemma 5.6. Let Λ be a set of labels, and let φ(x) be a formula in FO[Λ]. There exists p ∈ N,
a set of labels ℓ,
                b and a p-lca-reduced formula φ(x) b   such that, for every (G, ℓ) ∈ G[Λ], and every
p-skeleton S of G, there exists a ℓ-labeling
                                  b          ℓb of G such that

                                     true(φ, G, ℓ) = true(φ,
                                                          b S, ℓ).
                                                               b

Moreover, there exists a distributed algorithm that computes the labeling ℓb in O(D + log n) rounds,
assuming ℓ and S are given as input.

Proof. We prove the lemma by designing the algorithm by induction on the quantifier depth t of
the formula. For the base case, φ(x) is quantifier-free. Let p = |x|. Thanks to Lemma 4.15, the
p-skeleton S can be computed in O(log n) rounds. We can then apply Lemma 5.4 with |y| = 0, and
return the reduction of (Λ, φ, ℓ) on S.
    Now let us suppose that the statement of the lemma holds for all formulas with quantifier
depth t ≥ 0. Let φ(x) = Qy, ψ(x, y), where Q ∈ {∃, ∀}, and ψ is a formula of quantifier depth t.
We study Q = ∃ and Q = ∀ separately.

Existential quantifier. By induction hypothesis, an integer p1 , a set Λ1 , a p1 -lca-reduced formula
     ψ1 (x, y), a set of labels ℓ2 , and a p1 -skeleton S such that

                                        true(ψ, G, ℓ) = true(ψ1 , S, ℓ1 )

     can be computed in O(D + log n) rounds. One would then like to apply Lemma 5.4 on
     ∃y ψ1 (x, y). However, ψ1 is not defined over graphs of bounded expansion, but over p1 -
     skeletons. Therefore, we first apply Lemma 5.5 on p1 , Λ1 , ψ1 , G, S, ℓ1 , to compute Λ2 , ψ2 (x, y),
     and ℓ2 satisfying
                                      true(ψ1 , S, ℓ1 ) = true(ψ2 , G, ℓ2 )
     in O(log n) rounds, where ψ2 is existential, of the form ψ2 (x, y) = ∃z, ρ(x, y, z), where ρ ∈
     FO[Λ2 ] is quantifier-free. Now we can define φ2 (x) = ∃y ψ2 (x, y). Note that φ2 is also
     existential, and
                                    true(φ2 , G, ℓ2 ) = true(φ, G, ℓ).
     We can finally apply Lemma 5.4 to compute a reduction (p, Λ,
                                                               b φ,
                                                                  b ℓ)
                                                                    b of (Λ2 , φ2 , ℓ2 ).

Universal quantifier. In this case, we merely rewrite φ as:

                                            φ(x) = ¬∃y ¬ψ(x, y).

     By induction hypothesis, an integer p1 , a set Λ1 , a p1 -lca-reduced formula ψ1 (x, y), a Λ1 -
     labeling ℓ1 of G, and a p1 -skeleton S1 of G can be computed in O(D + log n) rounds, such
     that
                                     true(ψ, G, ℓ) = true(ψ1 , S1 , ℓ1 ).
     The negation of ψ1 is still a p1 -lca-reduced formula. Let us apply Lemma 5.5 on p1 , Λ1 , ¬ψ1 ,
     G, S1 , and ℓ1 to compute a set Λ2 , an existential formula ψ2 , and a Λ2 -labeling ℓ2 of G in
     O(log n) rounds, such that

                                     true(¬ψ1 , S1 , ℓ1 ) = true(ψ2 , G, ℓ2 ).


                                                    55
      Now we can define ρ(x) = ∃y ψ2 (x, y). Observe that this formula is existential, and it satisfies

                                        true(φ, G, ℓ) = true(¬ρ, G, ℓ2 ).

      We can eventually apply Lemma 5.4 to compute the reduction (p, Λ,     b ρb, ℓ)
                                                                                  b of (Λ2 , ρ, ℓ2 ) in
      O(D + log n) additional rounds. In particular, ρb is p-lca-reduced, as well as ¬bρ. Therefore
          b ¬b
      (p, Λ, ρ, ℓ)
                b is the reduction of (Λ, φ, ℓ).

    We obtain that eliminating each quantifier of φ can be done in O(D + log n) rounds.

5.4    Proof of Theorem 5.1
Let φ be a formula in FO[Λ]. We define the formula φ′ (x) with one (dummy) free variable by

                                          φ′ (x) = φ ∧ (x = x).

We do have that, for every labeled graph (G, ℓ), and for every node v ∈ V (G),

                                    (G, ℓ) |= φ′ (v) ⇐⇒ (G, ℓ) |= φ.

By Lemma 5.6, φ′ (x) can be reduced to a p-lca-reduced formula φ(x)
                                                                  b    in O(D + log n) rounds. Since
φ(x)
b     is quantifier free, each node v can check locally (without additional communication) whether
it satisfies φ.
             b By definition of the reduction, the truth of φ   b is equivalent to that of φ′ , which
completes the proof.


6     Counting and Optimization Problems
In this section, we prove Theorems 1.6 and 1.7. We restate these two theorems here, in their full
generality of labeled graphs.

Theorem 6.1. Let Λ be a finite set. For every FO formula φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) on Λ-labeled graphs
with k ≥ 1 free variables x1 , . . . , xk , and for every class of graphs G of bounded expansion, there
exists a distributed algorithm that, for every n-node network G = (V, E) ∈ G of diameter D and
every ℓ : V → 2Λ , performs global counting in O(D + log n) rounds in CONGEST. If the for-
mula φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) is local then there exists a distributed algorithm that performs local counting in
O(log n) rounds in CONGEST.

Theorem 6.2. Let Λ be a finite set. For every FO formula φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) on Λ-labeled graphs
with k ≥ 1 free variables x1 , . . . , xk , and for every class graphs G of bounded expansion, there
exists a distributed algorithm that, for every n-node network G = (V, E) ∈ G of diameter D, every
ℓ : V → 2Λ , and every weight function        P ω : V → N, computes a k-tuple of vertices (v1 , . . . , vk )
such that (G, ℓ) |= φ(v1 , . . . , vk ) and ki=1 ω(vi ) is maximum, in O(D + log n) rounds under the
CONGEST model. (The same holds if replacing maximum by minimum.) If no tuples (v1 , . . . , vk )
exist such that (G, ℓ) |= φ(v1 , . . . , vk ), then all nodes reject.

    To ease the notations, let us adopt the following notations.
                                                                                          Pk
    • Let OPTφ (G, L) denote the optimum value for φ, i.e., the maximum value of             i=1 ω(vi ) over
      all k-uples of vertices (v1 , . . . , vk ) such that G |= φ(v1 , . . . , vk ).

                                                    56
    • Let countφ (G, L) denote the number of k-uples satisfying the formula.

    • Given some (p, f (p))-treedepth coloring of G, and a set of colors U , let OPTφ (G[U ], L) and
      countφ (G[U ], L) be the same quantities as above, but assuming that the formula is restricted
      to the subgraph G[U ] of G induced by the colors in U .

Let us prove the following lemma, which is restricted to quantifier-free formulas.

Lemma 6.3. Let Λ be a finite set. For every quantifier-free FO formula φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) on Λ-labeled
graphs with k ≥ 1 free variables x1 , . . . , xk , and for every class of graphs G of bounded expansion,
there exists a distributed algorithm that, for every n-node network G = (V, E) ∈ G of diameter D,
and every ℓ : V → 2Λ , performs global counting in O(D + log n) rounds under the CONGEST model.
If the formula is local, then there exists an algorithm that performs local counting in O(log n) rounds
under the CONGEST model.

6.1    Proof of Lemma 6.3 and Theorem 6.2
We first consider Lemma 6.3, on counting. In this case, the formula φ has exactly k variables,
namely x1 , . . . , xk . We now apply Proposition 3.9 to compute, in O(log n) rounds, a (k, f (k))-
treedepth coloring of G. Since formula φ has exactly k variables, a k-uple of vertices (v1 . . . , vk ) sat-
isfies the formula in (G, ℓ) if and only if it satisfies it in some set G[U ]. By definition, countφ (G[U ], ℓ)
is the size of the set true(φ, G[U ], ℓ) of k-uples (v1 , . . . , vk ) such that (G[U ], ℓ) |= φ(v1 , . . . , vk ). An
easy but crucial observation is that, for any two sets of colors U1 , U2 , we have that

                        true(φ, G[U1 ], ℓ) ∩ true(φ, G[U2 ], ℓ) = true(φ, G[U1 ∩ U2 ], ℓ),

because φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) has no other variables than the free ones. The condition fails if one allows
other variables, which explains that the technique does not extend directly to arbitrary FO formulas;
this is the subject of Section 6.2. The equality above allows us to use the inclusion-exclusion
principle in order to count the solutions of φ, assuming that we were able to count the partial
solutions over subgraphs G[U ], where U are sets of at most k colors.

Lemma 6.4. Let φ(x1 , . . . , xk ) ∈ F O(Λ) be a quantifier-free formula. Let us consider a (k, f (k))-
treedepth coloring of (G, ℓ) ∈ G[Λ]. Let κ = f (k)
                                                  
                                                k , and let U1 . . . Uκ be all subsets of [f (k)] of size k.
Then
                                X κ              X
                countφ (G, ℓ) =     (−1)h−1              countφ (G[Ui1 ∩ · · · ∩ Uih ], ℓ).
                                    h=1            1≤i1 ≤···≤ih ≤κ

Proof. Recall that for any i ∈ [κ], countφ (G[Ui ], ℓ) is the size of the set true(φ, G[Ui ], ℓ) of k-uples
(v1 , . . . , vk ) such that (G[Ui ], ℓ) |= φ(v1 , . . . , vk ). Also, countφ (G[Ui1 ∩ · · · ∩ Uih ], ℓ) is the size of
the set true(φ, G[Ui1 ∩ · · · ∩ Uih ], ℓ), which is itself equal to true(φ, G[Ui1 ]) ∩ · · · ∩ true(φ, G[Uih ], ℓ).
Eventually, true(φ, G, ℓ) = true(φ, G[U1 ], ℓ)∪· · ·∪true(φ, G[Uκ ], ℓ) and countφ (G, ℓ) = |true(φ, G, ℓ)|,
so the formula is a straightforward application of the inclusion-exclusion principle.

    Before explaining (in Lemma 6.7) how to compute the values countφ (G[U ], ℓ), we address opti-
mization as stated in Theorem 6.2. Recall that, in general, the formula φ may have other (quanti-
fied) variables than its free valiables. We first transform φ(x) into an equivalent existential formula
φ̃(x) at the cost of enriching the set of labels, and the labeling of the input graph.


                                                          57
Lemma 6.5. Given a formula φ(x) ∈ F O[Λ], and a labeled graph (G, ℓ) ∈ G[Λ], a tuple (Λ̃, φ̃, ℓ̃)
such that
  1. ℓ̃ is a Λ̃-labeling of G,
  2. φ̃(x) is an existential formula in F O[Λ̃], i.e., φ̃(x) = ∃y ψ(x, y) where ψ ∈ Λ̃ is quantifier-free,
     and
  3. true(φ, G, ℓ) = true(φ̃, G, ℓ̃),
can be computed in O(D + log n) rounds in CONGEST.
Proof. Thanks to Lemma 5.6 (see also Definition 4.16), there exists some constant p such that, for
any p-skeleton S of G (obtained by Lemma 4.15), the tuple (Λ, φ, τp , ℓ) can be reduced to a tuple
(p, Λ,
    b φ, b in O(D + log n) rounds, where φ(x)
       b ℓ)                               b      is a p-lca-reduced (thus quantifier-free) formula in
F O(Λ),
     b ℓb is a Λ
               b labeling of S, and true(φ, G, ℓ) = true(φ,b S, ℓ).
                                                                b Now, given the tuple (p, Λ, b φ,
                                                                                                b ℓ),
                                                                                                   b
Lemma 5.5 states that the desired tuple (Λ̃, φ̃, ℓ̃) can be computed with no extra communication.

     Thanks to Lemma 6.5, we may now assume, w.l.o.g., that, in the proof of Theorem 6.2, the
formula φ(x) = ∃yψ(x, y) is given in an existential form, where ψ ∈ F O[Λ] is quantifier-free.
     Let p = |x| + |y|. We use again Proposition 3.9 to compute a (p, f (p))-treedepth coloring of
G in O(log n) rounds. Since φ has exactly p variables, a k-uple of vertices (v1 . . . , vk ) satisfies the
formula in (G, ℓ) if and only if it satisfies it in some subgraph G[U ], where U can be viewed as
obtained by “guessing” the colors of (v1 , . . . , vk ) as well as the colors of the quantified variables
(y1 , . . . , yp−k ) = y. This is formally stated as follows, for further references.
Lemma 6.6. Let φ ∈ F O(Λ) be an existential formula, i.e., φ(x) = ∃y, ψ(x, y), where ψ ∈ F O[Λ]
is quantifier-free. Let p = |x| + |y|, and let us assume a given a (p, f (p)) coloring of (G, ℓ) ∈ G[Λ].
We have
                              OPTφ (G, ℓ) =       max     OPTφ (G[U ], ℓ).
                                             U ⊆[f (p)], |U |≤p

    It remains to compute OPTφ (G[U ], ℓ) and countφ (G[U ], ℓ) for every set U of at most p colors,
given some (p, f (p))-treedepth coloring of G. This is partially done in Proposition 3.7 thanks a
previous result in [31] in which it is shown that OPTφ (G, ℓ) and countφ (G, ℓ) can be computed in a
constant number of rounds in connected graphs of bounded treedepth. We however need to extend
their techniques to fit our purposes, i.e., to deal with disconnected graphs of bounded treedepth
(the non-necessarily connected subgraphs of G induced by a set of colors U ). For global counting,
the cost of communication among different components adds an additive term O(D) to the round
complexity.
Lemma 6.7. Let G[Λ] be a class of labeled graphs of bounded expansion, let φ(x) be a F O(Λ)
formula, and p ∈ N. Let us assume given a (p, f (p))-treedepth coloring of (G, ℓ) ∈ G[Λ], and let
U ⊆ [f (p)] be any set of at most p colors. Then OPTφ (G[U ], ℓ) and countφ (G[U ], ℓ) can be computed
in O(D) rounds in CONGEST. Moreover, if φ is local, then local counting in G[U ] can be solved in
O(1) rounds.
Proof. Let us first consider the case of local counting, that is, we assume φ is local. In this case,
countφ (G[U ], ℓ) is equal to the sum of countφ over all connected components of G[U ], i.e.,
                                                      X
                               countφ (G[U ], ℓ) =             countφ (H, ℓ),
                                                   H∈CC(G[U ])


                                                     58
where CC(G[U ]) denotes the set of connected components of G[U ]. Each component H ∈ CC(G[U ])
has treedepth at most |U |, and thus, by Proposition 3.7, countφ (H, ℓ) can be computed in O(1)
rounds. One arbitrary node vH ∈ H outputs ν(vH ) = countφ (H, ℓ), whereas every other node u
outputs ν(u) = 0. Since H has bounded treedepth and thus bounded diameter, we can choose vH
to be for example the node in H with maximal identifier. It follows that
             X             X                    X
                ν(v) =              ν(vH ) =             countφ (H, ℓ) = countφ (G[U ], ℓ)
            v∈V        H∈CC(G[U ])           H∈CC(G[U ])

    Let us now focus on counting and optimization for an arbitrary (non-necessarily local) formula.
    To prove the lemma, we generalize the techniques of [31] for proving Proposition 3.7. We will
only restate here the main features of the proof in [31], based on tree decomposition and treewidth-
related techniques. Recall that the tree decomposition of a graph H = (V, E) is a pair

                                        (T = (I, F ), {Bi }i∈I )

where T is a tree, and, for every i ∈ I, Bi is a subset of vertices of V , referred to as the bag of
node i in T , or merely “bag i”, such that

   • every vertex of H is contained in at least one bag,

   • for every edge of H, at least one bag contains its two endpoints, and

   • for every vertex v of H, the nodes of T whose bags contain v form a connected subgraph of T .

The width of the decomposition is the maximum size of a bag, minus one. The treewidth of H is
the minimum width over all its tree decompositions. Note that graphs of treedepth at most p have
treewidth at most 2p [67]. The proof of Proposition 3.7 is based on three ingredients.

  1. The first ingredient is a dynamic programming centralized algorithm for decision, optimiza-
     tion and counting solutions of a given formula φ(x) ∈ F O(Λ), over labeled graphs (H, ℓ)
     of bounded treewidth. Here we will assume that a tree decomposition of constant width is
     part of the input, and moreover the tree is rooted. The distributed algorithm used in [31]
     is based on the centralized algorithm by Borie, Parker and Tovey [6]. The nodes of the tree
     decomposition (T = (I, F ), {Bi }i∈I ) are processed bottom-up, from the leaves to the root of
     T . When processing node i, let j1 , . . . , jq be its children in T . The essential observation due
     to [6] is that the dynamic programming tables at node i are of constant size for decision,
     and of O(log n) size for counting and optimization. Moreover, for computing the informa-
     tion (encoding partial solutions) at node i, one only needs to know the subgraphs H[Bi ] and
     H[Bj1 ], . . . , H[Bjq ] induced by the bags at node i and its children, together with the infor-
     mation already computed at the children nodes. In particular, when i is a leaf, H[Bi ] suffices
     for computing the dynamic programming table at node i.

  2. The second ingredient of [31] is an implementation of the above centralized algorithm in the
     CONGEST model, in a number of rounds equal to the depth of the tree decomposition T ,
     under the condition that one can associate to each node i of T a vertex h(i) of H, such that
     vertices h(i) satisfy several properties in order to “simulate the behavior” of node i in the
     dynamic programming. Vertex h(i) must know the depth of tree T and the depth of node i in


                                                  59
      T , the bag Bi and the subgraph H[Bi ], and moreover h(i) knows the node h(pT (i)) associated
      to the parent pT (i) of i in T , and vertices h(i), h(pT (i)) are equal or adjacent in H. Informally,
      the distributed algorithm implements the centralized one by making vertex h(i) to help it
      computing the right moment (i.e., at the round corresponding to the depth of T minus the
      depth of i in T , plus one) the dynamic programming table at node i is processed, and the
      result transmitted to h(pT (i)). Observe that h(i) has collected all the information from the
      children j1 , . . . , jq of i, thanks to the fact that h(j1 ), . . . , h(jq ) have already computed and
      communicated it at the previous round. (To be complete, in [31], one actually has h(i) = i
      and T is a subgraph of H, but our generalization is a simple observation.) This explains that
      the number of rounds of the distributed algorithm is the depth of the tree decomposition T .

  3. The third ingredient in [31] is an algorithm computing the desired tree decomposition
     (T = (I, F ), {Bi }i∈I ) of graph H of treedepth at most p in a constant number of rounds,
     together with the information requested by the previous item. The width of the tree-
     decomposition is at most p, and the depth of T is at most 2p .

    Let us now come back to our framework, that is when H = G[U ] is the subgraph of G induced
by some set U of at most p colors of some (p, f (p))-treedepth decomposition of G. In particular
H = G[U ] has treedepth at most p. Our goal is to replace the third item above by a distributed
algorithm running in O(D) rounds in CONGEST for computing a suitable tree decomposition of
G[U ]. We compute a p-skeleton using Lemma 4.15. Note that this can be done in O(22p ) rounds,
hence in a constant number of rounds whenever the coloring is provided. Let F U be the resulting
decomposition forest spanning G[U ], of depth at most 2d . Recall that each node knows its parent
and depth in the forest.
    Generalizing [31], we transform the decomposition forest F U into a tree decomposition of G[U ].
This tree decomposition (T = (I, F ), {Bi }i∈I ) has to be computed in time O(D) and to satisfy all
the conditions of the second ingredient above. The only difference is that, for each node i of T , its
“leader” h(i) has to be a vertex of G (not necessarily of G[U ]), and, for each pair of nodes i, j of T
such that j = pT (i), vertices h(i) and h(j) must be adjacent in G. In our construction, there may
be up to two different nodes of T having the same leader in G.
    Let us choose an arbitrary vertex r of G, and compute a breadth-first search tree of G. From
this rooted tree, remove every node v that does not have a descendant which is a root in F U . Note
that the construction of this tree can be performed in time O(D) rounds. We call T S the resulting
tree, rooted at r. T S can be viewed as a Steiner tree in G spanning r and all the vertices labeled
rootU . The depth of T S is, by construction, at most D, the diameter of G.
    From now on, let us focus on T S alone, independently from the the fact that it is a subgraph
of G. Let us then construct a “virtual” tree T by augmenting T S a follows. For every vertex labeled
rootU in T S, we root the corresponding tree T U to that vertex. So, such a vertex has two types
of children in T , those originally in T S, and those in the tree T U rooted at that vertex. Note that
two different vertices i and j in T may correspond to the same node v in G, as node i may be v as
a node in T S, and j may be v again, but as a node of T U . For every node i of T , let h(i) be the
corresponding vertex of G. Note that, by a simple distributed algorithm working in O(D) rounds,
each node h(i) of G can learn the depth of T , the depth of i in T , and the identifier of h(pT (i)).
The depth of T is at most D + 2p because the forest F has depth at most 2p . By construction, h(i)
and h(pT (i)) are either adjacent in G or equal, whenever i is labeled rootU .



                                                     60
   It remains to construct the bag Bi for each node i of T , and to ensure that the node h(i) of G
knows the subgraph induced by Bi in H = G[U ].
   • For every node i of T belonging to T S, we set Bi = ∅.
   • For every node i belonging to F U , we act as in [31], i.e., we set h(i) = i, and Bi is the set
     of ancestors of i in F U . As observed in [31], each node i can learn the subgraph induced by
     bag Bi in a constant number of rounds. Moreover, for each tree T U of the forest F U , the
     restriction of the decomposition (T = (I, F ), {Bi }i∈F ) to T U is a tree decomposition of the
     subgraph of G induced by the vertices of T U , of width at most 2p .
    It is a matter of exercise to check that, by attaching to T S the tree-decompositions corresponding
to the trees T U in the forest F U , the resulting tree is a tree decomposition of G[U ] with width at
most 2p . Therefore we can apply the same dynamic programming scheme as above for computing
values OPTφ (G[U ], ℓ) and countφ (G[U ], ℓ) in D + 2p rounds. Together with the construction of the
tree decomposition, the overall algorithm takes O(D) rounds.

    By plugging the result of Lemma 6.7 into Lemma 6.6 and Lemma 6.4 over all sets U of at most
p colors for a suitable p depending on φ and a (p, f (p))-treedepth coloring of G, we achieve the
proof of Lemma 6.3 and Theorem 6.2. Note that in each case, we need to build a (p, f (p))-treedepth
coloring, which can be done in O(log n) CONGEST rounds by Proposition 3.9.

6.2   Proof of Theorem 6.1
Lemma 6.3 shows how to solve the counting problem for quantifier-free FO formulas on bounded
expansion classes. In order to prove the more general Theorem 6.1, we apply the quantifier elim-
ination techniques developed in Sections 4 and 5. Lemma 5.6 transforms a general FO formula
into a p-lca-reduced formula. However, Lemma 6.3 does not handle such formulas, as it only deals
with usual adjacency and equality predicates. In order to solve that issue, it is tempting to use
Lemma 5.5, which replaces lca predicates by FO formulas. However, this would result in an existen-
tial formula rather than a quantifier free formula as needed for applying Lemma 6.3. The main idea
of the proof of Theorem 6.1 is to maintain that the quantified variables introduced by Lemma 5.5
are quantified uniquely, in the following sense.
Definition 6.8. Let p ∈ N, let Λ a set of labels, and let φ(x) ∈ FO[Λ] be a p-lca-reduced formula.
φ is lca-freeable on G if there exists Λ,
                                       b and a quantifier free formula ψ(x, y) ∈ FO[Λ]
                                                                                    b such that, for
every G = (V, E) ∈ G, for every Λ-labeled p-skeleton (S, ℓ) of G, there exists a Λ-labeling
                                                                                   b         ℓb of G
satisfying
                                           
   1. true(φ, S, ℓ) = true ∃y ψ(x, y) , G, ℓb , and

  2. for every v ⊆ V satisfying (S, ℓ) |= φ(v), there exists a unique w ⊆ V such that (G, ℓ)
                                                                                          b |=
     ψ(v, w).
The following lemma outlines the usefulness of lca-freeability for counting.
Lemma 6.9. Let p ∈ N, and let φ(x) ∈ FO[Λ] be a p-lca-reduced, and lca-freeable formula. For
      b ψ(x, y), G, S, ℓ, ℓb as in Definition 6.8,
every Λ,

                                    countφ (S, ℓ) = countψ (G, ℓ).
                                                               b


                                                  61
Proof. Definition 6.8 specifies the existence of a one-to-one correspondence between true(φ, S, ℓ)
and true(ψ, G, ℓ).
               b These two set have thus the same cardinality.

    The following lemma is an analog of Lemma 5.5.

Lemma 6.10. Every formula φ(y, z) = lcaU   i (y, z) is lca-freeable on G. Moreover, assuming (S, ℓ)
is given as input, every node u can compute Λ,
                                             b ψ, ℓ(u)
                                                   b     without any communication.

Proof. The proof follows the same guidelines as the one of Lemma 5.5. Recall labels colork were
added for each color k, and the label depthU
                                           j was added to mark the depth of a node in each forest
  U
F . Each lca predicates was then replaced by an existential formula. The following formula is
very similar, except that we removed the quantifiers on y0 , . . . , yd−1 , z0 , . . . , zd−1 , which are now
free variables, and we added another constraint, specified on the last line of the formula below.


                                                                _
   ψ(y, z, y0 , . . . , yd−1 ,z0 , . . . , zd−1 ) =                           (ya = y) ∧ (zb = z)
                                                      (a,b)∈[max(0,i),d−1]2
                                   ^                                ^                   
                              ∧                 ys = zs ∧                          ys ̸= zs ∧ depthU              U
                                                                                                   0 (y0 ) ∧ depth0 (z0 )
                                      s∈[0,i]                   s∈[i+1,min(a,b)]
                                   ^                                           ^                               
                              ∧                 depthU
                                                     s (ys ) ∧ adj(ys−1 , ys ) ∧    depthU
                                                                                         s (zs ) ∧ adj(zs−1 , zs )
                                      s∈[1,a]                                           s∈[1,b]
                                                                                                 !
                                          ^                            ^                  
                              ∧                     ys = y ∧                        zs = z       .
                                      s∈[a+1,d−1]                     s∈[b+1,d−1]


Recall that a (resp., b) represents here the depth of y (resp., z) in F U , and y0 , . . . , ya (resp.,
z0 , . . . , zb ) represent the path from the root of y’s tree to y (resp., from the root of z’s tree to z).
Since, in general, variables ya+1 , . . . , yd−1 , zb+1 , . . . , zd−1 can take any value, the (new) last line of
the formula above is needed to enforce their uniqueness. For the same reasons as in Lemma 5.5, ψ
satisfies
                                  true(φ, S, ℓ) = true(∃y, ∃z, ψ(y, z, y, z), G, ℓ).
                                                                                  b

Let us now prove that the quantified variables are unique. Fix (y, z) ∈ true(φ, S, ℓ) and let y, z such
         b |= ψ(y, z, y, z). For some (a, b) ∈ [i, d − 1]2 , the inside of the disjunction of ψ is true.
that (G, ℓ)
This implies that:

   • y (resp. z) has depth a (resp. b),

   • for s ≤ a (resp. s ≤ b), ys (resp. zs ) is the (unique) ancestor of y (resp. z) at depth s, and

   • for s > a (resp. s > b), ys = y (resp. zs = z), thus it is also unique.

This completes the proof.

Lemma 6.11. A conjunction of lca-freeable formulas is lca-freeable.




                                                                    62
Proof. Let φ1 (x), φ2 (x) be two lca-freeable formulas and φ(x) = φ1 (x) ∧ φ2 (x). Let Λ                b 1, Λ b 2,
ψ1 (x, y), ψ2 (x, z) as in Definition 6.8. We set Λ = Λ1 ∪ Λ2 , where we assume, w.l.o.g., that the
                                                         b     b    b
sets of labels Λ       b 2 are disjoint, and we set ψ(x, y, z) = ψ1 (x, y) ∧ ψ2 (x, z). For G, S, ℓ1 , ℓ2 , ℓb1 , ℓb2
                  b 1, Λ
as in Definition 6.8, we define ℓ(u)  b    = ℓb1 (u) ∪ ℓb2 (u). Let v ∈ true(φ, S, ℓ). Since ψ1 (resp. ψ2 ) is
lca-freeable, there exists a unique w (resp. u) such that (v, w) ∈ true(ψ1 , G, ℓb1 ) (resp. (v, u) ∈
true(ψ2 , G, ℓb2 )). Then, (G, ℓ) b |= ψ(v, w, u). Conversely, let w′ , u′ such that (G, ℓ) b |= ψ(v, w′ , u′ ).
Then, (G, ℓ)b |= ψ1 (v, w′ (resp. ψ2 (v, u′ )), which implies w′ = w (resp. u′ = u).

    At this stage, we can now prove the global counting part of Theorem 6.1.

Proof of Theorem 6.1 (global counting). Let Λ be a (finite) set of labels and φ(x) ∈ FO[Λ]. By
Lemma 5.6, there exists p ∈ N, Λ1 and φ1 (x) ∈ FO[Λ1 ] p-lca-reduced such that, for every (G, ℓ) ∈
G[Λ], and for every S p-skeleton of G, there exists a Λ1 -labeling ℓ1 of S such that true(φ, G, ℓ) =
true(φ1 , S, ℓ1 ) (and thus countφ (G, ℓ) = countφ1 (S, ℓ1 ). We compute a p-skeleton using Lemma 4.15,
and the corresponding labeling ℓ1 , in O(D + log n) rounds. Let us write φ1 in disjunctive normal
form:
                                                      _ k
                                             φ1 (x) =      ψj (x)
                                                            j=1

where ψj is a conjunction of lcaU
                                i predicates, label predicates, color predicates, or their negations.
As in Lemma 4.19, note that ¬lcaU i (x, y) is equivalent to:
                                                          _
                         ¬colorU (x) ∨ ¬colorU (y) ∨            lcaU
                                                                   j (x, y).
                                                                  j∈[−1,d]\{i}

We may thus assume that φ1 does not contain any negated lca predicate. We apply the inclu-
sion/exclusion principle to φ1 , that is,
                                          k
                                          X                     X
                     countφ1 (S, ℓ1 ) =     (−1)h−1                         countVh         (S, ℓ1 ).
                                                                                  m=1 ψjm
                                          h=1             1≤j1 <···<jh ≤k

It only remains to compute the values of

                                                countVh           (S, ℓ1 ),
                                                       m=1 ψjm


for some fixed indexes j1 , . . . , jh . Since each ψjm are conjunctions of lcaU -predicates and (possibly
negated) label and color predicates, it is also true of hm=1 ψjm . By Lemmas 6.10 and 6.11, this
                                                             V

formula is lca-freeable. By Lemma 6.9 there exists Λ,     b ψb ∈ FO[Λ] quantifier-free, and ℓb such that

                                    countVh            (S, ℓ1 ) = countψb(G, ℓ).
                                                                             b
                                             m=1 ψjm


Moreover, Λ,
           b ψ,
             b ℓ(u)
                b    can be computed by any node u without communication (cf. Lemmas 6.10
and 6.11, and their proofs). Finally, since ψb is quantifier free, it only remains to apply Lemma 6.3
to complete the proof.

   In order to prove our result on local counting, we need to adapt the notion of lca-freeable
formulas so that it preserves locality.

                                                           63
Definition 6.12. Let p ∈ N, let Λ be a (finite) set of labels, and let φ(x) ∈ FO[Λ] be a local
p-lca-reduced formula. φ is locally lca-freeable on G if the following two conditions hold:

   • φ is lca-freeable, and

   • the quantifier-free formula ψ from Definition 6.8 can be chosen to be local.

The following lemma is the “locality preserving version” of Lemmas 6.10 and 6.11.

Lemma 6.13. Let φ(x) ∈ FO[Λ] be a p-lca-reduced formula that is supposed to be a conjunction
of lcaU predicates, and (possibly negated) label and color predicates. If φ is local then it is locally
lca-freeable. Moreover, assuming a p-skeleton (S, ℓ) is given as input, each node u can compute
Λ,
b ψ, ℓ(u)
      b    matching the requirement of Definition 6.8 without any communication.

    Before proving Lemma 6.13, we first prove a technical lemma.

Lemma 6.14. Let φ(x) be a local p-lca-reduced formula that is assumed to be a conjunction of lcaU
predicates, and (possibly negated) label and color predicates. Let k = |x|, and let H(φ) be the graph
with vertex set equal to the set of variables x1 , . . . , xk , and where there is an edge between xi and xj
if and only if the formula φ contains a predicate of the form lcaU      m (xi , xj ) with m ≥ 0. If there exists
a labeled skeleton (S, ℓ), and a set of vertices v such that (S, ℓ) |= φ(v), then, H(φ) is connected.

Proof. Let us fix a formula φ, a labeled skeleton (S, ℓ), and a set of vertices v as in the statement
of the lemma. We proceed by contradiction. Let us assume that H(φ) is not connected. Up to
a reordering of the variables x2 , . . . , xk , we may assume that x1 , . . . , xs form a single connected
component, 1 ≤ s < k, and that the vertices xs+1 , . . . , xk are in other connected components. Let
us consider the labeled skeleton (S ′ , ℓ′ ) consisting of two connected components S 1 and S 2 , each of
which being a copy of (S, ℓ). For any vertex u ∈ S, let us denote by ui the copy of u in S i . Let w
where, for every i = 1, . . . , k,                 ®
                                                     vi1 if i ≤ s
                                              wi =
                                                     vi2 if i > s
We have that (S ′ , ℓ′ ) |= φ(w). However ws+1 , . . . , wk are not in the connected component of w1 . In
particular, they are not at bounded distance from w1 . This contradicts the fact that φ is local (see
Definition 3.2).

    When H(φ) is connected, we say that φ is lca-connected.

Proof of Lemma 6.13. Since φ is local, we get from Lemma 6.14 that it is either lca-connected, or
always false. Let us assume that it is not lca-connected. Then one can trivially output the formula
⊥ that is always false. Thus, we now assume that φ is lca-connected. We then merely adapt the
proofs of Lemmas 6.10 and 6.11. Let us consider a labeled p-skeleton (S, ℓ). As in the proof of
Lemma 6.10, we add new labels depthU   i , and colork , and we denote by ℓ the resulting labeling. We
                                                                         b




                                                      64
then replace each predicate lcaU
                               i (y, z) of φ by

              _                                                 ^                                  ^                 
                               (ya = y) ∧ (zb = z) ∧                     ys = zs ∧                           ys ̸= zs
      (a,b)∈[max(0,i),d−1]2                                    s∈[0,i]                    s∈[i+1,min(a,b)]

                              ∧ depthU              U
                                     0 (y0 ) ∧ depth0 (z0 )
                                   ^                                           ^                               
                              ∧                 depthU
                                                     s (ys ) ∧ adj(ys−1 , ys ) ∧    depthU
                                                                                         s (zs ) ∧ adj(zs−1 , zs )
                                      s∈[1,a]                                        s∈[1,b]
                                                                                              !
                                         ^                            ^                
                              ∧                     ys = y ∧                     zs = z           ,
                                      s∈[a+1,d−1]                  s∈[b+1,d−1]

where y1 , . . . , yd , z1 , . . . , zd are new free variables (which are unique, see the proof of Lemma 6.10).
Note that if the formula above is satisfied, then each newly introduced variable yi (resp. zi ) is at
distance at most d from y (resp. z). Moreover, if i ≥ 0, then y and z are at distance at most 2d, as
they are both at distance at most d from y0 = z0 . Let us denote by ψ(x, t) the formula obtained
by replacing each lcaU -predicate by the formula above (t is the collection of newly introduced
variables). By the same argument as in Lemma 6.10, we have

                                                true(φ, S, ℓ) = true(∃t ψ(x, t), G, ℓ),
                                                                                    b

and
                                                    countφ (S, ℓ) = countψ (G, ℓ).
                                                                               b

It only remains to show that ψ is local. Since it is quantifier-free, this is equivalent to showing that,
for some r′ , every labeled graph (G′ , ℓ′ ) satisfies

                                       (v, w) ∈ true(ψ, G′ , ℓ′ ) =⇒ v, w ⊆ BG′ (v1 , r′ ).

Since, are underlined above, each newly introduced variable in ti ∈ t̄ is at distance at most d from
at least one of the variables xj , it is sufficient to show that for some r′

                                        (v, w) ∈ true(ψ, G′ , ℓ′ ) =⇒ v ⊆ BG′ (v1 , r′ ),

as v ⊆ BG′ (v1 , r′ ) implies that w ⊆ BG′ (v1 , r′ + d). Recall that φ(x) is lca-connected, and so let
H(φ) be defined as in Lemma 6.14. For each index 1 ≤ j ≤ |x|, since H(φ) is connected there is a
path xi1 , . . . , xik from x1 to xj in H(φ). Since H(φ) has |x| nodes, we may assume this path has
length at most |x| − 1. The formula ψ guarantees that, for every l < k, xil and xil+1 are at distance
at most 2d in G′ . Finally, x1 and xj are at distance at most 2d(|x| − 1). This concludes the proof
that φ is local.

    We are now ready to establish Theorem 6.1.

Proof of Theorem 6.1 (local counting). We follow the same guidelines as in the proof of the global
counting result, but we make sure that locality is preserved throughout the process. Let us
consider a labeled graph (G, ℓ). Let us apply the locality preserving elimination technique (cf.
Lemma 4.20) for reducing φ to a local p-lca-reduced formula φ1 . We then construct a p-skeleton S



                                                                   65
(cf. Lemma 4.15), and a new labeling ℓ1 , in O(log n) rounds. Let us rewrite φ1 in disjunctive
normal form:
                                              _k
                                     φ1 (x) =     ψj (x)
                                                        j=1

where ψj is a conjunction of lcaU -predicates, and (possibly negated) label and color predicates — re-
call that we can assume that there are no negated lcaU -predicates. The formula φ1 is quantifier-free
so, thanks to Lemma 3.6, each term of the disjunction is local. Let us apply the inclusion/exclusion
principle to φ1 , i.e.,
                                        k
                                        X                    X
                   countφ1 (S, ℓ1 ) =     (−1)h−1                        countVh         (S, ℓ1 ).
                                                                               m=1 ψjm
                                        h=1          1≤j1 <···<jh ≤k

It thus remains solely to perform the local counting of

                                              countVh         (S, ℓ1 )
                                                    m=1 ψjm


for fixed indexes j1 , . . . , jh . Since each formula ψjm is a local conjunction of lca-predicates (as well
as possibly negated label and color predicates), then same holds for hm=1 ψjm . By Lemma 6.13, this
                                                                          V
latter formula formula is locally lca-freeable, and one can compute a local, quantifier free formula
ψ,
 b and a labeling ℓb of G, without any communication, such that

                                  countVh           (S, ℓ1 ) = countψb(G, ℓ).
                                                                          b
                                          m=1 ψjm


Since ψb is local and quantifier-free, it suffices to apply (the local case of) Lemma 6.3 for completing
the proof.


7     Distributed Certification
In this section we prove that every graph property expressible in FO can be certified with certificates
on O(log n) bits in graphs of bounded expansion.

Theorem 7.1. Let Λ be a finite set. For every FO formula φ on Λ-labeled graphs, and for every
class of graphs G of bounded expansion, there exists a distributed certification scheme that, for every
n-node network G = (V, E) ∈ G and every ℓ : V → 2Λ , certifies (G, ℓ) |= φ using certificates on
O(log n) bits.

    For establishing Theorem 7.1, we revisit the logical structures introduced and analyzed in the
previous section, by mainly focusing on the points where theses structures must be certified instead
of being computed.

7.1    Certifying Reduction of Trees with Bounded Depth
We begin with a basic primitive, that we use to count values, to identify connected components,
and for several other applications.



                                                        66
Proposition 7.2 ([56]). Let us suppose that each node u in a graph G = (V, E) is given as an
input a triple (root(u), parent(u), depth(u)), where root(u) and parent(u) are node identifiers, and
depth(u) is a positive integer. Let us consider the algorithm where each node u checks:
   • For each v ∈ N (u), root(v) = root(u) = ρ.

   • If id(u) = ρ then parent(u) = id(u) and depth(u) = 0.

   • If id(u) ̸= ρ, then there exists v ∈ N (u) s.t. id(v) = parent(u) and depth(v) = depth(u) − 1.
If all checks are passed at every node, then there exists a spanning tree T of G rooted at ρ such that
the function parent defines the parent relation in T , and depth(u) is the depth of u in T .
   In the above proposition, if all checks are passed at every node, then the set

                               {(root(u), parent(u), depth(u)) | u ∈ V }

is called the encoding of the tree T . Given a graph G and a forest F ⊆ G with components
T1 , . . . , Tk , we say that the nodes of G are given the encoding of F if, for every i ∈ [k], each node
u ∈ Ti is given the encoding of Ti .
Lemma 7.3. Let A be an algorithm such that, in every n-node network G = (V, E), every node u ∈
V is given an O(log n)-bit input In(u), and must produce an O(log n)-bit output Out(u). Let R(n)
be the round-complexity of A in the BROADCAST CONGEST model. Then, there is a certification
scheme using certificates on O(R(n) log n) bits that certifies that a pair of functions f : V → {0, 1}∗
and g : V → {0, 1}∗ form an input-output pair for A (i.e., if, for every node u ∈ V , In(u) = f (u),
then, for every node u ∈ V , Out(u) = g(u)).
Proof. On legal instances (f, g) for network G = (V, E), the prover provides each vertex u ∈ V
with the sequence M (u) = (m1 (u), . . . , mR(n) (u)) where mi (u) is the message that u broadcasts to
its neighbors on input f (u) during the i-th round of A.
    The verification algorithm proceeds as follows. Every node collects the certificates of its neigh-
bors, and simulates the R(n) rounds of A. That is, u checks first whether m1 (u) is indeed the
message that it would send in the first round of A. For every i ∈ {2, . . . , R(n)}, node u assumes
that the messages m1 (v), . . . , mi−1 (v) of each of its neighbors v ∈ N (u) were correct, and checks
whether mi (u) is indeed the message that it would broadcast at round i. If some of these tests are
not passed then u rejects. If all tests are passed, then u finally checks whether g(u) is the output
that u would produce by executing A, and accepts or rejects accordingly.
    The completeness and soundness of the algorithm follow by construction.

   Let us now prove a result analogous to Lemma 5.2, but for distributed certification.
Lemma 7.4. Let (G, ℓ) be a connected Λ-labeled graph, and let F ∈ Fd be a subgraph of G. Let
φ(x) = ∃y ζ(x, y) be a formula in FO[Λ], where ζ is an lca-reduced formula. Let us assume that
every node u of G is provided with the following values:
   • Two sets Λ and Λ;
                    b

   • The formula φ, and a lca-reduced formula φ;
                                              b

   • A set of labels ℓ(u) ⊆ Λ, and a set of labels ℓ(u)
                                                   b ⊆ Λ̂;


                                                   67
   • The encoding (root(u), parent(u), depth(u)) of F ;

   • The encoding (rootT (u), parentT (u), depthT (u)) of a spanning tree T of G.

There is a certification scheme using O(log n)-bit certificates that certifies that true(φ, F, ℓ) =
true(φ,
     b F, ℓ̃).

Proof. Let k = |x|. As in the proof of Lemma 4.8, let us assume w.l.o.g. that k ≥ 1 (as otherwise
we can create a dummy free variable x for φ). Moreover, let us assume that Λ        b and φb are the set
and the formula defined in the proof of Lemma 4.8. Since Λ         b and φb can be computed by every
node without any communication, each node can reject in case they are not appropriately defined.
Similarly, we can assume that ℓ and ℓ̂ are, respectively, a Λ-labeling and a Λ̂-labeling. Thanks to
Proposition 7.2, O(log n)-bits certificates are sufficient to certify that the encodings of F and T are
correctly. The remaining of the proof consists in checking that ℓb is correctly set as specified the
proof of Lemma 4.8.
    Let us first suppose that |y| = 1. We shall deal with the case when |y| > 1 later in the proof.
We start by proving the result for the case where ζ is a lca-type typeγ,δ ∈ Type(k + 1, d, Λ), where
the variable y is identified with variable k + 1 in the definition of γ and δ. In a second stage, we’ll
define s, h, hs and hy in the same way as we did in Lemma 4.8, and revisit the cases of Lemma 4.8.
    In Case 1 and 2, observe that the algorithms provided in Lemma 4.10 are algorithms that fit
with the broadcast constraint of the BROADCAST CONGEST model, running in O(d) rounds. On
input ℓ, these algorithms output ℓ.   b By Lemma 7.3, we can certify whether ℓb is well defined in
d · O(log n) = O(log n) rounds.
    Now let us deal with Case 3. The algorithm A given in Lemma 5.2 for this case has three phases.
The first two phases can be implemented by an algorithm B under the BROADCAST CONGEST
model, running in O(d) rounds. The output of B consists in a marking of all active roots, as well
as a marking of all good nodes. We can simulate these two first phases by giving a certificate to
each node, interpreted as the markings given by B, as well as a certificate of the execution of B.
According to Lemma 7.3, this can be implemented using certificates on O(log n) bits. The last
phase of Algorithm A aims at providing each node with the number of active roots. Each node u
receives a certificate consisting of:

   • an integer ρ(u) equal the number of active roots in F ;

   • a bit a(u) indicating whether or not u is an active root;

   • an integer val(u) equal to the sum of all bits a(v) in the subtree of T rooted at u.

Observe that these certificates can be encoded in O(log n) bits. For a non-negative integer ν, let
                                                ®
                                                    ν    if ν ≤ k,
                                       h(ν) =
                                                    ∞    otherwise.

The verifier checks the following conditions at every node u:

 (1) For every v ∈ N (u), ρ(u) = ρ(v);

 (2) a(u) = 1 if and only if u is marked as active by B;


                                                    68
 (3) The following condition holds
                                                                       X
                                           val(u) = a(u) +                        val(v),
                                                                  v∈Children(u)


      where Children(u) denotes the set of nodes v such that parentT (v) = id(u);

 (4) If id(u) = rootT (u), then val(u) = ρ(u);

 (5) If u ∈ F is marked as good by B, then ℓ(u)
                                           b = ℓ(u) ∪ {good, h(ρ(u))};

 (6) If u ∈ F is not marked as good by B, then ℓ(u)
                                               b = ℓ(u) ∪ {h(ρ(u))};

 (7) If u ∈
          / F then ℓ(u)
                   b = ℓ(u).

    We now check completeness and soundness of this certification scheme. Condition (1) is satisfied
if and only if every node received the same value ρ for the number of active roots. Conditions (2)
and (3) are both satisfied if and only if val(u) correspond to the number of active roots in the
subgraph of T rooted at u. In particular val(r) is equal to the number of active roots. Then,
conditions (1) to (4) are satisfied if and only if ρ corresponds to the number of active roots in F .
Finally, conditions (1) to (7) are satisfied if and only if ℓb is well defined according to the proof of
Lemma 4.8.
    Let us denote by Atype the verification algorithm, and by Certζ the certificates described for
each of the three cases when ζ is an lca-type formula. Let us now assume that ζ is an arbitrary
lca-reduced formula. From Lemma 4.5, there exists a set I ⊆ Type(k + 1, D, Λ) such that,
                                                    _
                                         ζ(x, y) =     ψ(x, y).
                                                             ψ∈I


For each ψ ∈ I, let us denote by Λ       b ψ , ψb and ℓbψ the reduction on Fd of Λ, ψ and ℓ, respectively. The
prover provides each node u of G with the certificate cψ (u) = ℓbψ (u) for each ψ, in addition to the
certificate Certψ .
      The verifier proceeds as follows. Each node u checks that it accepts when running algorithm
A type    with certificates cψ (u), for every ψ ∈ I. Then, each node u relabels the S         sets ℓbψ to make
them disjoint, as we did in the proof of Lemma 4.8), and checks whether ℓ(u) = ψ∈I ℓbψ (u). The
                                                                                      b
soundness and completeness of the whole scheme follows from the soundness and completeness of
Atype .
      It remains to deal with the case where q = |y| > 1. Let us denote by A the verification algorithm
that we described for the case when |y| = 1. The prover provides the nodes with a set of triplets
(ζi , ℓi , Certi )i∈[q] such that, for each i ∈ [q], Certi is a certificate used to check whether

                 true(∃yi , ζi (x, y1 , . . . , yi ), G, ℓi ) = true(ζi−1 (x, y1 , . . . , yi−1 ), G, ℓi−1 ),

Where ζq = ζ, ℓq = ℓ, ζ0 = φ,         b Every node u accepts if A accept all certificates at u.
                           b and ℓ0 = ℓ.




                                                             69
From the soundness and completeness of A, we obtain that every node accepts if and only if

               true(φ(x), G, ℓ) = true(∃(y1 , . . . , yq ) ζ(x, (y1 , . . . , yq )), G, ℓ)
                                   = true(∃(y1 , . . . , yq ) ζq (x, (y1 , . . . , yq )), G, ℓq )
                                   = true(∃(y1 , . . . , yq−1 ) ζq−1 (x, (y1 , . . . , yq−1 )), G, ℓq−1 )
                                   ...
                                   = true(∃y1 ζ1 (x, y1 ), G, ℓ1 )
                                   = true(ζ0 (x), G, ℓ0 )
                                   = true(φ(x),
                                          b      G, ℓ).
                                                    b

Which completes the proof.

7.2   Certifying Low-Treedepth Colorings and Skeletons
Bousquet et al. [27] have shown that, for every MSO property P, there is a certification scheme
using O(log n)-bit certificates for certifying P on graphs of bounded treedepth. Since the mere
property “treedepth at most k” is expressible in MSO, we obtain the following.

Proposition 7.5 ([27]). For every integer p ≥ 1, there exists a certification scheme using O(log n)-
bit certificates for certifying “treedepth at most p”.

    We show how to use this result for certifying a (p, f (p))-treedepth coloring. Moreover, we also
extend this certification scheme to an encoding of a p-skeleton. Given a (p, f (p))-treedepth coloring
Cp , and p-skeleton S, the encoding of S is defined as the encoding of all decomposition forests F U
of G[U ], for all U ∈ Col(p). More precisely, in the encoding of S, for every U ∈ Col(p), every node
u has a triple {(rootU (u), parentU (u), depthU (u))} corresponding to the subtree TuU containing u of
the decomposition forest F U of G[U ].

Lemma 7.6. Let f : N → N, and let G be a class of graphs of expansion f . Let p > 0, and let us
suppose that each node u is given (1) a value Cp (u) ∈ [f (p)], and (2) an encoding of S. There is
a certification scheme using O(log n)-bit certificates for certifying that Cp is a (p, f (p))-treedepth
coloring of G, and that the encoding of S is indeed defining a p-skeleton of G.

Proof. Let us first certify that Cp is a (p, f (p))-treedepth coloring of G. For every set U ∈ Col(p),
every node u receives as a certificate: (1) The encoding of a rooted spanning tree T of the component
of G[U ] containing u (where each component is identified with the node identifier of the root of T );
(2) The certification of the property “treedepth at most p” for all the nodes in the component of
G[U ] containing u. The soundness and completeness of (1) and (2) follow from Proposition 7.2 and
Proposition 7.5.
    Next, let us certify that S is a p-skeleton of G. First, we use the verifier of Proposition 7.2 to
check that the encoding of each tree TuU is correct, for all u ∈ V and all U ∈ Col(p). If no nodes
reject at that point, we can safely deduce that if u and v are in the same connected component of
G[U ], then the encoding of TuU and of TvU must induce the same tree.
    It remains to certify that each TuU forms a decomposition tree of the component of G[U ] con-
taining u. More precisely, we must certify that all neighbors of u in G[U ] are either descendants or
ancestors of u in TuU . Let us fix an arbitrary set U ∈ Col(p). Let (rootU (u), parentU (u), depthU (u))


                                                           70
be the encoding of TuU that has u in its input (given in the encoding of S). Then node u receives
the set PuU = {w1u , . . . , wdu } as certificate, corresponding to a sequence of at most d ≤ 2p node
identifiers representing the path from root(u) to u. Then node u accepts PuU if the following holds:

  (i) d = depthU (u);

 (ii) w1u = rootU (u) and wdu = id(u);

(iii) if id(u) ̸= rootU (u) and v ∈ N (u) is such that id(v) = parentU (u), then PvU is a sequence of
      length d − 1 satisfying wvi = wui for every i ∈ [d − 1];

 (iv) if every v ∈ N (u) is such that Cp (v) ∈ U , then either id(u) ∈ PvU or id(v) ∈ PuU .

Conditions (i) to (iii) are satisfied if and only if PuU represents the path from the root of TuU to u,
for all u. Assuming that (i) to (iii) are satisfied, we have that (iv) is satisfied if and only if TuU is
a decomposition tree of G[U ], for all nodes u of G[U ]. Indeed, for every u in G[U ], and for every
v ∈ N (u) that is also in G[U ], we have that either u is an ancestor of v (i.e. id(u) belongs to PvU ),
or v is an ancestor of u (i.e. id(v) belongs to PuU ).
    Then, for every U ∈ Col(p), one can certify that TuU is an decomposition tree of G[U ] with a
certificate containing at most 2p node identifiers, which can be encoded on O(2p · log n) = O(log n)
bits. Furthermore, one can certify that the union over all nodes u and all U ∈ Col(p), of TuU is a
p-skeleton of G using certificates of size O(|Col(p)| · 2p · log n) = O(log n) bits.

7.3   Certifying Reductions on Graphs of Bounded Expansion
Let f : N → N, and let G be a class of connected graphs with expansion f . We first define a notion
of reducibility that admits an efficient distributed certification scheme.

Definition 7.7. Let φ ∈ FO[Λ]. For every labeled graph (G, ℓ) with G ∈ G, let us assume that
every node u of G is provided with the following values:

  1. The set Λ, the formula φ, and the label ℓ(u) ⊆ Λ;

  2. A positive integer p;

  3. A set Λ,
           b a formula φ,            b ⊆ Λ;
                       b and a label ℓ(u) b

  4. The encoding of a p-skeleton S of G.

We say that φ admits a distributedly certifiable reduction on G if there is a certification scheme
using O(log n)-bits certificates for certifying that (p, Λ,
                                                         b φ,
                                                            b ℓ)
                                                              b is the reduction of (Λ, φ, S, ℓ) on G.

   In a way similar to what was done in Section 5, we show that every first-order formula over
labeled graphs admits a certifiable reduction. We fist establish this result for existential formulas.

Lemma 7.8. Every existential formula in FO[Λ] admits a distributed certifiable reduction on G.

Proof. Let φ ∈ FO[Λ] be an existential formula. Consider that each node is provided with the
values listed in Definition 7.7. Let φ(x) = ∃y ψ(x, y), where ψ is quantifier free. Every node checks
that p = |x| + |y|. The scheme of Lemma 7.6 enables to certify that the encoding S correctly defines
a p-skeleton of G. Let Cp be the (p, f (p))-treedepth coloring that defines S. The same construction

                                                   71
as in Lemma 5.4 can then be used. More precisely, for every U ∈ Col(p), let Λ     e U , ψeU , ℓeU , ΛU , ψ U ,
and ℓU be defined as in the proof of Lemma 5.4. Instead of computing these values, each node
receives them from the prover as certificates. The values of Λ, b φ,
                                                                   b Λ e U , ψeU , ΛU , and ψ U do not
depend on the input graph, and can be computed by each node. The labeling ℓ̃U can be computed
from ℓ by a 1-round algorithm in the BROADCAST CONGEST model. Hence, using Lemma 7.3,
the correctness of each labeling ℓ̃U can be certified with O(log n)-bit certificates. The correctness
of each labeling ℓbU can be certified using Lemma 7.4, using O(log n)-bit certificates. Finally, each
node can check the correctness of ℓ,b and accept or reject accordingly.

    We can now proceed with the general case.

Lemma 7.9. Every formula in FO[Λ] admits a distributed certifiable reduction on G.

Proof. Let φ ∈ FO[Λ] be an existential formula. Let us assume that each node is provided with
the values described in Definition 7.7, i.e. the tuples (Λ, φ, ℓ) and (p, Λ̂, φ̂, ℓ̂), and the encoding of a
p-skeleton S. We follow the same induction as in Lemma 5.4, over the quantifier depth of φ. The
base case is trivial as the construction requires no communication. Furthermore, if φ = ¬ψ where
ψ admits a distributed certifiable reduction, then φ admits a distributed certifiable reduction as
well, as we described in Lemma 5.4.
    It remains to consieder the case φ(x) = ∃y ψ(x, y). Let (pψ , Λ  b ψ , ψ,
                                                                           b ℓbψ (u)), (Λξ , ξ, ℓξ ) as it was
done in Case 1 in the proof of Lemma 5.6. Again, instead of computing these values, each node
receives them as certificates, and checks them. The values of p, pψ , Λb ψ , ψ,
                                                                              b Λξ , and ξ do not depend
on the input graph, and can be computed by each node. Then, each node can construct the input
values (1) to (4) given in Definition 7.7 with respect to to ξ and ψ. By the induction hypothesis,
the correctness of ℓbψ (u) at each node u can be certified with O(log n)-bit certificates.
    Recall that, in Lemma 5.6, the value of ℓξ (u) on each node u was computed using Lemma 5.5,
without any communication, under the assumption that each node knows a encoding a pψ -skeleton
S of G. The prover provides the encoding of a pψ -skeleton to each node as a O(log n)-bit certificate,
which can be checked using Lemma 7.6. Finally, the correctness of ℓb can be certified with O(log n)-
bit certificates, using the scheme of Lemma 7.8 with given values (Λξ , (∃y, ξ(x, y)), ℓξ ) and (p, Λ, b φ,b ℓ)
                                                                                                             b
and S.

7.4    Proof of Theorem 7.1
We are now ready to prove Theorem 7.1.

Proof. Let φ ∈ FO[Λ]. We proceed the same way as in Theorem 5.1. Specifically, let us redefine
φ(x), as φ with a dummy free-variable x. The prover provides each node with the following
certificate:

  (i) a positive integer p, a set Λ,
                                  b a p-lca-reduced formula φ,
                                                            b and a label set ℓ(u);
                                                                              b

 (ii) the certificate of u used to certify the p-skeleton S of G;

 (iii) the certificate Cert(u) for certifying that (p, Λ,
                                                       b φ,
                                                          b ℓ)
                                                            b is the reduction of (Λ, φ, S, ℓ).

The part (i) of the certificate can be encoded in O(1) bits, the part (ii) can be encoded in O(log n)
bits, and Lemma 7.9 asserts that a certificate for (iii) exists and, furthermore, it can be encoded in
O(log n) bits.

                                                      72
    The verifier proceeds as follows. Each node checks that (p, Λ,b φ,b ℓ)
                                                                        b is the reduction of (Λ, φ, S, ℓ)
using the certificates given in (iii) using the verifier A in Lemma 7.9, with certificates (i) and (ii)
provided to the nodes. If a node rejects in A, then the node rejects, otherwise it carries on the
verification as described hereafter.
    Assuming that no nodes have rejected so far, we have that true(φ, G, ℓ) = true(φ,     b G, ℓ).
                                                                                                b Since
φ has only one dummy variable, the truth value of φ(x), as well as the one of φ(x),   b      is the same
for every node in G. Moreover, the formula φ(x)   b      is a Boolean combination of label predicates
of x. Therefore, every node u can check φ(u) b   using ℓ(u),
                                                         b     and it accepts if φ(u)
                                                                                 b    holds, and rejects
otherwise.
    It remains to analyze soundness and completeness.
    For establishing completeness of the certification scheme, let us suppose that G |= φ. Then, by
Lemma 5.6, we have that φ is reducible in G. Then there exist certificates for (i) and (ii), and, by
Lemma 7.9, there exist certificates for (iii) such that every node accepts when running verifier A.
Since G |= φ we have that true(φ, G) = true(φ,  b G, ℓ)b = V (G). It follows that φ(u)
                                                                                   b    is true at every
node u, and thus every node accepts.
    For establishing soundness, let us suppose that G ̸|= φ, and let us suppose that the nodes
received certificates (i)-(iii) such that every node accepts when renning the verifier A. Then
true(φ, G, ℓ) = true(φ,     b However, in this case true(φ, G, ℓ) = ∅. Therefore φ(u)
                      b G, ℓ).                                                            b     does not
hold at any node u, and thus all nodes reject.


8     Lower Bounds and Impossibility Results
In this section we give evidence that our results somehow represent the limit of tractability of dis-
tributed model checking and distributed certification of properties on graphs of bounded expansion.
    All our reductions are based on classical results in communication complexity. Let f : X × Y →
{0, 1} be a function. The deterministic communication complexity of f D(f ) corresponds to the
minimum number of bits that must be exchanged in any deterministic protocol between a player
Alice holding an input x ∈ X and another player Bob y ∈ Y in order to output the value f (x, y).
The non-deterministic communication complexity of f , N (f ) is defined similarly, but for non-
deterministic communication protocols. We refer to the book of Kushilevitz and Nissan for more
detailed definitions [59].
    In important problem in communication complexity is set disjointedness. It is defined by func-
tion Disjn . For each n the inputs of Disjn are subsets of [n]. Given A, B ⊆ [n] we have that
Disj(A, B) = 1 if and only if A ∩ B = ∅.

Proposition 8.1 ([59]). D(Disjn ) = Ω(n) and N (Disjn ) = Ω(n).

8.1   No Extension to Monadic Second-Order Logic
We first show that it is not possible to extend our results to the whole set of MSO properties on
graphs of bounded expansion. We illustrate this fact by considering the property of being non-three-
colorable. We define Non-3-Coloring the set of graphs that do not admit a proper three-coloring
(their chromatic number is at least 4). The membership in Non-3-Coloring can be represented by
the following MSO formula:
                                                                                                    
    ∀C1 , C2 , C3 , ∃x, y, adj(x, y) ∧ (x ∈ C1 ∧ y ∈ C1 ) ∨ (x ∈ C2 ∧ y ∈ C2 ) ∨ (x ∈ C3 ∧ y ∈ C3 )


                                                   73
   In the following theorem, we show that there are no efficient CONGEST algorithms for checking
nor compact certification scheme for certifying the membership in Non-3-Coloring, even under the
promise that the input graph belongs to a class of graphs of bounded expansion and of logarithmic
diameter.
Theorem 8.2. Let G the class of graphs of maximum degree 5 and diameter O(log n). Every
CONGEST algorithm deciding the membership in Non-3-Coloring of a n-node input graph in G
requires Ω(n/ log2 n) rounds of communication.
    Every certification scheme that certifies membership to Non-3-Coloring of a n-node input graph
in G requires certificates of size Ω(n/ log n).
Proof. [44] show that every locally checkable proof, and therefore every proof-labeling scheme
for Non-3-Coloring requires certificates of size Ω(n2 / log n). The same proof directly implies the
same lowerbound for the number of rounds of a CONGEST algorithm deciding the membership in
Non-3-Coloring. We give an sketch of the proof of Göös and Suomella and then we show how to
adapt it to the case when the input graph has maximum degree 4.
    The proof of [44] is consists in a reduction to Disjn2 . In the reduction each instance (A, B) of
Disjn2 is associated with a O(n)-node graph GA,B . The set of vertices of GA,B is divided in two
sets of vertices, denoted VA and VB , and satisfies the following conditions:
(C1) The graph induced by VA only depends on A.
(C2) The graph induced by VB only depends on B.
(C3) The set of edges EA,B with one endpoint in VA and the other in VB contains at most O(log n)
     edges, and does not depend on A and B, only on n. The nodes with endpoints in EA,B are
     denoted VA,B .
(C4) A ∩ B = ∅ if and only if GA,B ∈ Non-3-Coloring.
Then, given a certification scheme P for Non-3-Coloring with certificates of size c(n) on n-node
graphs, we build the following non-deterministic protocol for Disjn2 . First, Alice and Bob build
graph GA,B , where Alice builds the subgraph depending on A, i.e., VA and all edges incident to VA ,
and Bob the part depending on B. Then, non-deterministically each player generate the certificates
of all the nodes of GA,B , and communicate to the other player the certificates generated for the
nodes in the cut. Then, the players run the verification algorithm of P and accept if all the nodes
on their side accept. We have that both players accept if and only if GA,B ∈ Non-3-Coloring, which
holds if and only if A ∩ B = ∅. The total communication is O(log n · c(n)). Using Proposition 8.1
we obtain that O(log n · c(n)) = N (Disjn2 ) = Ω(n2 ). Therefore, c(n) = Ω(n2 / log n).
    The construction is also useful for a lowerbound in the CONGEST model. Let A be an algorithm
deciding the membership in Non-3-Coloring in R(n) rounds. Then Alice and Bob construct GA,B
as above, and simulate the R(n) rounds of A on it, communicating on each round to other player
the messages transmitted over the edges EA,B . The players accept if all the nodes of their sides
accept. On each communication round the players send O(log n) bits per edge of EA,B . Hence, the
nodes interchange O(R(n) · |EA,B | · log n) = O(R(n) · log2 n) bits in total. From Proposition 8.1 we
obtain that O(R(n) · log2 n) = D(Disjn2 ) = Ω(n2 ). Therefore, R(n) = Ω(n2 / log2 n).

    We now use the classical reduction from Garey, Johnson and Stockmeyer [37], used to show that
3-colorability on planar graphs of maximum degree 4 is N P -Complete. Given an n-node graph G,

                                                 74
the reduction picks an arbitrary graph G and constructs a graph G      ‹ of maximum degree 4, such that
G ∈ Non-3-Coloring if and only if G ∈ Non-3-Coloring. Roughly, the we can construct G
                                         ‹                                                     ‹ replacing
each node v of degree greater than 4 by a node gadget, as the one represented in Figure 3. Let us
denote dv the degree of v. The gadget consists in a set Sv of 7(dv − 2) + 1 nodes of degree at most 4.
In Sv there are dv nodes v1 , . . . , vdv satisfying that on every proper three-coloring of G,
                                                                                            ‹ these nodes
must be colored the same. Furthermore, every coloring that assigns v1 , . . . , vdv the same color can
be extended to a proper 3-coloring of the whole gadget. For each node in G, consider an arbitrary
ordering of its neighbors. Let us pick an edge {u, v} of G, such that v is the i-th neighbor of u
and v is the j-th neighbor of v. Then, in G        ‹ we add the edge {ui , vj }. By construction satisfies
that G
     ‹ has the desired properties (c.f. [37] for more details). Observe that in the worst case G    ‹ has
                                 2
P
  v∈V (G) 7(dv − 2) + 1 = Θ(n ) nodes.


                                                             w3
                                                   w2             w4


                                              w1                       w5
                                                              v




                                w2                       w3                 w4


                                v2                       v3                 v4




             w1     v1                                                                v5    w5


Figure 3: Node gadget. In this figure is depicted the gadget for a node of degree 5. Notice that in
every proper three-coloring of the gadget the nodes v1 , . . . , v5 receive the same colors. Conversely,
if we color the nodes v1 , . . . , v5 with the same color, we can extend the coloring into a three-coloring
of all the nodes of the gadget.

    The statement of the theorem is obtained by plugging the reduction construction of Garey,
Johnson and Stockmeyer to the construction of Göös and Suomella. More precisely, given an in-
stance (A, B) of Disjn , we build graph GA,B . Then, we apply the construction of Garey, Johnson and
Stockmeyer on GA,B to obtain a G    ‹A,B of maximum degree 4. Observe that G   ‹A,B ∈ Non-3-Coloring
if and only if A ∩ B = ∅. We partition the nodes of G    ‹A,B into V
                                                                   ‹A and V ‹B . All the nodes inside
gadgets created for nodes in VA (respectively VB ) belong to V ‹A (respectively V‹B ). We obtain that
G
‹A,B satisfies conditions (C1)-(C4) and has maximum degree 4. However, G     ‹A,B might have a large
diameter.
    We now reduce the diameter constructing a graph G    “A,B obtained from G ‹A,B by plugging to it
two rooted binary trees TA and TB , where each edge of TA and TB is subdivided. Tree TA has depth
O(log |Vf
        A |), and each leaf corresponds to a node of VA . The tree TB is defined analogously for VB .
                                                      f                                           ‹


                                                        75
Finally, add an edge between the root of TA and the root of TB . Let us define V        ‹A ∪ V (TA )
                                                                                   “A = V
and VB = VB ∪ V (TB ). We obtain that GA,B also satisfies conditions (C1)-(C4) and belongs to G.
     ‹      ‹                             “
Conditions C1 and C2 follow from the construction of V   “A and V “B . Condition C3 holds because in
GA,B there is only one more edge in the cut than GA,B consisting in the edge between the roots.
“                                                     ‹
Finally, for condition (C4) we observe that any 3-coloring of the nodes in G   ‹A,B can be extended
to a three coloring of the trees TA and TB . First, pick two different colors for the roots of TA
and TB . Then, color arbitrarily the other nodes of degree 3 in TA and TB . Then, color the nodes
of degree two (the subdivided edges) with a color different than their endpoints. We deduce that
“A,B satisfies conditions (C1)-(C4) and belongs to G.
G
    Let P be a certification scheme (resp. let A be a CONGEST algorithm) for Non-3-Coloring
with certificates of size c(n) (resp. running in R(n) rounds) under the promise that the input
graph is a n-node graph contained in G. Let A, B ⊆ [n] be an instance of Disjn2 . Consider the
communication protocol where Alice and Bob construct G      “A,B and simulate P (resp. A) in the
same way that we explained for GA,B . Since G    “A,B is a graph with Θ(n2 ) nodes, we obtain that
O(c(n2 ) · log n) = N (Disjn2 ) = Ω(n2 ), hence c(n2 ) = Ω(n2 / log n), and then c(n) = Ω(n/ log n).
                                     √
Similarly, we obtain that R(n) = Ω( n/ log2 (n)).

Remark.        Theorem 8.2 implies that the difficulty of certifying MSO properties over graphs
of max degree 5 is (up to logarithmic factors) as hard as the hardest problem over that family.
Indeed, a graph of max degree 5 can be encoded using O(n log n) bits, e.g. by adjacency lists of
all nodes. We can use such encoding to design a certification scheme that certifies any property
on graphs of maximum degree 5: every node interprets its certificate as an encoding of a graph
of maximum degree 5, and checks that every neighbor received the same encoding, and that its
local view corresponds with the one in the encoding. If the conditions are verified, the nodes can
compute any property of the input graph without any further communication.
    We can also show that we cannot extend the certification of first-order properties to monadic
second-order properties for planar graphs. However, in this case we obtain a weaker lowerbound.

Theorem 8.3. Every certification scheme for membership to Non-3-Coloring under the promise
                                                               √
that the input graph is planar requires certificates of size Ω( n/ log n) bits.

    Similar to the proof of Theorem 8.2 we use the construction of Göös and Suomella and the
reduction of Garey, Johnson and Stockmeyer for planar graphs. Given an n-node graph G, the
reduction of [37] for planar graphs first pick an arbitrary embedding of G in the plane. In this
embedding, there might be a number cr(G) of edge crossings (they must exist if G is non-planar).
Then, a planar graph G ‹ is constructed from G by replacing on point where a pair of edges cross,
by the crossing gadget shown in Figure 4. This gadget allows to transmit the coloring of one of
the endpoints of the edge in a planar way. For each crossing, we add 13 new vertices. In the worst
case, cr(G) = Θ(n4 ). Hence, the obtained graph has G‹ has Θ(n4 ) nodes.

Proof. Let G be the class of planar graphs. As we did for Theorem 8.2, we plug the reduction
construction of Garey, Johnson and Stockmeyer to the construction of Göös and Suomella. More
precisely, given an instance (A, B) of Disjn , we build graph GA,B (c.f. proof of Theorem 8.2). Then,
using the crossing gadget we obtain a planar graph G    ‹A,B . We partition the nodes of G
                                                                                         ‹A,B into V
                                                                                                   ‹A
and V
    ‹B . All the nodes inside gadgets created for edges with both endpoint in VA (respectively VB )


                                                 76
                                                  y1




                                     x1                        x2




                                                  y2


Figure 4: Crossing gadget. In every proper three-coloring of the gadget node label x1 has the same
color of node labeled x2 , as well as node labeled y1 has the same color of y2 . Conversely, every
three-coloring of x1 , x2 , y1 and y2 that assigns the same color to x1 and x2 , and the same color to
y1 and y2 can be extended into a three coloring of the gadget.


belong to V‹A (respectively V
                            ‹B ). We also consider that the nodes inside the gadgets used for the
edges in the set EA,B of GA,B belong to VA . We obtain that G ‹A,B satisfies conditions (C1)-(C4).
    The remaining of the proof is analogous to Theorem 8.2. Let P be a certification scheme for
Non-3-Coloring with certificates of size c(n) under the promise that the input graph is planar. On
input A, B ⊆ [n], Alice and Bob construct G ‹A,B and simulate P in the same way that we explained
                 ‹A,B is a graph with Θ(n4 ) nodes, we obtain that O(c(n4 ) · log n) = N (Disjn2 ) =
for GA,B . Since G
                                                        √
Ω(n ), hence c(n4 ) = Ω(n2 / log n), and then c(n) = Ω( n/ log n).
    2



8.2   No Extension to First Order Logic on Graphs of Bounded Degeneracy
We now show that we cannot extend the efficient checking nor the certification of first order prop-
erties into graphs of degeneracy 2 and diameter 7. Consider the set of graphs C6 -free containing
all graphs not having a cycle of six nodes as a subgraph.

Theorem 8.4. Let G the class of degeneracy 2 and diameter at most 6. Every CONGEST algorithm
deciding the membership in C6 -free under the promise that the input graph belongs to G requires
   √
Ω̃( n) rounds of communication.
    Every certification scheme that certifies membership to C6 -free under the promise that the input
                                                    √
graph belongs to G requires certificates of size Ω̃( n).

Proof. The result for CONGEST algorithms and graph of degeneracy 2 was already shown in Ko-
rhonen et al. [55], which in turn use a construction of Druker et al. [20]. Roughly, the lower-bound
is based on a reduction to Disjm , for m = Θ(n1+1/2 ). Each instance A, B ∈ [m] is associated with
a O(n)-node graph GA,B of degeneracy 2. The set of vertices of GA,B are divided in two sets of
vertices, denoted VA (and called the nodes owned by Alice) and VB (the nodes owned by Bob),
satisfying the following conditions:

(B1) The graph induced by VA only depends on A.

(B2) The graph induced by VB only depends on B.



                                                 77
(B3) The set of edges EA,B with one endpoint in VA and the other in VB contains at most O(n)
     edges, and does not depend on A and B.

(B4) A ∩ B = ∅ if and only if GA,B ∈ C6 -free.

We need to deal with one detail. Graph GA,B is not necessarily of bounded diameter. To fix this
issue, we build graph G “A,B from GA,B by adding a node r, connecting it to every node in VA ∪ VB ,
and then subdividing all the new edges two times. We obtain that every node in VA ∪ VB is at a
distance of 3 from r, and then G  “A,B has a diameter of at most 6 and still degeneracy 2. Observe
also that r cannot belong to any C6 , hence G    “A,B belongs to C6 -free if and only if GA,B does. We
define VA as VA plus all the new nodes of GA,B , and V
       “                                       “          “B simply as VB . We obtain that G  “A,B ∈ G
and satisfies conditions (B1)-(B4).
    Then, analogously to the proof of Theorem 8.2, we can use G     “A,B to transform any CONGEST
algorithm into a protocol for Disjm . More precisely, let A be an R(n)-round algorithm that decides
the membership in C6 -free of a graph in G. Given an instance A, B ∈ [m], the players construct
GA,B , simulate A in the nodes they own, and in each round communicate to the other player the
messages sent from nodes on their side through EA,B ; in particular, the information communicated
in one round is of size O(n log n). We deduce that O(n log n · R(n)) = D(Disjm ) = Ω(n1+1/2 ).
                         √
Therefore, R(n) = Ω̃( n). The same construction directly implies a lower bound of Ω̃(n1/2 ) for
the size of a certificate of any certification scheme for C6 -free.


9     Conclusion
In centralized model checking, the fixed-parameter tractability of FO was extended from graphs of
bounded expansion to the more general class of nowhere dense graphs in [47]. Notably, nowhere
dense graphs represent the ultimate frontier in the program of designing fixed-parameter tractable
algorithms for model checking FO formulas. Indeed, as shown in [21], for any graph class G that
is not nowhere dense (i.e., G is somewhere dense) and closed under taking subgraphs, FO model
checking on G is not fixed-parameter tractable (unless FPT = W[1]). The tractability frontier
for FO model checking in the CONGEST model remains unknown. Moreover, there is no reason
to expect that the tractability landscape in the distributed setting should mirror the one of the
centralized setting. This raises several concrete and intriguing questions, discussed hereafter.

9.1   Distributed Computing in Nowhere Dense Graphs
Is it possible to design model-checking algorithms for FO formulas running in O(D + polylog(n))
rounds in CONGEST on nowhere dense graphs of diameter D? From a theoretical perspective, a
negative answer to this question would be even more insightful than a positive one. More broadly,
what is the precise boundary for O(D + polylog(n))-round FO model checking in the CONGEST
model? Does it coincide with the class of bounded expansion graphs, extend to nowhere dense
graphs, or even include a larger family of graphs? There are several difficulties in extending
our approach to nowhere dense graphs. First, it is unclear how to implement the combinatorial
arguments from [47], particularly the constructions of sparse neighborhood covers, in a distributed
model. Second, the proof of [47] builds on a weak variant of Gaifman’s local form, and not a
quantifier elimination procedure. While this is sufficient for fixed-parameter tractability of FO
model-checking, we do not know whether it could be adapted in the distributed setting.

                                                 78
9.2   Distributed Computing for Extensions of First-Order Logic
Another question is whether a meta-theorem with O(D + polylog(n)) round complexity can be ob-
tained for some extensions of FO logic on planar graphs. Theorem 8.2 shows that we cannot hope to
extend Theorem 5.1 to MSO, even on planar graphs. On the other hand, in centralized computing,
the fixed-parameter tractability of logics lying strictly between FO and MSO is an active area of
research. For example, the extension of FO known as separator logic, denoted FOL+conn, was intro-
duced independently by Schirrmacher, Siebertz, and Vigny [74], and by Bojańczyk and Pilipczuk [3].
This logic extends FO, for every k ≥ 1, with the general predicate connk (x, y, z1 , . . . , zk ), which
evaluates to true on a graph G if the nodes corresponding to x and y are connected by a path that
avoids the nodes corresponding to {z1 , . . . , zk }. Another example is disjoint paths logic, denoted
FOL+DP, which extends FO with the atomic predicate dpk (x1 , y1 , . . . , xk , yk ), expressing the exis-
tence of k pairwise internally vertex-disjoint paths between xi and yi for i ∈ {1, . . . , k}. The main
obstacle to developing distributed meta-theorems for these logics lies in the absence of distributed
counterparts of the core algorithmic tools used in the centralized setting—such as tree decomposi-
tions which underlies tractability results for FOL+conn [72], or the irrelevant vertex technique used
for FOL+DP [43].


References
 [1] S. A. Amiri, S. Schmid, and S. Siebertz, Distributed dominating set approximations beyond
     planar graphs, ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 15 (2019), pp. Article No. 39, 1–18.

 [2] D. A. Baterisna and Y. Chang, Optimal local certification on graphs of bounded pathwidth,
     in Proceedings of the 44th Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing
     (PODC), ACM Press, 2025, pp. 99–109.

 [3] M. Bojanczyk and M. Pilipczuk, Definability equals recognizability for graphs of bounded
     treewidth, in Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer
     Science (LICS), ACM, 2016, pp. 407–416.

 [4] M. Bonamy, C. Gavoille, T. Picavet, and A. Wesolek, Local constant approximation
     for dominating set on graphs excluding large minors, in Proceedings of the 44th Annual ACM
     Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), ACM Press, 2025, pp. 77–87.

 [5] É. Bonnet, E. J. Kim, S. Thomassé, and R. Watrigant, Twin-width I: tractable FO
     model checking, in 61st IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2020,
     pp. 601–612.

 [6] R. B. Borie, R. G. Parker, and C. A. Tovey, Automatic generation of linear-time
     algorithms from predicate calculus descriptions of problems on recursively constructed graph
     families, Algorithmica, 7 (1992), pp. 555–581.

 [7] N. Bousquet, L. Feuilloley, and T. Pierron, Local certification of graph decomposi-
     tions and applications to minor-free classes, in 25th International Conference on Principles of
     Distributed Systems (OPODIS), vol. 217 of LIPIcs, Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
     Informatik, 2021, pp. 22:1–22:17.


                                                   79
 [8] K. Censor-Hillel, Distributed subgraph finding: Progress and challenges (invited talk), in
     48th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP), vol. 198
     of LIPIcs, Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2021, pp. 3:1–3:14.

 [9] Y.-J. Chang, Efficient distributed decomposition and routing algorithms in minor-free net-
     works and their applications, in 42nd ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing
     (PODC), 2023, pp. 55–66.

[10] Y.-J. Chang, S. Pettie, T. Saranurak, and H. Zhang, Near-optimal distributed triangle
     enumeration via expander decompositions, Journal of the ACM (JACM), 68 (2021), pp. 1–36.

[11] L. Cook, E. J. Kim, and T. Masarı́k, A tight meta-theorem for local certification of mso2
     properties within bounded treewidth graphs, in Proceedings of the 44th Annual ACM Sympo-
     sium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), ACM Press, 2025, pp. 110–120.

[12] B. Courcelle, The monadic second-order logic of graphs. I. Recognizable sets of finite graphs,
     Inf. Comput., 85 (1990), pp. 12–75.

[13] A. Czygrinow, M. Hańćkowiak, and W. Wawrzyniak, Fast distributed approxima-
     tions in planar graphs, in 22nd International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC),
     vol. 5218 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 2008, pp. 78–92.

[14]        , Distributed approximation algorithms for the minimum dominating set in kh -minor-free
       graphs, in 29th International Symposium on Algorithms and Computation (ISAAC), vol. 123
       of LIPIcs, Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018, pp. 22:1–22:12.

[15] A. Das Sarma, S. Holzer, L. Kor, A. Korman, D. Nanongkai, G. Pandurangan,
     D. Peleg, and R. Wattenhofer, Distributed verification and hardness of distributed ap-
     proximation, SIAM J. Comput., 41 (2012), pp. 1235–1265.

[16] A. Dawar, M. Grohe, and S. Kreutzer, Locally excluding a minor, in 22nd IEEE Sym-
     posium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS), 2007, pp. 270–279.

[17] E. D. Demaine, F. Reidl, P. Rossmanith, F. S. Villaamil, S. Sikdar, and B. D.
     Sullivan, Structural sparsity of complex networks: Bounded expansion in random models and
     real-world graphs, J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 105 (2019), pp. 199–241.

[18] M. Dory, Y. Efron, S. Mukhopadhyay, and D. Nanongkai, Distributed weighted min-
     cut in nearly-optimal time, in 53rd ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), 2021,
     pp. 1144–1153.

[19] P. G. Drange, M. S. Dregi, F. V. Fomin, S. Kreutzer, D. Lokshtanov,
     M. Pilipczuk, M. Pilipczuk, F. Reidl, F. S. Villaamil, S. Saurabh, S. Siebertz,
     and S. Sikdar, Kernelization and sparseness: The case of dominating set, in Proceedings
     of the 33rd International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS),
     vol. 47 of LIPIcs, Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2016, pp. 31:1–31:14.

[20] A. Drucker, F. Kuhn, and R. Oshman, On the power of the congested clique model, in
     33rd ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), 2014, pp. 367–376.


                                                 80
[21] Z. Dvořák, D. Král’, and R. Thomas, Testing first-order properties for subclasses of
     sparse graphs, J. ACM, 60 (2013), p. 36.

[22] H.-D. Ebbinghaus and J. Flum, Finite Model Theory: First Edition, Springer Berlin Hei-
     delberg, 1995.

[23] K. Eickmeyer, A. C. Giannopoulou, S. Kreutzer, O. Kwon, M. Pilipczuk, R. Ra-
     binovich, and S. Siebertz, Neighborhood complexity and kernelization for nowhere dense
     classes of graphs, in Proceedings of the 44th International Colloquium on Automata, Lan-
     guages, and Programming (ICALP), vol. 80 of LIPIcs, Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für
     Informatik, 2017, pp. 63:1–63:14.

[24] R. L. Epstein, Classical mathematical logic: The semantic foundations of logic, Princeton
     University Press, 2011.

[25] G. Even, O. Fischer, P. Fraigniaud, T. Gonen, R. Levi, M. Medina, P. Monteale-
     gre, D. Olivetti, R. Oshman, I. Rapaport, and I. Todinca, Three notes on distributed
     property testing, in 31st International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC), vol. 91
     of LIPIcs, Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2017, pp. 15:1–15:30.

[26] S. Faour, M. Ghaffari, C. Grunau, F. Kuhn, and V. Rozhon, Local distributed round-
     ing: Generalized to mis, matching, set cover, and beyond, in ACM-SIAM Symposium on
     Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2023, pp. 4409–4447.

[27] L. Feuilloley, N. Bousquet, and T. Pierron, What can be certified compactly? compact
     local certification of MSO properties in tree-like graphs, in 41st ACM Symposium on Principles
     of Distributed Computing (PODC), 2022, pp. 131–140.

[28] L. Feuilloley and P. Fraigniaud, Survey of distributed decision, Bull. EATCS, 119 (2016).

[29] M. Fischer, M. Ghaffari, and F. Kuhn, Deterministic distributed edge-coloring via hy-
     pergraph maximal matching, in 58th IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
     (FOCS), 2017, pp. 180–191.

[30] J. Flum and M. Grohe, Fixed-parameter tractability, definability, and model-checking, SIAM
     J. Comput., 31 (2001), pp. 113–145.

[31] F. V. Fomin, P. Fraigniaud, P. Montealegre, I. Rapaport, and I. Todinca, Dis-
     tributed model checking on graphs of bounded treedepth, in 38th International Symposium on
     Distributed Computing (DISC), vol. 319 of LIPIcs, Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
     Informatik, 2024, pp. 25:1–25:20.

[32] P. Fraigniaud, F. Mazoit, P. Montealegre, I. Rapaport, and I. Todinca, Dis-
     tributed certification for classes of dense graphs, in 37th International Symposium on Dis-
     tributed Computing (DISC), vol. 281 of LIPIcs, Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Infor-
     matik, 2023, pp. 20:1–20:17.

[33] P. Fraigniaud, P. Montealegre, I. Rapaport, and I. Todinca, A meta-theorem for
     distributed certification, Algorithmica, 86 (2024), pp. 585–612.


                                                81
[34] M. Frick and M. Grohe, Deciding first-order properties of locally tree-decomposable struc-
     tures, J. ACM, 48 (2001), pp. 1184–1206.

[35] H. Gaifman, On local and non-local properties, in Studies in Logic and the Foundations of
     Mathematics, vol. 107, Elsevier, 1982, pp. 105–135.

[36] J. A. Garay, S. Kutten, and D. Peleg, A sub-linear time distributed algorithm for
     minimum-weight spanning trees, in 34th IEEE Symposium on the Foundations of Computer
     Science (FOCS), 1993, pp. 659–668.

[37] M. R. Garey, D. S. Johnson, and L. Stockmeyer, Some simplified np-complete problems,
     in 6th ACM symposium on Theory of computing, 1974, pp. 47–63.

[38] M. Ghaffari and B. Haeupler, Distributed algorithms for planar networks I: planar em-
     bedding, in 35th ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), 2016,
     pp. 29–38.

[39]         , Distributed algorithms for planar networks II: low-congestion shortcuts, mst, and min-
       cut, in 27th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2016, pp. 202–219.

[40]       , Low-congestion shortcuts for graphs excluding dense minors, in 40th ACM Symposium
       on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), 2021, pp. 213–221.

[41] M. Ghaffari and F. Kuhn, Deterministic distributed vertex coloring: Simpler, faster, and
     without network decomposition, in 62nd IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
     (FOCS), 2021, pp. 1009–1020.

[42] M. Ghaffari and M. Parter, Near-optimal distributed dfs in planar graphs, in 31st In-
     ternational Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC), Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum
     fuer Informatik, 2017, pp. 21:1–21:16.

[43] P. A. Golovach, G. Stamoulis, and D. M. Thilikos, Model-checking for first-order logic
     with disjoint paths predicates in proper minor-closed graph classes, in Proceedings of the 2023
     Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), SIAM, 2023, pp. 3684–3699.

[44] M. Göös and J. Suomela, Locally checkable proofs in distributed computing, Theory Com-
     put., 12 (2016), pp. 1–33.

[45] M. Grohe, Logic, graphs, and algorithms, in Logic and Automata: History and Perspectives,
     in Honor of Wolfgang Thomas, vol. 2 of Texts in Logic and Games, Amsterdam University
     Press, 2008, pp. 357–422.

[46] M. Grohe and S. Kreutzer, Methods for algorithmic meta theorems, in Model Theoretic
     Methods in Finite Combinatorics - AMS-ASL Joint Special Session, vol. 558, AMS, 2009,
     pp. 181–206.

[47] M. Grohe, S. Kreutzer, and S. Siebertz, Deciding first-order properties of nowhere dense
     graphs, in 46th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), 2014, pp. 89–98.

[48] B. Haeupler, T. Izumi, and G. Zuzic, Low-congestion shortcuts without embedding, in
     2016 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, 2016, pp. 451–460.

                                                  82
[49] B. Haeupler, T. Izumi, and G. Zuzic, Near-optimal low-congestion shortcuts on bounded
     parameter graphs, in 30th International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC),
     vol. 9888 of LNCS, Springer, 2016, pp. 158–172.

[50] B. Haeupler, J. Li, and G. Zuzic, Minor excluded network families admit fast distributed
     algorithms, in ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), ACM, 2018,
     pp. 465–474.

[51] S. Har-Peled and K. Quanrud, Approximation algorithms for polynomial-expansion and
     low-density graphs, SIAM J. Comput., 46 (2017), pp. 1712–1744.

[52] O. Heydt, S. Kublenz, P. Ossona de Mendez, S. Siebertz, and A. Vigny, Distributed
     domination on sparse graph classes, European Journal of Combinatorics, 123 (2025), p. 103773.

[53] W. Hodges, Model theory, Cambridge university press, 1993.

[54] T. Izumi, N. Kitamura, T. Naruse, and G. Schwartzman, Fully polynomial-time dis-
     tributed computation in low-treewidth graphs, in 34th ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Al-
     gorithms and Architectures (SPAA), ACM, 2022, pp. 11–22.

[55] J. H. Korhonen and J. Rybicki, Deterministic Subgraph Detection in Broadcast CON-
     GEST, in 21st International Conference on Principles of Distributed Systems (OPODIS 2017),
     vol. 95 of LIPIcs, Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2018, pp. 4:1–4:16.

[56] A. Korman, S. Kutten, and D. Peleg, Proof labeling schemes, Distributed Comput., 22
     (2010), pp. 215–233.

[57] S. Kreutzer, Algorithmic meta-theorems, in Finite and Algorithmic Model Theory, J. Es-
     parza, C. Michaux, and C. Steinhorn, eds., vol. 379 of London Mathematical Society Lecture
     Note Series, Cambridge University Press, 2011, pp. 177–270.

[58] S. Kublenz, S. Siebertz, and A. Vigny, Constant round distributed domination on graph
     classes with bounded expansion, in 28th International Colloquium on Structural Information
     and Communication Complexity (SIROCCO), vol. 12810 of Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
     ence, Springer, Cham, 2021, pp. 334–351.

[59] E. Kushilevitz and N. Nisan, Communication Complexity, Cambridge University Press,
     1997.

[60] C. Lenzen and B. Patt-Shamir, Fast routing table construction using small messages, in
     ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing Conference (STOC), 2013, pp. 381–390.

[61] C. Lenzen, Y.-A. Pignolet, and R. Wattenhofer, Distributed minimum dominating set
     approximations in restricted families of graphs, Distributed Computing, 26 (2013), pp. 119–
     137.

[62] N. Linial, Locality in distributed graph algorithms, SIAM J. Comput., 21 (1992), pp. 193–201.

[63] V. Manoharan and V. Ramachandran, Computing minimum weight cycle in the CON-
     GEST model, in 43rd ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC),
     2024, pp. 182–193.

                                               83
[64] D. Nanongkai, Distributed approximation algorithms for weighted shortest paths, in ACM
     Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), 2014, pp. 565–573.

[65] M. Naor and L. J. Stockmeyer, What can be computed locally?, SIAM J. Comput., 24
     (1995), pp. 1259–1277.

[66] J. Nešetřil and P. Ossona de Mendez, Linear time low tree-width partitions and algo-
     rithmic consequences, in 38th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC),
     2006, pp. 391–400.

[67] J. Nešetřil and P. Ossona de Mendez, Sparsity – Graphs, Structures, and Algorithms,
     vol. 28 of Algorithms and combinatorics, Springer, 2012.

[68]        , A distributed low tree-depth decomposition algorithm for bounded expansion classes, Dis-
       tributed Comput., 29 (2016), pp. 39–49.

[69] A. Panconesi and R. Rizzi, Some simple distributed algorithms for sparse networks, Dis-
     tributed Computing, 14 (2001), pp. 97–100.

[70] D. Peleg, Distributed computing: a locality-sensitive approach, SIAM, 2000.

[71] D. Peleg and V. Rubinovich, A near-tight lower bound on the time complexity of distributed
     minimum-weight spanning tree construction, SIAM J. Comput., 30 (2000), pp. 1427–1442.

[72] M. Pilipczuk, N. Schirrmacher, S. Siebertz, S. Toruńczyk, and A. Vigny, Al-
     gorithms and data structures for first-order logic with connectivity under vertex failures, in
     Proceedings of the 49th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Program-
     ming (ICALP), vol. 229 of LIPIcs, Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2022,
     pp. 102:1–102:18.

[73] M. Pilipczuk, S. Siebertz, and S. Torunczyk, Parameterized circuit complexity of model-
     checking on sparse structures, in 33rd ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science
     (LICS), 2018, pp. 789–798.

[74] N. Schirrmacher, S. Siebertz, and A. Vigny, First-order logic with connectivity opera-
     tors, in Proceedings of the 30th EACSL Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic (CSL),
     vol. 216 of LIPIcs, Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2022, pp. 34:1–34:17.

[75] D. Seese, Linear time computable problems and first-order descriptions, Mathematical Struc-
     tures in Computer Science, 6 (1996), pp. 505–526.

[76] S. Siebertz and A. Vigny, Parameterized distributed complexity theory: A logical approach,
     CoRR, abs/1903.00505 (2019).




                                                  84
