                                                                   APMF < APSP?
                                                          Gomory-Hu Tree for Unweighted Graphs
                                                               in Almost-Quadratic Time
                                                       Amir Abboud∗1 , Robert Krauthgamer†1 , and Ohad Trabelsi‡1
                                                                          1
                                                                              Weizmann Institute of Science
arXiv:2106.02981v1 [cs.DS] 5 Jun 2021




                                                                                       Abstract
                                                We design an n2+o(1) -time algorithm that constructs a cut-equivalent (Gomory-Hu) tree of
                                            a simple graph on n nodes. This bound is almost-optimal in terms of n, and it improves on the
                                            recent Õ(n2.5 ) bound by the authors (STOC 2021), which was the first to break the cubic barrier.
                                            Consequently, the All-Pairs Maximum-Flow (APMF) problem has time complexity n2+o(1) , and
                                            for the first time in history, this problem can be solved faster than All-Pairs Shortest Paths
                                            (APSP). We further observe that an almost-linear time algorithm (in terms of the number of
                                            edges m) is not possible without first obtaining a subcubic algorithm for multigraphs.
                                                Finally, we derandomize our algorithm, obtaining the first subcubic deterministic algorithm
                                            for Gomory-Hu Tree in simple graphs, showing that randomness is not necessary for beating the
                                                                                                                  2
                                            n − 1 times max-flow bound from 1961. The upper bound is Õ(n2 3 ) and it would improve to
                                              2+o(1)
                                            n        if there is a deterministic single-pair maximum-flow algorithm that is almost-linear. The
                                            key novelty is in using a “dynamic pivot” technique instead of the randomized pivot selection
                                            that was central in recent works.




                                        ∗
                                          amir.abboud@weizmann.ac.il
                                        †
                                          robert.krauthgamer@weizmann.ac.il
                                        ‡
                                          ohad.trabelsi@weizmann.ac.il
1     Introduction
Connectivities (minimum-cut or maximum-flow) and distances (or shortest path) are perhaps the
two most fundamental measures in graphs. Their computational complexity is a central object
of study in algorithms and discrete optimization, and both have been extensively investigated in
almost any setting of interest. Researchers often ponder the question: at a high-level, which of the
two is harder?
     The focus of this paper is on simple graphs (undirected, unweighted, no parallel edges or self-
loops), denoting the input graph by G and its number of nodes by n = |V (G)|. For a single-pair
s, t ∈ V (G) both measures can be computed in Õ(n2 ) time, albeit using very different algorithms.
For shortest path, Dijkstra’s algorithm [Dij59] from 1956 is sufficient, while either continuous op-
timization [vdBLL+ 21] or randomized contractions [KL15] are needed for maximum-flow. For the
more demanding task of computing these measures for all-pairs in a given graph, the complexities
appear to differ. Seidel’s algorithm [Sei95] solves all-pairs shortest paths in time nω+o(1) , where
ω ≤ 2.37286 is the fast matrix multiplication exponent [AW21]; whether faster algorithms are possi-
ble is one of the most well-known open questions in Algorithms. The key breakthrough for all-pairs
maximum-flow came in 1961 with the fundamental discovery of Gomory and Hu [GH61] that any
graph can be turned into a tree while preserving the minimum cuts for all pairs. Once the tree is
obtained, all pairwise connectivities can be extracted in Õ(n2 ) time.

Theorem 1.1 (Gomory and Hu [GH61]). Every undirected graph G (even with edge weights) has
an edge-weighted tree T on the same set of vertices V (G) such that:

    • for all pairs s, t ∈ V (G) the minimum (s, t)-cut in T is also a minimum (s, t)-cut in G, and
      their values are the same.

Such a tree is called a cut-equivalent tree, aka Gomory-Hu Tree. Moreover, the tree can be con-
structed in the time of n − 1 invocations to a Max-Flow algorithm.1

    Such a strong structural result is not possible for shortest paths (e.g., because any compression
to Õ(n) bits must incur large error [TZ05, AB17]). Still, up until now, it has not lead to an
algorithm solving the all-pairs maximum-flow problem (denoted All-Pairs Max-Flow) faster than all-
pairs shortest path (All-Pairs Shortest-Paths). The original algorithm of Gomory and Hu for getting
such a tree has time complexity Ω(n3 ), and only very recently a subcubic Õ(n2.5 )-time algorithm
was found [AKT21]. The immediate open question is whether the bound can be pushed all the way
down to n2 , or perhaps the tools of fine-grained complexity could come in the way and establish a
conditional lower bound.

Open Question 1.2. Can one construct a Gomory-Hu Tree of a simple graph G and solve all-pairs
maximum-flow in Õ(n2 )-time?

    Positive answers were obtained recently [AKT20a, LP21], but only for (1 + ε)-approximate cuts.
On the negative side, the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH) gives an n3−o(1) lower bound
for the harder setting of directed graphs [KT18] (see also [AGI+ 19] for a higher lower bound), but
probably not for undirected graphs [AKT20b]. Recent work has identified a class of problems that
are conjectured to have n2.5 complexity [LPW20] (including all-pairs shortest paths in directed
graphs [CWX21]); could our problem be one of them?
    1
      The notation Max-Flow refers to the maximum (s, t)-flow problem, which clearly has the same value as minimum
(s, t)-cut. In fact, we often need algorithms that find an optimal cut (not only its value), which is clearly different
(and usually harder) than Global-Min-Cut.


                                                          1
Main Result For unweighted simple graphs, our main result resolves (up to no(1) factors) the
complexity of all-pairs maximum-flow and of the Gomory-Hu Tree problem in dense graphs, where
Ω(n2 ) is a lower bound due to the input size (and for the former problem also output size).

Theorem 1.3. There is a randomized algorithm, with success probability 1 − 1/ poly(n), that con-
structs a Gomory-Hu Tree of a simple graph G and solves All-Pairs Max-Flow in time n2+o(1) .

    We find this result surprising for multiple reasons. First, it shows that all n2 answers can be
computed in the same time, up to lower-order factors, as it takes to compute a single-pair maximum-
flow. Second, for the first time in history, the time complexity of All-Pairs Max-Flow goes below that
of All-Pairs Shortest-Paths. This might be counter-intuitive because of the apparent unruliness of
flows compared to paths, e.g., the n2+o(1) -time single-source algorithm was much more difficult to
obtain. Perhaps the only indication for the plausibility of this outcome was given in our previous
paper, where it was shown that truly subcubic time is possible for All-Pairs Max-Flow by only
using combinatorial methods, whereas it is conjectured to be impossible for All-Pairs Shortest-Paths
[AKT21]. Third, the algorithm not only solves All-Pairs Max-Flow but also produces a Gomory-
Hu Tree that, among other things, is a space-optimal data structure for answering minimum cut
invocations in Õ(1) time. While the Gomory-Hu algorithm reduces the problem to n − 1 Max-Flow
computations, our new algorithm can be viewed as a reduction to only Õ(1) computations on graphs
with n2+o(1) edges (but possibly more than n nodes).2

Gomory-Hu Tree in Õ(m) Time? Looking ahead, after achieving the optimal exponent for the
number of nodes n, the next outstanding question is a bound in terms of the number of edges m =
|E(G)|: Is there an almost-linear time algorithm? Such a bound is known for planar graphs [BSW15],
surface-embedded graphs [BENW16], and bounded-treewidth graphs [ACZ98, AKT20a]. It is also
known in simple graphs if the algorithm is allowed to make nondeterministic guesses [AKT20b].

Open Question 1.4. Can one construct a Gomory-Hu Tree of a simple graph G in m1+o(1) -time?

   One issue when studying this question is that even single-pair Max-Flow is not known to be in
almost-linear time when m = O(n1.5−ε ). If our goal is to understand the complexity of constructing
a Gomory-Hu Tree, it is natural (and common) to assume the following plausible hypothesis.

Hypothesis 1.5. Single-Pair Max-Flow on m-edge weighted graphs can be solved in time m1+o(1) .

    This hypothesis does resolve Open Question 1.4 positively, even for general (weighted) graphs, if
we are only interested in a (1 + ε)-approximate Gomory-Hu Tree [LP21], but not in the exact case.
In the regime of sparse simple graphs, m = O(n), even under this hypothesis, the fastest algorithm
                                                                                 √
for Gomory-Hu Tree [AKT20b] has complexity Õ(n1.5 ), leaving a gap of about n. For general m,
the state of the art would be (min(n2 , m1.5 ))1+o(1) , due to Theorem 1.3 and [AKT20b].
    Our next observation is a reduction showing that improving the n1.5 -bound for simple graphs
requires a breakthrough subcubic algorithm for Gomory-Hu Tree in more general settings. However,
the recent advances in algorithms for Gomory-Hu Tree have been insufficient for breaking the cubic
barrier even in unweighted non-simple graphs (multigraphs), which seem to be the main step towards
weighted graphs; indeed, the known bound is Õ(mn) [BHKP07, KL15], which is Õ(n3 ) in the worst-
case.
   2
     However, viewing it this way is not sufficient for getting an almost-quadratic algorithm because the current Max-
Flow algorithms are not linear-time for all edge densities. Our algorithm actually uses a subroutine due to [BHKP07]
that cannot be reduced to Max-Flow computations.



                                                          2
Hypothesis 1.6. No algorithm can construct a Gomory-Hu Tree of an unweighted multigraph with
n nodes and O(n2 ) possibly parallel edges in time O(n3−ε ) for a fixed ε > 0.

Theorem 1.7. Assuming Hypothesis 1.6, no algorithm can construct a Gomory-Hu Tree of a simple
graph on n nodes and m = O(n) edges in time n1.5−ε for a fixed ε > 0.

Derandomization Taking a step back, we ask whether the developments in recent years [BHKP07,
AKT20b, AKT20a, AKT21] can give faster deterministic algorithms for Gomory-Hu Tree. In
fact, no deterministic algorithm (in any density regime) faster than Gomory-Hu’s deterministic
n · M F (n, m) = Ω(nm) algorithm is known. In fact, to our knowledge, the best upper bound in
                    2
terms of n is O(n3 3 ) using Goldberg and Rao’s deterministic Max-Flow algorithm [GR98]. The main
difficulty is due to the fact that all these new algorithms solve the single-source minimum-cut prob-
lem in some clever way, and then use a randomized pivot technique, in which a uniformly random
source serves as a pivot in a recursive process of logarithmic depth. The algorithm in Theorem 1.3
(and in [AKT21]) uses randomization also in other steps, such as expander decompositions and
randomized hitting sets, but these can already be derandomized with existing methods.
     A central contribution of our work is a new dynamic pivot technique that can (sometimes)
derandomize the randomized-pivot technique at no extra cost.The main result in this context is the
first subcubic algorithm for Gomory-Hu Tree.

Theorem 1.8. There is a deterministic algorithm that constructs a Gomory-Hu Tree of a simple
                                                  2
graph and solves All-Pairs Max-Flow in time Õ(n2 3 ). The time bound improves to n2+o(1) assuming
that single-pair Max-Flow can be computed in deterministic time m1+o(1) in m-edge weighted graphs.

1.1   Prior Work
The literature on cut-equivalent (Gomory-Hu) trees is quite vast. They have found many important
applications in several fields (see [AKT21, Section 1.4]), and have been generalized in several ways.
For example, they can be adapted to support other cut requirements such as multiway cuts or
cuts between groups of nodes [Has88, Has90, Has91, Har01, EH05, CKK16]. The possibility of
such magical representations of the minimum s, t-cuts in a graph have also been investigated in
the harder settings of vertex connectivity and directed graphs (see [Ben95, HL07, PY21] and the
references therein).

Previous Algorithms for Gomory-Hu Tree Over the years, the time complexity of construct-
ing a Gomory-Hu Tree has decreased several times due to improvements in Max-Flow algorithms,
but there have also been conceptually new algorithms. Gusfield [Gus90] presented a modification of
the Gomory–Hu algorithm in which all the n − 1 calls to Max-Flow are made on the original graph G
(instead of on contracted graphs). Bhalgat, Hariharan, Kavitha, and Panigrahi [BHKP07] designed
an Õ(mn)-time algorithm utilizing a tree packing approach [Gab95, Edm70] that has also been used
in other algorithms for cut-equivalent trees [CH03, HKP07, AKT20b, AKT21]. In particular, they
designed an O(mk)-time algorithm for constructing a k-partial Gomory-Hu Tree, which preserves
the minimum cuts if their size is up to k (see [Pan16] and the full version [BCH+ 08]). A simple high-
                                                              √
degree/low-degree strategy is helpful in sparse graphs: only m nodes can have degree (and there-
                          √           √                     √
fore outgoing flow) above m, thus a m-partial tree plus m Max-Flow queries are sufficient, which
takes O(m3/2 ) time if Max-Flow is solved in linear time. Using the current Max-Flow algorithms,
this strategy results in the time bound Õ(min {m3/2 n1/6 , max {mn3/4 , m3/2 }}) [AKT20b]. Com-
bined with [AKT21], the state of the art before this work was Õ(min {m3/2 n1/6 , mn3/4 , n3/2 m1/2 })


                                                  3
and now it is min(n2+o(1) , Õ(m3/2 n1/6 ), Õ(mn3/4 )). Additionally, two recent algorithms accelerate
the Gomory–Hu algorithm by making multiple steps at once to achieve Õ(m) time, one requires
nondeterminism [AKT20b] and the other requires a (currently non-existent) fast minimum-cut data
structure [AKT20a].
    In weighted graphs, the bound for Gomory-Hu Tree is still n times Max-Flow and therefore
cubic using the very recent Õ(m + n1.5 ) algorithm for Max-Flow [vdBLL+ 21]. If the graph is
sparse enough, one can use the recent Õ(m3/2−1/328 ) time algorithm [GLP21]. If additionally
the largest weight U is small, a series of algorithms exist [Mąd16, LS19, LS20] that run in time
Õ(min{m10/7 U 1/7 , m11/8 U 1/4 , m4/3 U 1/3 }) and might give a better time bound. The main open
question left by this work is whether the ideas behind the drastic speed ups for unweighted graphs
will lead to faster algorithms for weighted graphs as well.
    Practice-oriented algorithms and experimental studies of some algorithms for Gomory-Hu Tree
can be found in [AIS+ 16, GT01]. See the Encyclopedia of Algorithms entry [Pan16] for a further
discussion on Gomory-Hu Tree algorithms.

Approximations The challenge of designing approximation algorithms for Gomory-Hu Tree has
received considerable attention lately [AKT20a, LP21]. In what may be the final answer, Li and
Panigrahy [LP21] show that an m1+o(1) time algorithm constructing a (1 + ε)-approximate Gomory-
Hu Tree, even for weighted graphs, would follow from Hypothesis 1.5. Notably, the key tool in their
result is a simple yet powerful Isolating-Cuts procedure introduced in order to get a deterministic
algorithm for the global minimum cut problem [LP20] and is also crucial in our exact algorithms
for Gomory-Hu Tree in unweighted graphs [AKT21] (and this work). Interestingly, the expanders-
based techniques that are also crucial in our exact algorithms were not needed for their (1 + ε)-
approximation.

Expander Decompositions A key ingredient of our Gomory-Hu Tree algorithms (in this paper
and in [AKT21]) is an expander-decomposition of the graph [KVV04, OV11, OSV12, ST13, SW19,
CGL+ 20, GRST21]. Such decompositions have led to several breakthroughs in algorithms for basic
problems in the past decade, e.g. [ST14, KLOS14, NSWN17]. Even more recently, expander
decompositions and conductance based arguments have been used to break longstanding bounds for
other problems related to minimum cuts such as: deterministic algorithms for global minimum cut
[KT19, Sar20, LP20, Li21] and vertex connectivity [Gab06, NSY19, FNY+ 20].
    The added difficulty of the Gomory-Hu Tree problem compared to the global minimum cut
problem comes from the low degree nodes. When we are searching for a minimum s, t-cut of value
w there could be many nodes with degree < w that must be assigned to the correct side of the cut.
But in the global minimum cut problem this cannot happen: if the global minimum cut has value
w then all nodes in the graph must have degree ≥ w. These low-degree nodes create difficulties for
the expansion-based arguments because, intuitively, they do not contribute as much as expected to
the volume (for a more detailed explanation see [AKT21, Section 1.3, Complication 5]).

1.2   Technical Overview
In this section we distill and highlight the novel technical ideas of this work, instead of providing
an overview of the actual algorithms. The overview below is a considerable over-simplification, be-
cause the algorithms in both the work we improve upon [AKT21] and (to a lesser extent) this paper
combine intricately many ingredients, and they cannot be truly explained without many prelimi-
naries that may only be known to experts. Nevertheless, the standard/advanced terminology and



                                                  4
algorithms mentioned below without explanation can all be found in the Preliminaries (Sections 2
and 5.1).
     The plan is to first motivate and explain the three new ideas that are the key to the new results.
We hope that they can be appreciated on their own even if it is not possible to see exactly how they
fit into the actual algorithm. Afterwards, we will discuss some of the complications that arise when
using these ideas inside the algorithm.

1.2.1    The Simplest Hard Tree: Breaking the n2.5 Barrier using Expander-Decomposition
         with Demands
The simplest hard case for constructing a Gomory-Hu Tree appears to be the following.3 Given a
graph G distinguish between the case where its only Gomory-Hu Tree is a star from the case where
it is a c` -cr tree; i.e. two stars connected by an edge between the two centers c` and cr . In the first
case, the graph has the property that the minimum u, v-cut for all nodes u, v ∈ V is one of the two
trivial cuts {u} or {v}, and in the second case there is a single non-trivial minimum cut (C` , Cr ),
the cut between c` and cr , while almost all others are trivial. This is a hard case even if we are
given the node cr in advance; it is helpful to think of it as the pivot or source from which we want
to compute single-source cuts. The difficulty is in finding c` (if it exists at all). To make it more
concrete (and still hard) suppose that both stars have Ω(n) nodes and the minimum c` , cr -cut has
value w = Θ(n) which in turn implies that both c` , cr must have degree Ω(n). See Figure 1.




                                                  𝑐𝑙     𝑤      𝑐𝑟


                                                   <𝑤        𝑤<




                                       𝑪𝒍                                 𝑪𝒓

Figure 1: The cut-equivalent tree T of a hard case, where cr is given and the goal is to identify c` ,
the only node with a non-trivial minimum cut to cr . The weight of the cut (C` , Cr ) is λcl ,cr = w,
illustrated by the dashed edge at the center; edges of weight > w are thick, and edges of weight
< w are thin. The minimum cut between any pair of leaves u, v is trivial unless u is incident to a
bold edge on the left and v is incident to a bold edge on the right.

     It is instructive to observe that random sampling does not help, even if the cut we are searching
for (the minimum c` , cr -cut) is balanced. Even if we sample a node ` from c` ’s star and a node r from
cr ’s star (or cr itself), their minimum `, r-cut will not reveal the cut we are searching for; it could
even be simply {`} or {r}.4 It seems that Ω(n) calls to a Max-Flow algorithm are required with this
strategy. In fact, random sampling is one of the ways that help one see that c` -cr is the “hardest
tree”: if the tree had a long path it would have been possible to shorten it with a randomized hitting
   3
     It had appeared to be hard both for breaking the n2.5 bound in simple graphs and, until today, for breaking the
n3 bound in multigraphs and weighted graphs. This is discussed in Section 3 in [AKT21].
   4
     This is a big difference from related problems that ask for the global connectivity of a graph. There, finding a
node from each side is the end of the story.



                                                         5
set. Another method, the powerful Isolating-Cuts procedure [LP20], lets one resolve trees with
many small subtrees, but it too fails against the c` -cr tree where there is only one large subtree (see
[AKT21, Section 3] for more details). One important observation, that is the first step towards a
solution is that c` is the highest degree node among the nodes in the left star C` ;5 but the right star
could have many nodes with higher or lower degree than it.
    Perhaps the main idea in the subcubic algorithm of [AKT21] was to use an expander decom-
position of G in order to locate the node c` using fewer or cheaper calls to a Max-Flow algorithm.
                                                                                                √
The graph is decomposed into φ-expanders H1 , . . . , Hh with expansion parameter φ = 1/ n and
the number of outer-edges (that leave an expander) is Õ(|E|φ) = Õ(n1.5 ). Since the cut we are
                                                                  √
searching for has only O(n) edges, no expander can contain Ω( n) nodes from each side of this cut,
as that would violate the φ-expansion requirement, as it would induce inside the expander a cut
                   O(n)
of conductance Ω(    √
                       n)
                          < φ (see Section 2.4 for relevant definitions). Now, a key observation that
                                                                         √
crucially relies on the fact that G is a simple graph, is that only Õ( n) nodes of high degree, say
at least n/10, can be in small expanders Hi , i.e., of size at most n/100; this is because such a high
degree node in a small expander must have at least n/10 − n/100 ≥ Ω(n) incident outer-edge, and
there can only be Õ(n1.5 ) outer-edges in the decomposition. On the other hand, there can only be
O(1) large (i.e., not small) expanders since there are only n nodes in the graph. Consequently, it
is enough to search for c` inside the O(1) large expanders, using the clever methods that follow,
                      √
or among those Õ( n) high-degree nodes using direct calls to a Max-Flow algorithm. To search in
large expanders two methods are used: one is useful when there are few nodes from the left star
in the expander, and one is useful when there are few nodes from the right star. (Recall that no
                            √
expander can contain Ω( n) nodes from each star.)
    In brief, the first procedure uses the fact that the expander contains c` plus only few nodes from
C` in order to find a set of nodes S that isolates c` , in the sense that C` ∩ S = {c` }, and then uses
the Isolating-Cuts procedure. And the second procedure, which will be elaborated on in the
next subsection, uses the fact that c` is the highest degree node in C` to conclude that it must be
                √                                                      √
among the O( n) highest-degree nodes in an expander that has < n nodes from Cr . The upshot
           √
is that Õ( n) calls to a Max-Flow algorithm are enough to resolve any expander, and since this is
only done for the O(1) large expanders, the n2.5 bound follows.
                             √
    How can we beat this n barrier? It is natural to make the expansion parameter φ larger, e.g.
                              √
1/ logO(1) n rather than 1/ n, so that each expander is guaranteed to have fewer nodes from one
                                          √
of the sides, e.g., logO(1) n rather than n, and then it can be handled more efficiently. The issue
is that the upper bound on the number of outer-edges Õ(φ|E|) becomes worse and we end up with
Ω(n/ logO(1) n) high-degree nodes in small expanders that must be checked. On the other hand,
making φ smaller, e.g. 1/n, makes the time of handling an expander correspond to Ω(n) Max-Flow
              √
calls. Thus, n seems like a natural sweet-spot.
    The new observation is that even though φ = 1/ logO(1) n may not allow us to directly find c`
(since it may be among the Ω(n/ logO(1) n) high-degree nodes in small expanders), it does efficiently
reduce the set of candidate for being c` from Ω(n) to about n/ logO(1) n. If this candidate elimination
can be repeated, we will quickly, after Õ(1) times, reach a set of only Õ(1) candidates that can be
checked directly. To make this repetition possible and to avoid pointlessly eliminating the same set of
candidates each time, we utilize a more powerful expander-decomposition with vertex demands, that
lets us set to 0 the demand of nodes we have already handled. These demands control much better
how the vertices of a single expander are split between the two stars, because we can count only
nodes that have non-zero demand and are not yet handled. A similar strategy was used by Li and
   5
    Suppose for contradiction that one of the leaves v ∈ C` has higher degree than c` . Then {c` } is a better cut than
{v} the minimum cut in the tree, violating the requirements of a Gomory-Hu Tree.



                                                          6
Panigrahy [LP20] for their deterministic global min-cut algorithm (in weighted graphs), a related
but very different problem. The two algorithms share a certain high-level strategy, even though
almost all the details are different. These two striking applications of expander-decomposition with
vertex demands indicate that we are likely to see additional applications of this powerful technology.

1.2.2    From One Hard Cut to Single-Source Cuts using New Structural Results
After resolving the hard case of the previous section, where there was only one “candidate” c` with
a difficult-to-find cut, we move on to the more general setting. Suppose we are given a source (or
pivot) node p, such as cr in the previous example, and want to compute the minimum cut to all
other nodes v ∈ V . For concreteness and simplicity, assume that we are only interested in cuts of
value between w and 2w, where w = Θ(n). It might seem that the strategy of the previous section
simply works because c` could have been any high-degree node: we take all nodes of degree ≥ w to
be candidates and the Õ(1) calls to Max-Flow are magically supposed to find the minimum p, v-cut
for all of them.
     Alas, from a closer look we see that the fact that c` is the highest degree node in its cut C` is
crucially used in the second of the two methods described above, and this will not be the case for
all high-degree nodes; from now on we will call this second method Procedure Lefty because it
handles expanders with few nodes from the right side. The strategy taken in this paper and also (in
a much less efficient way) in [AKT21] is to talk about estimates instead of degrees. The estimate
c0 (v) of a node v is initially the degree of v, and it is reduced whenever a p, v-cut of smaller value is
found. Eventually, when a node is “done” the estimate becomes equal to the value of the minimum
p, v-cut (that is always upper bounded by the degree of v). In Procedure Lefty in [AKT21], instead
of taking the O(φ−1 ) highest degree nodes from an expander, we actually take the highest estimate
nodes. This lets us compute correct cuts not only for nodes that have the highest degree among
their cut-members, but also those whose current estimate is highest. If this (the entire algorithm)
is repeated enough times, letting the estimates improve after each repetition, it is guaranteed that
all the minimum cuts will be found.6
     But how many times should the algorithm be repeated? In [AKT21] it is argued that Õ(1)
                                                                              √
repetitions are sufficient because the algorithm has the budget to make n additional invocations
each time Procedure Lefty is called and because the depth of the Gomory-Hu Tree can be upper
              √                                           √
bounded by n by taking a random hitting set of n nodes. Unfortunately, both of these things
                                                                        √
are not possible if we want n2+o(1) time. First, we cannot spend n additional invocations and
second, the depth reduction itself already has Ω(n2.5 ) running time.
     The approach taken in this paper is different, much more efficient, and exploits the fact that
the graph is simple in a deeper way. We do not repeat the algorithm at all, but we augment
Procedure Lefty so that it does not stop handling an expander until the node with highest estimate
in the expander is done. The number of calls to Max-Flow can no longer be upper bounded by
O(φ−1 ) = Õ(1) and, in principle, some expanders might incur a much larger number of calls. But
we can provide an upper bound on the total number of calls using the fact that each additional call
was a result of a previously undone node becoming done, meaning that a new minimum cut was
found. In fact, the new cut is also not “easy” in the sense that it contains at least two high-degree
nodes; this important point will not be discussed in this overview (except briefly in Section 1.2.4
Item 4). Then, using a new bound on a certain notion of depth of a Gomory-Hu Tree of a simple
graph, we can upper bound the number of such cuts by O(n/w) which is a negligible overhead for
our algorithm. This bound is proved in Section 3 using combinatorial arguments of the following
   6
    To get intuition, observe that if a node v is the only node in its cut Cv that is not done, then it must have a
higher estimate than all other nodes in Cv . The same cannot be said about the degree.


                                                        7
flavor: Suppose there is a set of k minimum cuts of value between w and 2w that nested (each cut is
a subset of the previous one). If most of them have “private sets” of Ω(w) nodes that do not belong
to the other cuts, then k = O(n/w), as desired. Otherwise, there is a sequence of 10 cuts with only
o(w) private nodes each; now, because the graph is simple and each of these cuts must contain a
node of degree ≥ w, we get that each of these cuts has (1 − o(1))w edges leaving the entire set of
10 cuts. But then there are (10 − o(1))w edges leaving the largest of these cuts, contradicting the
fact that its value is ≤ 2w. This structural result follows from basic combinatorics, but when used
properly (e.g., one has to bypass complications with easy cuts), it can lead to significant algorithmic
savings.

1.2.3    Derandomization using a Dynamic Pivot
Until now, we have described how to find the minimum cuts from a single pivot p to all other
nodes v ∈ V . Let use remark that essentially all techniques needed for our n2+o(1) time single-
source minimum cuts algorithm can be derandomized with standard tools.7 To fully construct a
Gomory-Hu Tree, this algorithm is used recursively in a manner that is similar to the Gomory-Hu
algorithm. There is an intermediate tree T that starts from a single super-node containing all of
V , and gets refined throughout the recursion until eventually each node is in its own super-node.
A refinement of the tree T is performed by dividing a super-node into smaller super-nodes, based
on information about some minimum cuts. The Gomory-Hu algorithm divides the super-node into
two each time, while our algorithm (since it has all the minimum cuts from a single pivot) may
divide it into many super-nodes at once.8 For purposes of efficiency, we want to make the recursion
depth logarithmic. This is guaranteed if the cuts from the pivot happen to divide the graph in a
balanced way; but unfortunately, it could be the case that the minimum cut from the pivot p to
all other nodes is ({p}, V \ {p}) and we have learned very little. A popular way to circumvent this
issue ([BHKP07, AKT20a, AKT21]), used also in our randomized algorithm, is to pick the pivot at
random and argue that with high probability, many of the cuts will be balanced. But it is not clear
how a deterministic algorithm can avoid depth Ω(n) due to a sequence of bad pivots.
    One approach is to use the new structural results to argue that, in a simple graph, if we always
pick nodes of degree ≥ w as pivots, the number of calls to the single-source algorithm will be
O(n/w). This would be an improvement over Ω(n) calls, but it will not lead to an n2+o(1) bound
(even if Max-Flow can be solved in linear time).
    The approach we take is both more powerful and conceptually simpler. We modify the single-
source algorithm so that it is guaranteed to return balanced cuts: if this is not possible because the
pivot is bad, then the single-source algorithm may change the pivot into a better one. A good pivot
is always guaranteed to exist, e.g. the centroid p∗ of the Gomory-Hu Tree has the property that for
all v ∈ V , the minimum p∗ , v-cut has ≤ n/2 nodes in the side of v.
    In more detail, we start from the highest degree node as the pivot p and proceed with the
single-source algorithm as usual. Whenever a cut Cq for node q ∈ V is obtained, either via a call
to Max-Flow or via the Isolating-Cuts procedure (Lemma 2.10), we check to see if the cut is
good in the sense that the side of q has ≤ n/2 nodes. (We work with so-called latest cuts, see
Section 5.1.1, so that if a good cut exists, it will be found.) If the cut is not good, the algorithm
runs a pivot-change protocol that makes q the new pivot. In this protocol, the estimates and cuts
of all nodes v ∈ V are updated; fortunately, due to a triangle-inequality-like property of cuts,9 it
   7
     The only exception is the k-partial tree that is only needed as long as the upper bound for Max-Flow is not
almost-linear. For the purposes of this overview, it is not needed.
   8
     This is a crucial point, as discussed in our previous papers [AKT20b, AKT20a]
   9
     It is well-known that min(λx,y , λy,z ) ≤ λx,z for all nodes x, y, z, where λu,v denotes the minimum u, v-cut value.



                                                           8
can all be done in O(1) time per node v ∈ V , which is negligible compared to the time for solving
the Max-Flow leading to that pivot-change. And that is it; the algorithm can proceed as if q was
the pivot all along.

1.2.4   Further Complications
Finally, let us mention the complications that arise when turning the above ideas into a full algorithm
for constructing a Gomory-Hu Tree. Happily, some of the complications in our previous work
[AKT21] were alleviated due to the recent discovery of a Max-Flow algorithm that runs in near-
linear time when m = Ω(n1.5 ) [vdBLL+ 21].

  1. The first reason that our actual algorithms are more complicated than what has been described
     is that the single-source algorithm must work with auxiliary graphs of the iput graph G, and
     thees are obtained by contracting certain nodes (as in the Gomory-Hu framework). While
     the input graph is simple, the auxiliary graphs could have parallel edges, and so the same
     arguments cannot be applied in a black-box manner. Still, we apply them by going back and
     forth (in both the algorithm and analysis) between the nodes of the auxiliary graph and of
     the input graph. While this does not introduce substantial technical difficulties, the notation
     is heavier and it takes some time to get used to.
  2. When searching for cuts of value w = o(n) the number of calls to a Max-Flow algorithm is
     higher. Typically, our algorithms make Õ(n/w) calls to a Max-Flow algorithm. Fortunately, as
     w gets smaller, each call becomes cheaper because it can be applied on a Nagamochi-Ibaraki
     sparsifier [NI92] of the graph that only has O(nw) edges and preserves all cuts of value ≤ w.
     So if we had an almost-linear time Max-Flow algorithm, all the calls together would overall
     take (nw)1+o(1) · n/w = n2+o(1) time. But using the current Max-Flow algorithms each call
                                                     √
     takes Õ(nw +n1.5 ), which is larger when w = o( n), making the overall time super-quadratic.
                                                                                √
     To circumvent this issue, we start with a preliminary step that computes a n-partial tree of
     the graph [BHKP07] in Õ(n2 ) (randomized) time, and afterwards all cuts we are interested in
                    √
     will have w > n.
  3. In our randomized algorithm, where we use the standard randomized pivot selection to go from
     a single-source algorithm to a full tree, it is convenient to assume that all minimum cuts are
     unique. Otherwise the Max-Flow algorithm might adversarially return bad (unbalanced) cuts
     with respect to whatever pivot we choose. This can be achieved by adding a small perturbation
     to each edge, which guarantees that ties are broken in some consistent manner and does not
     ruin the arguments that need the graph to be unweighted because we can still analyze the
     underlying simple graph. There are other ways to circumvent this issue; for example, by
     dropping the randomized pivot strategy altogether and using our dynamic pivot technique
     instead. Still, we have chosen to present this method because it may be the easiest to follow
     for readers who are familiar with prior work.
  4. Finally, there is a step in our single-source algorithm that might seem unnecessary at first.
     We invoke the Isolating-Cuts procedure to compute all easy cuts (recall these contain only
     one node of degree ≥ w). We call them easy because they are indeed easy to compute using
     a single call to Max-Flow and without any expansion-based arguments. The need for this step
     is in order to bound the number of new cuts obtained in Procedure Lefty later on in the
     algorithm using our new structural results. This result can only bound the number of cuts
     that are not easy. Therefore, omitting this step might make Procedure Lefty prohibitively
     expensive.

                                                  9
2     Preliminaries
2.1    Gomory-Hu’s Algorithm and Partial Trees
First, we give some general definitions that are often used by algorithms for Gomory-Hu trees.

Partition Trees. A partition tree T of a graph G = (V, E) is a tree whose nodes 1, . . . , l are
super-nodes, which means that each node i is associated with a subset Vi ⊆ V ; and these super-
nodes form a disjoint partition V = V1 t · · · t Vl . We will assume that the edges of a partition
tree are weighted in the natural way: each edge in T represents a vertex bipartition in G and we
can define its weight to be the value of this cut in G. An auxiliary graph Gi is constructed from
G by merging nodes that lie in the same connected component of T \ {i}. These merged nodes
(representing multiple nodes in G) will be called contracted node. For example, if the partition
tree is a path on super-nodes 1, . . . , l, then Gi is obtained from G by merging V1 ∪ · · · ∪ Vi−1 into
one contracted node and Vi+1 ∪ · · · ∪ Vl into another contracted node. We will use the notations
n0i := |Vi |, m0i := |E(Gi )|, and ni := |V (Gi )|. Note that n0i ≤ ni since V (Gi ) contains Vi as well as
some other contracted nodes, with n0i = ni only if the tree T has a single super-node. The following
is a brief description of the classical Gomory-Hu algorithm [GH61] (see Figure 2).

The Gomory-Hu algorithm. This algorithm constructs a cut-equivalent tree T in iterations.
Initially, T is a single node associated with V (the node set of G), and the execution maintains
the invariant that T is a partition tree of V . At each iteration, the algorithm picks arbitrarily two
graph nodes s, t that lie in the same tree super-node i, i.e., s, t ∈ Vi . The algorithm then constructs
from G the auxiliary graph Gi and invokes a Max-Flow algorithm to compute in this Gi a minimum
st-cut, denoted C 0 . The submodularity of cuts ensures that this cut is also a minimum st-cut in the
original graph G, and it clearly induces a disjoint partition Vi = S t T with s ∈ S and t ∈ T . The
algorithm then modifies T by splitting super-node i into two super-nodes, one associated with S
and one with T , that are connected by an edge whose weight is the value of the cut C 0 , and further
connecting each neighbor of i in T to either S or T (viewed as super-nodes), depending on its side
in the minimum st-cut C 0 (more precisely, neighbor j is connected to the side containing Vj ).



            𝑉𝑖                                          𝑆

                     𝑠                                      𝑠
                                      Minimum-Cut
                 𝑡                    between 𝑠 and 𝑡           𝑡
                                                                     𝑇




Figure 2: An illustration of the construction of T . Left: T right before the partition of the super-
node Vi . Middle: after the partitioning of Vi . Right: T as it unfolds after the Gomory-Hu algorithm
finishes.

    The algorithm performs these iterations until all super-nodes are singletons, which happens after

                                                                10
n − 1 iteration. Then, T is a weighted tree with effectively the same node set as G. It can be shown
[GH61] that for every s, t ∈ V , the minimum st-cut in T , viewed as a bipartition of V , is also a
minimum st-cut in G, and of the same cut value. We stress that this property holds regardless of
the choice made at each step of two nodes s 6= t ∈ Vi .
    A GH-Equivalent Partition Tree is a partition tree that can be obtained by a truncated execution
of the Gomory-Hu algorithm, in the sense that there is a sequence of choices for the pairs s 6= t ∈ Vi
that can lead to such a tree. A basic property of partition trees and auxiliary graphs is the following.

Lemma 2.1 ([GH61]). Let T be a GH-Equivalent Partition Tree of a graph G = (V, E) and let G0
be an auxiliary graph on original nodes V 0 ⊆ V . For all u, v ∈ V 0 it holds that Max-FlowG (u, v) =
Max-FlowG0 (u, v).

   The following simple lemma describes the flexibility in designing cut-equivalent tree algorithms
based on the Gomory-Hu framework.

Lemma 2.2. Given a GH-Equivalent Partition Tree T 0 of an input graph G, and a cut-equivalent
tree Ti of the auxiliary graph Gi for each super-node Vi in T 0 , one can construct a full cut-equivalent
tree T of G in linear time.

Proof. In a preprocessing step, for every super node Vi in T 0 and every contracted node q ∈ V (Gi ) \
Vi , save a pointer to the super node Vj ⊆ q that is adjacent to Vi in T 0 . Now, for every super-node
Vi , identify each contracted node q ∈ V (Gi ) \ Vi with the super-node it contains that is adjacent to
Vi in T 0 , and connect the nodes of Vi to the super-nodes they are adjacent to (if any). Finally, if a
node u ∈ Vi is connected to a super-node Vj , and a node v ∈ Vj is connected to Vi , remove these
connections and connect u to v directly, and call the result T . Observe that T must be a tree.
     To see why T is a correct cut-equivalent tree of G, observe that there exists a simulated Gomory-
Hu execution that results in T . Given the GH-Equivalent Partition Tree T 0 , pick pairs of nodes from
Vi and cuts according to Ti . This is guaranteed to produce a tree T̃i whose projection on Vi is
identical to Ti , while the subtrees adjacent to Vi in T̃ are connected to the same nodes of Vi as their
contracted counterparts in Ti . Applying this simulated execution to all super-nodes concludes the
proof.

   A simple corollary is the following natural lemma that we will use.

Lemma 2.3. Let G be a graph and suppose that S1 , . . . , Sk are non-crossing minimum cuts between
a single source p and k targets. Then there exists a Gomory-Hu Tree of G in which all of these k
cuts are minimum cuts.

Proof. To construct such a tree, execute the Gomory-Hu algorithm where in the first k steps choose
the pairs p, vi and suppose that Si is the cut returned by the invocation. Then continue the
execution arbitrarily. Since these k cuts will be contracted in the later stages, the final tree will
preserve them.

2.1.1   k-Partial Trees
A k-partial tree, formally defined below, can also be thought of as taking a cut-equivalent tree of G
and contracting all edges of weight greater than k. Such a tree can obviously be constructed using
the Gomory-Hu algorithm, but as stated below (in Lemma 2.5), faster algorithms were designed
in [HKP07, BHKP07], see also [Pan16, Theorem 3]. It is known that such a tree is a GH-Equivalent
Partition Tree, see [AKT20b, Lemma 2.3].


                                                   11
Definition 2.4 (k-Partial Tree [HKP07]). A k-partial tree of a graph G = (V, E) is a partition tree
of G with the following property: For every two nodes x, y ∈ V whose minimum x, y-cut value in G
is at most k, nodes x and y lie in different super-nodes x ∈ X and y ∈ Y , such that the minimum
X, Y -cut in the tree defines a bipartition of V which is a minimum x, y-cut in G and the two cuts
have the same value.
Lemma 2.5 ([BHKP07]). There is an algorithm that given an undirected graph having n nodes, m
edges, and unit edge-capacities together with an integer k ∈ [n], constructs a k-partial tree in time
min{Õ(nk 2 ), Õ(mk)}.

2.2   Edge Perturbation
The following proposition shows that by adding small capacities to the edges, we can assume that
G has one cut-equivalent tree T ∗ (see also [BENW16, Preliminaries] and [AKT20a]).
Proposition 2.6. One can add random values in {1/n10 , . . . , n7 /n10 } to the edge-capacities in G,
such that with probability 1 − 1/poly(n), the resulting graph G̃ has a single cut-equivalent tree T ∗
with n − 1 distinct edge weights, and moreover the same T ∗ (with edge weights rounded back) is a
valid cut-equivalent tree also for G.
    Throughout this paper, when we say that G̃ is a perturbed version of G with unique minimum
cuts we mean that G̃ was obtain from G as in Proposition 2.6. The truth is that sometimes, with
low probability, the perturbed version G̃ may not have unique minimum cuts; but this event will
be ignored throughout our analysis and, if it occurs, the algorithm is assumed to fail.

2.3   Nagamochi-Ibaraki Sparsification
We use the sparsification method by Nagamochi and Ibaraki [NI92]. They showed that for any
graph G it is possible to find a subgraph H with at most w(n − 1) edges, such that H contains all
edges crossing cuts of value w or less. It follows that if a cut has value at most w − 1 in G then
it has the same value in H, and if a cut has value at least w in G then it also has value at least
w in H. Their algorithm [NI92] performs this sparsification in time O(m) on unweighted graphs,
independently of w, and it works for multigraphs that have m parallel edges.
    We will need the following simple lemma, showing that sparsification and edge-perturbation can
be combined in a convenient way.
Lemma 2.7 (The Nagamochi-Ibaraki sparsifier of a perturbed graph). Given an unweighted multi-
graph graph G on n nodes and m (possibly parallel) edges, an integer w ≥ 1, and a perturbed version
G̃ of G with unique minimum cuts, one can compute in O(m) time a perturbed sparsifier Gw on
O(nw) edges such that:
   • any cut of weight < w in G̃ has exactly the same weight in Gw , and
   • any cut of weight ≥ w in G̃ still has weight ≥ w in Gw .
Proof. Let ε(e) ∈ {1/n10 , . . . , n7 /n10 } be the added perturbation of each edge e ∈ E(G) that was
added in order to produce G̃, and note that ε(e) < 1. To produce the perturbed sparsifier Gw
start by computing a Nagamochi-Ibaraki sparsifier H of the unweighted G, and then for each edge
e ∈ E(G) ∩ E(H) that remains in H, add ε(e) to its weight.
    Let S be a cut of weight < w in G̃. Since the edge perturbations are < 1 it follows that S
has weight < w in G as well, and therefore all of its edges are preserved in the Nagamochi-Ibaraki
sparsifier H. It follows that the weight of S in Gw is exactly as it is in G̃.

                                                 12
    On the other hand, let S be a cut of weight ≥ w in G̃. Again, since the perturbations are so small,
the weight of this cut in G must have also been ≥ w, and by the properties of the Nagamochi-Ibaraki
sparsifier, also in H and in Gw .

   Consequently, if we restrict our attention to the cuts of weight < w, the sparsifier still has unique
minimum cuts.

2.4   Expander Decomposition
We mostly follow notations and definition from [SW19]. Let GP    = (V, E) be an undirected graph with
edge capacities. Define the volume of C ⊆ V as volG (C) := v∈C cdegG (v), where the subscripts
referring to the graph are omitted if clear from the context. The conductance of a cut S in G is
                    δ(S)
ΦG (S) := min(volG (S),vol G (V \S))
                                     . The expansion of a graph G is ΦG := minS⊂V ΦG (S). If G is a
singleton then ΦG := 1 by convention. Let G[S] be the subgraph induced by S ⊂ V , and let G{S}
denote the induced subgraph G[S] but with an added self-loop e = (v, v) for each edge e0 = (v, u)
where v ∈ S, u ∈/ S (where each self-loop contributes 1 to the degree of a node), so that every node
in S has the same degree as its degree in G. Observe that for all S ⊂ V , ΦG[S] ≥ ΦG{S} , because the
self-loops increase the volumes but not the values of cuts. We say that a graph G is a φ-expander
if ΦG ≥ φ, and we call a partition V = V1 t · · · t Vh a φ-expander-decomposition if mini ΦG[Vi ] ≥ φ.

Theorem 2.8 (Theorem 1.2 in [SW19]). Given a graph G = (V, E) of m edges and a parameter φ,
one can compute with high probability a partition V = V1 t · · · t Vh such that mini ΦG[Vi ] ≥ φ and
P                    3
  i δ(Vi ) = O(φm log m). In fact, the algorithm has a stronger guarantee that mini ΦG{Vi } ≥ φ.
The running time of the algorithm is O(m log4 m/φ).

  We will need the following strengthening of Theorem 2.8, where the input contains vertex de-
mands (to be used instead of vertex degrees). Given in addition a demand vector d ∈ RV≥0 , the
                                                                                  δ(S)
graph G = (V, E) is a (φ, d)-expander if for all subsets S ⊆ V , ΦdG (S) := min(d(S),d(V \S)) ≥ φ. The
following theorem statement is taken from [LP20], but its proof is actually a variation of a result
from [CGL+ 20], and gives a deterministic algorithm. We are not aware of a faster algorithm, not
even a randomized one based for instance on [SW19].

Theorem 2.9 (Theorem III.8 in [LP20]). Fix ε > 0 and any parameter φ > 0. Given an edge-
weighted, undirected graph G = (V, E, w) and a demand vector d ∈ R≥0 V , there is a deterministic

algorithm running in time O(m1+ε ) that computes a partition V = V1 t · · · t Vh such that

  1. For each i ∈ [h], define a demand vector di ∈ RV≥0     i
                                                               given by di (v) = d(v) + w(E(v, V \ Vi ))
     for all v ∈ Vi . Then, the graph G[Vi ] is a (φ, di )-expander.
                                                                        P
  2. The total weight of inter-cluster edges is w(E(V1 , . . . , Vh )) = i w(E(Vi , V \ Vi )) ≤ B · φd(V )
                          4
     for B = (log n)O(1/ε ) .

2.5   The Isolating Cuts Procedure
A key tool that will be used in both our deterministic and randomized algorithms is a simple yet
powerful procedure that can compute many minimum cuts all at once with Õ(1) calls to a Max-Flow
algorithm. More specifically, if a subset of the nodes C ⊆ V is given, the procedure returns the
minimum isolating cut for each node v ∈ C; meaning the minimum cut that separates v from all
other nodes in C \ {v}. This is very useful when we can pick a set C that contains only one node
from each minimum p, v-cut Cv for many nodes v; then, all of these cuts are guaranteed to be found.

                                                   13
    This lemma was introduced by Li and Panigrahy [LP20] for their deterministic global minimum
cut, and was later rediscovered in [AKT21] (using a different proof and a slightly different statement
where there is a pivot) and used in a Gomory-Hu Tree algorithm. Independently, Li and Panighrahy
[LP21] also used it for (an approximate) Gomory-Hu Tree.

Lemma 2.10 (The Isolating-Cuts Procedure ([LP20]. See also [AKT21])). Given an undirected
graph G = (V, E, c) on n nodes and m edges, a pivot node p ∈ V , and a set of connected vertices
C ⊆ V , let (Cv , V \ Cv ) where v ∈ Cv , p ∈ V \ Cv be the latest minimum (p, v)-cut for each v ∈ C.
One can compute deterministically in time O(M F (n, m, c(E)) · log n) |C| disjoint sets {Cv0 ⊂ V }v∈C
such that
                               ∀v ∈ C, if Cv ∩ C = {v} then Cv0 = Cv .


3         New Structural Results for the Gomory-Hu Tree of Simple Graphs
The main result of this section is a new structural result giving a non-trivial bound on a certain
notion of depth of any Gomory-Hu Tree of a simple graph G. In fact, the bound is on the depth of
a certain subtree of the cut-membership tree defined next.
    Let T be any Gomory-Hu Tree of a graph G. A cut-membership tree Tp∗ with respect to node
p ∈ V (G) [AKT20a, Section 3] (see Figure 3 for illustration) is a coarsening of T where all nodes
B ⊆ V whose minimum cut to p is the same are merged into one bag. In more detail, define a
function ` : V (T ) \ {p} → E(T ), where `(u) is the lightest edge in the path between u and p in T ,
and `(p) = ∅; to make the function well-defined we break ties by taking the lowest (furthest from p)
minimal edge on the path. Let Tp∗ (G) (or simply Tp∗ when G is clear from the context) be the graph
constructed from T by merging nodes whose image under ` is the same. Observe that nodes that
are merged together, namely, `−1 (e) for e ∈ E(T ), are connected in T , and therefore the resulting
Tp∗ is a tree. We shall refer to nodes of Tp∗ as bags. For example, p is not merged with any other
node, and thus forms its own bag. Just like a graph has many Gomory-Hu Trees, it also has many
cut-membership trees with respect to any node p.
    The size of a bag is defined to be the number of nodes (from G) that it contains. Define the
value of a bag to be the value of the minimum cut corresponding to it. Define Tp∗,≥w (G), called
the w-large cut-membership tree of G, to be the subset of Tp∗ (G) containing only bags of value ≥ w
(see Figure 4).
    Notice that all nodes in the bags of Tp∗,≥w (G) have degree ≥ w. A bag of Tp∗,≥w (G) is called
easy if the subtree under it contains only one node of degree ≥ w.10 It follows that all easy bags
are leaves in Tp∗,≥w (G), but not all leaves are easy.

Theorem 3.1. If Tp∗,≥w (G) is an arbitrary w-large cut-membership tree of a simple graph G on
n nodes, then the number of bags in Tp∗,≥w (G) that are not easy is ≤ c · n/w for a fixed constant
c ≤ 105 .

Proof. Let Tp∗,≥w (G) be any w-large cut-membership tree of G, and define T to be the tree Tp∗,≥w (G)
after the removal of its easy bags. Our goal is to bound the number of bags in T by O(n/w). We
begin by bounding its number of leaves, then continue to bound the number of internal bags (which
is not straightforward since there could be many degree 2 bags).
Claim 3.2. The number of leaves in T is ≤ 2n/w.
    10
         Throughout, the subtree under a bag includes the bag itself.




                                                             14
                                                 𝑒2                   𝑝
                                                               7             13   𝑒1


                                        ℓ−1 𝑒2
                                                      9                           8
                                                                                                 ℓ−1 𝑒1
                                                               𝑒3                     𝑎
                                        1                                             10        12
                                             6
                                                                    ℓ−1 𝑒3        𝑏              𝑐
                               1                 15                                        11
                                                          16
                                                                                           𝑑

                       2   3       14                 5




Figure 3: An illustration showing a Gomory-Hu tree T with solid blue lines and the corresponding
cut-membership tree Tp∗ (G) with dashed gray lines. For example, e1 = `(a) = `(b) = `(c) = `(d)
and therefore {a, b, c, d} ∈ V (Tp∗ ) is a bag of size 4.


Proof. Let B1 , . . . , Bx be the bags that are leaves in T . Fix a node v ∈ Bi and recall that the
subtree of Tp∗ (G) under Bi , when viewed as a subset of V , corresponds to a minimum v, p-cut in G.
Call the latter set Ci ⊆ V . It holds that the sets C1 , . . . , Cx are disjoint.
    The claim follows from the key observation that, since G is simple, it must be that |Ci | ≥ w/2
for all i ∈ [x], which implies that x ≤ 2n/w. To see why this observation is true, assume for
contradiction that |Ci | < w/2 for some i ∈ [x]. Since Bi is not an easy bag, the cut Ci must contain
at least two nodes of degree ≥ w, call them u, v. The node u has ≥ w adjacent edges, but since G
is simple, only |Ci | − 1 < w/2 − 1 of them could go into Ci , and ≥ w/2 + 1 of them must go to
V \ Ci . This implies that Ci \ {u} is a p, v-cut with fewer edges than Ci , a contradiction.

    Let A ⊂ V (T ) be the set of bags in T whose degree (in T ) is 2. By Claim 3.2 and the basic
combinatorial fact that in every tree, the number of nodes of degree > 2 is at most the number of
leaves, we obtain that |V (T ) \ A| ≤ 2n/w. Thus, it remains to bound |A|.
    Consider a bag B ∈ A. Let B 0 be the bag below it in T , and let PB ⊆ V be the set of all nodes
in the subtree under B in Tp∗ (G) except for those in the subtree under B 0 . These nodes will be
called the private nodes of B since they do not appear in bags below B in T . For example, suppose
that B ∈ A has four children in Tp∗,≥w (G) called B1 , B2 , B3 , B4 , out of which three are leaves
                 / T and only one is internal B 0 = B4 ∈ T , as well as two additional children B5 , B6 that
B1 , . . . , B 3 ∈
are in Tp (G) but not in Tp∗,≥w (G); in this case, the set PB contains all nodes in B1 , B2 , B3 , B5 , B6
             ∗

and their subtrees in Tp∗ (G), as well as the nodes in the bag B itself. Let AL ⊆ A be the set of
bags of degree 2 with a large private set AL = {B ∈ A | |PB | > w/100}.
    Since for any two bags B1 , B2 ∈ A we have that PB1 ∩ PB2 = ∅ it follows that |AL | ≤ 100n/w.
The following key claim shows that T 0 cannot have a long path of degree 2 bags without large
private sets.


                                                               15
                                       𝑝
                                                              𝑃𝐵
                                                     𝐵

                                                                             𝑃𝐵 ′
                                                                   𝐵′ = 𝐵4
                                  𝐵1       𝐵2   𝐵3   𝐵5       𝐵6




            T𝑝∗           ∪        ∪
            ⊆




            T𝑝∗,≥𝑤        ∪
            ⊆




            T




Figure 4: An illustration of a cut-membership tree Tp∗ , its subtree Tp∗,≥w the w-large cut-membership
tree, and its subtree T that is obtained by deleting all easy bags. Small blue circles represent nodes
of degree ≥ w, while small grey dots represent nodes of degree < w


Claim 3.3. There is no path of length ≥ 10 in T containing only bags from A \ AL .

Proof. Assume for contradiction that such a path exists, and denote its bags by B1 , . . . , B10 ∈ A\AL ,
ordered by going away from p. The nodes of G can be partitioned into three sets V = U t X t D,
where U contains all nodes that do not appear in bags in the subtree under B1 , the set X =
PB1 ∪ · · · ∪ PB10 of nodes that are private to bags in this path, and D contains all the remaining
nodes, that is nodes that appear in the subtree under B10 but not private to B10 . Since none of
these 10 bags is in AL we have that |X| ≤ 10 · w/100 = w/10.
    For each i ∈ [10], let λi be the value of the bag Bi and fix a node vi ∈ Bi . By construction,
λ1 ≥ · · · ≥ λ10 ≥ w. We know that deg(vi ) ≥ λi ≥ w; but since |X| ≤ Pw/10 and G is simple,     vi must
                                                                          10                P9
have > λi −w/10 edges to nodes in U ∪D. Overall, there must be >          i=1 λi −w >         i=1 λi edges
from the nodes in X to the nodes in U ∪ D. Now there are two cases: either |E(X, D)| ≥ λ8 + λ9 ≥
2λ10 , which contradicts the fact that |E(V \ D, D)| ≤ λ10 ; or |E(X, U )| > λ1 + · · · + λ7 ≥ λ1 + w,
which contradicts the fact that |E(V \ U, U )| ≤ λ1 . As both cases lead to a contradiction, Claim 3.3
follows.

    Let Y be the set of bags in T that are either leaves, or have degree > 2, or have degree 2 but
are in AL . By the above and Claim 3.2, |Y| ≤ 2 · 2n/w + |AL | ≤ 104n/w. To conclude the proof,
we define a mapping f : V (T ) \ Y → Y from bags that are yet to be counted to bags that have
already been counted. For a bag B ∈ A \ AL , let f (B) be the first bag in Y that is below B in T .
By Claim 3.3, there can only be ≤ 10 bags in the pre-image of any bag in Y.


                                                         16
    To conclude the proof, we charge the remaining bags V (T ) \ Y to the bags that we have already
counted. More precisely, we charge each bag B ∈ V (T ) \ Y = A \ AL to the first bag in Y that
is below B in T . By Claim 3.3, at most 10 bags are charged to the same bag in Y, and therefore
|A \ AL | ≤ 10|Y|. We conclude that |V (T )| = |A \ AL | + |Y| ≤ 11 · 104 · n/w, which completes the
proof of Theorem 3.1.


4     Gomory-Hu Tree in Near-Quadratic Time
Theorem 1.3. There is a randomized algorithm, with success probability 1 − 1/ poly(n), that con-
structs a Gomory-Hu Tree of a simple graph G and solves All-Pairs Max-Flow in time n2+o(1) .

    Recall from Section 2.1 that an auxiliary graph G0 is obtained from a graph G = (V, E) and
from a GH-Equivalent Partition Tree T by keeping the nodes V 0 ⊆ V from one super-node of T and
contracting certain subsets of the other nodes as prescribed by T , introducing other nodes V (G0 )\V 0
into G0 . The connectivity of any pair of original graph nodes u, v ∈ V 0 in G and G0 is the same
(Lemma 2.1). To simplify the exposition, we will use the following definition of connectivity of an
auxiliary graph; note that the requirement is only for the original graph nodes V 0 and not for the
other nodes in G0 .

Definition 4.1 (Connectivity of an Auxiliary Graph). We say that an auxiliary graph G0 has
connectivity k if for every pair of original graph nodes u, v ∈ V 0 , the minimum (u, v)-cut in G0 (and
thus also in G) has value at least k.

4.1    Single-Source in Near-Quadratic Time
Theorem 4.2. Given a simple graph G = (V, E) on N = |V | nodes with a designated pivot p ∈ V ,
an√ auxiliary graph G0 on the graph nodes V 0 ⊆ V (G) with n = |V (G0 )|, m = |E(G0 )| and connectivity
≥ N , and a perturbed version G̃ of G0 with unique minimum cuts, one can compute the minimum
(p, v)-cut in G̃ for all nodes v ∈ V 0 in total time m1+o(1) + N n1+o(1) .

   In the rest of this section we prove Theorem 4.2. Denote the value of the minimum u, v-cut in G̃
by λu,v := Max-FlowG̃ (u, v), and fix a sufficiently large constant γ ≥ 1 (it will determine the overall
success probability).

The Algorithm First, initialize an estimate c0 (v) := degG̃ (v) for all v ∈ V 0 along with a witness
                                          √
cut Cv = {v}. Now for each j = blog N c, . . . , dlog N e, let w := 2j and execute the following
process. We shall refer to this process as stage w, and it will compute correct estimates c0 (v) = λp,v
(and witness cuts) for all v ∈ V 0 such that w ≤ λp,v < 2w.

Stage w:

    1. Compute a Nagamochi-Ibaraki sparsifier Gw (by Lemma 2.7) for the perturbed auxiliary graph
       G̃, so that this Gw has O(nw) edges, all cuts of value < 2w are preserved, and all cuts of
       larger value still have value ≥ 2w.
    2. Construct the set V≥w
                          0  := {v ∈ V 0 | degG (v) ≥ w} and call the Isolating-Cuts procedure
       (see Lemma 2.10) on Gw , p, V≥w
                                    0  to get a p, v-cut for all v ∈ V≥w
                                                                      0  and update the estimates




                                                  17
        c0 (v) and Cv if the new cut has smaller value (and if its value is not ≥ 2w). This step computes
        correctly all cuts that contain only one node from V≥w  0 ; such cuts will be called easy below.11

     3. Initialize a set C = {v ∈ V 0 | c0 (v) > w}; its nodes will be called candidates.
     4. While |C| > log n do:

           • Compute an expander decomposition (H1 , . . . , H` ) of G0 (see Theorem 2.9) with param-
                                                          1/2
             eters ε := (log n)−1/9 = o(1) and φ := 2− log n = n−o(1) , and demand function
                                                     (
                                                       w, if v ∈ C
                                             d(v) :=                                             (4.1)
                                                       0, otherwise.

           • Define the size of an expander H, denoted sizeG (H), to be the total number of nodes
             from G that appear in (the possibly contracted nodes) of V (H) ⊆ V (G0 ).12
           • For each expander Hi with sizeG (Hi ) ≥ w/2 do:
             (a) Execute Procedure Righty (in Algorithm 1).
             (b) Execute Procedure Lefty (in Algorithm 2).
             (c) Remove all nodes in Hi from C.

     5. Now that |C| ≤ log n, compute new cuts and estimates for all v ∈ C using Max-Flow invoca-
        tions in Gw .


  Algorithm 1: Procedure Righty
 1 repeat 2eγφ−1 ln N times
 2       S≥w ← randomly include each v ∈ V (Hi ) ∩ C independently with probability φ
 3       call the Isolating-Cuts procedure (Lemma 2.10) on Gw , p, S≥w to get a p, v-cut Sv0
          and a corresponding value δ(Sv0 ) for all v ∈ S≥w
 4       foreach v ∈ S≥w such that δ(Sv0 ) < min {c0 (v), 2w} do
 5           c0 (v) ← δ(Sv0 )
 6           set Sv0 as the witness cut for v




Running-Time Analysis We first bound the number of repetitions in Step 4, and then bound
the time requried for each repetition.
Claim 4.3. Every repetition of Step 4 reduces |C| by at least factor 2. Consequently, this step is
repeated at most O(log n) times (at a single stage w).
Proof. Let C be the set at the beginning of a repetition and let C 0 be the set at its end. The
                                                                                               4
total demand d(V ) is exactly |C| · w, and therefore by Theorem 2.9 we have that B = (log n)1/ε =
                   4/9
2(log log n)(log n) ≤ O(φ−1 / log n) and the number of outer-edges is bounded by
                       X
                          |E(Hi , V \ Hi )| ≤ O(d(V ) · B · φ) = O(|C|w/ log n).
                           i
  11
     Alas, if the true minimum cut is not easy, a returned cut containing one node from S may be incorrect, and the
algorithm will not know it.
  12
     For example, if H contains two nodes from V 0 ⊆ V (G) and two contracted nodes from V (G0 ) \ V 0 each of which
obtained from ten nodes from G, then sizeG (H) = 22.


                                                        18
 Algorithm 2: Procedure Lefty
 1 Initialize a heap containing the nodes of Hi ∩ C keyed by their estimate c0 (v)
 2 repeat α = 3φ−1 times
 3      v ∗ ← node with maximum key c0 (v) extracted from the heap
 4      invoke Max-Flow to obtain the minimum p, v ∗ -cut in Gw , call it S ∗ and its value λp,v∗
 5      if c0 (v ∗ ) > λp,v∗ then
 6          α++ // increment the number of repetitions
 7      foreach v ∈ S ∗ such that c0 (v) > λp,v∗ do
 8         c0 (v) ← λp,v∗
 9         set S ∗ as the witness cut for v
10      C ← C \ {v ∗ }



The set C 0 contains all nodes in C that appear in small expanders Hi with size(Hi ) < w/2 (because
nodes from the other expanders are removed from C). Recall that the size of an expander is measured
in G even though the decomposition is of G0 . Any node v ∈ C must have degG (v) + 1 ≥ degG̃ (v) ≥
c0 (v) ≥ w, and since G is a simple graph, only size(Hi ) ≤ w/2 of these edges can go to nodes in Hi .
Therefore, each node in C 0 contributes ≥ (w − 1) − w/2 outer-edges to the expander-decomposition.
Thus, |C 0 | · (w/2 − 1) = O(|C|w/ log n) and |C 0 | < |C|/2.
      The O(log n) bounds on the number of repetitions follows immediately because initially |C| ≤
|V 0 | ≤ |V (G0 )| = n.

Claim 4.4. Each repetition in Step 4 takes time O(m1+ε ) = m1+o(1) plus the time for O(φ−1 N/w) =
N/w · no(1) Max-Flow invocations in a graph with n nodes and O(nw) edges.

Proof. By Theorem 2.9, the expander-decomposition takes time O(m1+ε ). The number of large
expanders, i.e., with size(Hi ) ≥ w/2, is bounded by O(N/w) since the number of nodes in G is N
and each large expander contains a disjoint set of at least w of them.

     • In Step 4a, for each of the O(N/w) large expanders, there are O(log4 n ln N ) calls to the
       Isolating-Cuts procedure with the graph Gw that has O(nw) edges, each of which results
       in O(log n) Max-Flow invocations to a graph with O(nw) edges.

     • The number of Max-Flow invocations in Step 4b is α = 3φ−1 for each large expander, plus
       additional invocations across all the expanders. Let S1 , . . . , Sk be the cuts that caused an
       increase in α, across all the expanders, listed in the order they were found. That is, each cut
       Si was obtained from a Max-Flow invocation for some node vi (these were called S ∗ and v ∗ at
       the time), and before the invocation the estimate c0 (vi ) was strictly larger than the cut value
       that was found δ(Si ) = λp,vi .
       It follows that all these k cuts are different. Indeed, Suppose that Si = Sj for i < j. Since
       the estimate of all nodes in Si were updated when Si was found, later, when Sj was found,
       c0 (vj ) was already equal to δ(Si ) and thus Sj = Si could not have improved vj ’s estimate, a
       contradiction.
       Moreover, and for a similar reason, all of these k cuts are not easy. Recall that a minimum
       p, v-cut Sv is called easy if Sv contains only one node of degree ≥ w. A cut that is easy would
       have been found by Step 2, and thus could not have improved the estimate of any node.



                                                   19
      By Claim 4.5 below (proved using structural Theorem 3.1), the number k of different cuts with
      these properties is bounded by k ≤ O(N/w). Thus, the total number of Max-Flow invocations
      in Step 4b (Procedure Righty) is O(N/w) · 3φ−1 + k = O(φ−1 N/w), and each of them is made
      in the graph Gw that has O(nw) edges.

     Finally, the time it takes to check and update the estimates for all nodes v ∈ S in a cut S that
is found, is always upper bounded by the time for the Max-Flow invocation itself.

    Combining the above two claims we establish that the running time of stage w of the algorithm is
bounded by O(m1+ε log n) ≤ m1+o(1) plus the time for O(φ−1 N/w · log n) ≤ N/w · no(1) invocations
to a Max-Flow algorithm on n nodes and O(nw) edges. Since every stage has w ≥ Ω(n1/2 ), employing
the recent Õ(m + n1.5 )-time Max-Flow algorithm [vdBLL+ 21], would solve each of these Max-Flow
invocations in time Õ(nw + n1.5 ) ≤ Õ(nw), which adds up over the entire stage to Õ(φ−1 N/w ·
log n · nw) = Õ(N n · φ−1 log n) ≤ N n1+o(1) . The running time of all steps other than 4 is dominated
by O(log N ) Max-Flow invocations in Gw , which itself is negligible compared to the above. We
have O(log N ) stages, and their overall time bound is O(log N ) · Õ(m1+ε log n + N n · φ−1 log n) ≤
Õ(m1+ε + N nφ−1 ).
    To conclude the running time analysis, it remains to prove Claim 4.5 that was used to bound the
number of additional invocations. Recall that a minimum (p, v)-cut Sv is called easy if Sv contains
≤ 1 nodes of degree ≥ w.
Claim 4.5. Let G be a simple graph on N nodes, let G0 be an auxiliary graph of G with respect to
V 0 ⊂ V (G) that includes a pivot p, and suppose G̃ is a perturbed version of G0 with unique minimum
cuts. Then the number of different minimum (p, v)-cuts, over all v ∈ V 0 , that have value ≥ w and
are not easy, is at most O(N/w).
Proof. Suppose that there is a set of k > 105 · N/w minimum (p, vi )-cuts in G̃ (and therefore also
in G) C1 , . . . , Ck for nodes v1 , . . . , vk ∈ V 0 . Moreover, suppose that these cuts C1 , . . . , Ck are all
distinct, have value ≥ w and are not easy. Since G̃ has unique minimum cuts, we know that all
these k cuts are non-crossing. Therefore, by Lemma 2.3, there exists a Gomory-Hu Tree T of
G that preserves all of these k cuts. Let Tp∗ (G) be the cut-membership tree with respect to p
that corresponds to T and let Tp∗,≥w (G) be the corresponding w-large cut membership tree. It
follows that all of our k cuts must be preserved in Tp∗,≥w (G) and, since they are different, they
must correspond to different bags. Moreover, since the cuts are not easy, the bags they correspond
to cannot be easy. It follows that Tp∗,≥w (G) contains k > 105 · N/w bags that are not easy, a
contradiction to the structural Theorem 3.1.

Correctness We say that a node v is done if c0 (v) = λp,v , and our goal is to show that at the
conclusion of the algorithm all nodes are done. The argument is by induction on the stages. The
follow main claim shows the inductive step.
                                              √
Claim 4.6. Let w = 2j for some j ∈ {blog N c, . . . , dlog N e} and consider the corresponding stage.
Suppose that all nodes v ∈ V 0 with λp,v < w are done at the beginning of the stage. Then, with
probability at least 1 − 1/N 2γ , all nodes with λp,v < 2w are done at the end of the stage.
Proof. Let v ∈ V 0 be a node with λp,v < 2w that is not done at the beginning of the stage. It may
be the case that v’s cut is easy and v becomes done in Step 2. If not, it must be that v ∈ C when
C get initialized because c0 (v) > λp,v ≥ w.
    There are two scenarios. Either v is removed from C in one of the repetitions of Step 4 or
it remains in C until Step 5. The latter is an easy case because a direct Max-Flow invocation is

                                                       20
guaranteed to make v done. (This is despite the fact that invocations are performed in Gw rather
than G0 because Gw preserves all cuts of value < 2w in G̃.) So suppose that v was removed from C
due to being in a large expander Hi during one of the repetitions of Step 4.
   Let (Sv , V \ Sv ), v ∈ Sv , p ∈ V \ Sv be the minimum p, v-cut in G̃ (and therefore also in
Gw ). Let (L, R) be the projection of this cut unto the expander Hi , such that L = Hi ∩ Sv and
R = Hi ∩ (V \ Sv ).
   By Theorem 2.9, Hi is a (φ, di )-expander for a demand vector di ≥ d (entrywise). Since
|EG0 (L, R)| ≤ |EG (Sv , V \ Sv )| < 2w we can conclude that
                                                              |EG0 (L,R)|
                    min(d(L), d(R)) ≤ min(di (L), di (R)) ≤        φ      ≤ 2wφ−1 .

By the definition of demand vector d, we get that min(|L ∩ C|, |R ∩ C|) ≤ φ−1 , where C is the
set of candidates at the beginning of the repetition of Step 4 (and v ∈ C). This means that we
cannot have too many candidates in both sides, and formally at least one of the following two cases
(possibly both) must hold.

   • Case |L ∩ C| ≤ 2φ−1 . Then we claim that at least one of the sets S that are chosen during
     the iterations of Step 4a will be isolating for v, meaning that S ∩ Sv = {v}. Once an isolating
     set S is chosen, the call to the Isolating-Cuts procedure with p, S, Gw is guaranteed to find
     the minimum p, v-cut and v will be done. To see this, let us compute the probability that S
     is isolating for v in one of the 2eγφ−1 ln N iterations. Since v ∈ Hi ∩ C the probability that
     it gets chosen to S is exactly φ. The only other nodes from Sv that can get chosen to S are
     those in L ∩ C, because we only choose nodes from Hi ∩ C = (L ∪ R) ∩ C and the nodes in R
     are not in Sv . Thus, the probability that v is chosen but not any of the other nodes in Sv is
     at least φ · (1 − φ)|L∩C| ≥ φ · e−1 . Now, taking into account all the iterations, the probability
                                                                            −1
     that at least once an isolating set is chosen is ≥ 1 − (1 − φe−1 )2eγφ ln N ≥ 1 − 1/N 2γ .

   • Case |R ∩ C| ≤ 2φ−1 . Then when we process Hi in Step 4b we are guaranteed to make v
     done. Suppose for contradiction that the step terminates while v is still not done. First,
     notice that at least 3φ−1 invocations for different nodes in Hi ∩ C are made during the step,
     while there are only ≤ φ−1 nodes in R ∩ C; therefore, there is at least one (in fact, at least
     φ−1 ) nodes v ∗ ∈ L ∩ C that are invoked. Let u be the last such node; this means that, when
     u was chosen, it (1) must have had the largest estimate c0 (u) amongst all nodes in Hi ∩ C,
     in particular, c0 (u) ≥ c0 (v); and (2) (since no more invocations were performed afterwards) it
     must have already been done before the invocation was performed, i.e. c0 (u) = λp,u . Thus,
     c0 (v) ≤ c0 (u) = λp,u . By our assumption that v is not done, we have a third inequality:
     c0 (v) > λp,v . Combining it all together, we see that λp,v < λp,u but this is a contradiction to
     the fact that u ∈ L ⊆ Sv : the cut (Sv , V \ Sv ) has value λp,v < λp,u yet it separates u from p,
     an impossibility by the definition of λp,u .

   This completes the proof the claim.
                                                                                      √
   Finally, for the base case, it remains to argue that for the first stage, where w = N , all nodes
v ∈ V 0 with λp,v < w are done at the beginning of the stage. This√holds trivially because, by our
assumption that the connectivity of the auxiliary graph G0 is < N , there cannot be any node
v ∈ V 0 with λp,v < w.




                                                 21
4.2    From Single-Source to All-Pairs via Randomized Pivot
Overview The algorithm of the previous section computes the minimum cuts from a single pivot
p to all other nodes v ∈ V . In this section, this algorithm is used recursively in order to construct
a full tree in a manner that is similar to the Gomory-Hu algorithm (see Section 2.1). Initially all
nodes are in one super-node of an intermediate tree, and each time we refine the tree by partitioning
the super-node into smaller super-nodes with the help of minimum cuts. The Gomory-Hu algorithm
partitions the super-node into two, while our algorithm (since it has all the minimum cuts from a
single pivot) may divide it into many super-nodes at once.13 For purposes of efficiency, we want
to make the recursion depth logarithmic. This is guaranteed if the cuts from the pivot happen to
divide the graph in a balanced way; but unfortunately, it could be the case that the minimum cut
from the pivot p to all other nodes does not partition the graph well, e.g. it is ({p}, V \ {p}). A
popular way to circumvent this issue ([BHKP07, AKT20a, AKT21]), that we also use in this section,
is by picking the pivot at random and arguing that many of the cuts will be balanced, with high
probability. To facilitate such arguments, it is helpful to have unique minimum cuts in the graph;
otherwise, a Max-Flow invocation is free to always give us the most unbalanced cut with respect to
the pivot we pick. For this purpose, the algorithm of this section works with perturbed edge weights
that make all minimum cuts unique.

The Algorithm The input is a simple graph G on N nodes.
                                                    √
  1. Compute a partial k-tree Tk for G with k = N (see Section 2.1.1). This is the initial
     GH-Equivalent Partition Tree T that will get refined throughout the algorithm until it is a
     Gomory-Hu Tree of G. Note that from this point onwards, all auxiliary graphs will have
     connectivity ≥ k.

   2. For each super-node Vi of Tk , do the following operations that refine T .

       (a) If |Vi | = 1, stop processing the super-node. Otherwise, continue:
       (b) Compute an auxiliary graph Gi for Vi using the current GH-Equivalent Partition Tree T
           (see Section 2.1), and then compute a perturbed version G̃i for Gi (as in Proposition 2.6)
           such that the minimum p, v-cuts for all v ∈ Vi are unique.
       (c) Pick a pivot p ∈ Vi uniformly at random, and run the algorithm of Theorem 4.2 on the
           graph G, the auxiliary graph Gi , its perturbation G̃i , and the pivot p, to get the (unique)
           minimum p, v-cuts Sv in G̃i for all v ∈ Vi ,
       (d) Check how many nodes v have “good” cuts. A cut Sv is called good if the side of v (not
           p) has |Sv ∩ Vi | ≤ |Vi |/2 graph nodes. The pivot p is called good if all but ≤ 3|Vi |/4
           graph nodes in Vi have good cuts.
       (e) If the pivot p is not good, go back to Step 2c. (If there is a sequence of 2γ log N bad
           pivots in a row, abort and return failure.) Otherwise, continue:
        (f) Refine T based on the cuts as follows. Assign each node u ∈ Vi to the largest good cut
            Sv that separates it from p, i.e. u ∈ Sv .14 Let S1 , . . . , Sr be the (good) cuts that have
            at least one node u ∈ Vi assigned to them.15 Refine Vi by taking a Gomory-Hu step
  13
     This is a crucial point, as discussed in our previous papers [AKT20b, AKT20a]
  14
     By largest we mean the cut with largest number of nodes |Sv |, not largest weight. This may not be a minimum
cut for u but it is a minimum p, v-cut for some v ∈ Vi and therefore it can be used for refining T .
  15
     Note that these cuts are non-crossing since they are minimum cuts in G̃ that has unique minimum cuts.



                                                       22
           using each of these r cuts. This results in r + 1 smaller super-nodes: one super-node Vi,j
           for each cut Sj plus a remainder super-node Vi,0 that contains p and all other ≤ 3|Vi |/4
           nodes in Vi whose cuts were not good (and therefore they were not assigned to any of
           the r cuts).
       (g) Recurse on each of the smaller super-nodes Vi,j for j ∈ {0, . . . , r} by going to Step 2a.

    3. When all super-nodes have been fully processed and contain only one node, the GH-Equivalent
       Partition Tree T is a complete Gomory-Hu tree.

Correctness Assuming that we do not reach a bad event in which we either abort in Step 2e
or a perturbed graph does not have unique minimum cuts, the correctness of the algorithm is
straightforward. It follows from the fact that whenever a super-node is partitioned into smaller
super-nodes it is based on correct minimum cuts, and therefore the process could have been simulated
by a Gomory-Hu algorithm that chose certain pairs and that received certain minimum cuts as
invocation answers. This is formalized in Lemma 2.2, plus the observation that the partial k-tree
Tk is a GH-Equivalent Partition Tree (see Section 2.1.1). The probability of the bad event can be
upper bounded by 1/ poly(N ) by Proposition 2.6 and Claim 4.7 below, plus a union bound on the
O(N ) recursive calls.

Claim 4.7. The probability that there is a sequence of 2γ log N bad pivots is ≤ 1/N γ .

Proof. We use Corollary 2.5 from [AKT20a], given here for completeness.
Corollary 4.8. Let F = (VF , EF ) be a graph where each pair of nodes u, v ∈ VF is associated
with a cut (Suv , Svu = VF \ Suv ) where u ∈ Suv , v ∈ Svu (possibly more than one pair of nodes are
associated with each cut), and let VF0 ⊆ VF . Then there exist |VF0 |/2 nodes p0 in VF0 such that at
least |VF0 |/4 of the other nodes w ∈ VF0 \{p0 } satisfy |Sp0 w ∩ VF0 | > |Swp0 ∩ VF0 |.
     Assign F := Gi , VF0 = Vi , and the cuts are the unique minimum cuts in the perturbed graph
G̃i . It follows that there exist |Vi |/2 good pivots p0 ∈ Vi , meaning that at least |Vi |/4 of the other
nodes q ∈ Vi \ {p0 } satisfy that Sq , their minimum p, q-cut in G̃, is good. Thus, the probability to
not pick good pivots in all 2γ log N iterations is at most (1/2)2γ log N ≤ 1/N 2γ , as required.


Running Time Analysis The algorithm is recursive. The depth of the recursion is O(log N )
because each super-node on n0 graph nodes gets refined into smaller super-nodes containing at most
3n0 /4 graph nodes, starting from n0 = N and until n0 = 1. The time for each recursive call is
dominated by the logarithmic number of calls to Theorem 4.2 and is therefore Õ(m + N n) where n
and m are the numbers of nodes and edges in the auxiliary graph that corresponds to the call. To
analyze the total time of the recursion, will use the fact that the total number of edges across all
auxiliary graphs at a single depth is O(M ) (see Lemma 3.7 in [AKT20a]), and the total number of
nodes there is Õ(N ) (seeP
                          Lemma 4.1 in [AKT21]). Thus, Summing over all the calls for one depth
of the recursion gives Õ( i m + N n) ≤ Õ(M + N 2 ) ≤ Õ(N 2 ), and summing over all log N levels
of the recursion concludes the total running time of Õ(N 2 ).


5     Derandomization via Dynamic Pivot
In this section we derandomize the algorithm of Section 4. The key tool is the dynamic pivot
technique that will be presented in Section 5.2 where we prove the following two theorems. Our

                                                   23
deterministic results for the single-source problem is the following; it is analogous to Theorem 4.2
in Section 4.
Theorem 5.1. Given a simple graph G = (V, E) on N nodes and an auxiliary graph G0 of G
on the graph nodes V 0 ⊆ V with n := |V (G0 )|, m = |E(G0 )|, one can find a certain pivot node
p ∈ V 0 and compute minimum p, v-cuts Sv in G for all terminals v ∈ V 0 where v ∈ Sv , p ∈ Sv
and |Sv ∩ V 0 | ≤ |V 0 |/2, in (m + N n5/3 )1+o(1) deterministic time. Suppose that single-pair Max-
Flow in m-edge weighted graphs can be solved deterministically in m1+o(1) time, then the time bound
improves to (m + N n)1+o(1) .
    Once we have this theorem, constructing the tree and proving Theorem 1.8 from the introduc-
tion is easy. This is described in Section 5.3. Before going into the proof we begin with some
preliminaries.

5.1     Preliminaries for the Deterministic Algorithms
5.1.1    Latest Cuts
Introduced by Gabow [Gab91], a latest minimum (s, t)-cut with respect to s (or a minimal minimum
(s, t)-cut, in some literature) is a minimum (s, t)-cut (Ss , St = V \ Ss ) such that no strict subset of
St is a minimum (s, t)-cut. The latest minimum cut (with respect to a node) is unique, and can be
found in the same running time of any algorithm that outputs the maximum network flow between
the pair, by finding all nodes that can reach t in the residual graph. In particular, the deterministic
Goldberg-Rao algorithm for Max-Flow also finds the latest minimum cut.
     We will use the following basic lemma about latest cuts that follows from the submodularity of
cuts. Recall that a family of cuts is a laminar family if they are non-crossing: no pair S, S 0 have
both S \ S 0 6= ∅ and S 0 \ S 6= ∅.
Lemma 5.2. Let p ∈ V be any node. The set of all minimum p, v-cuts with respect to p for all
v ∈ V is a laminar family.

5.1.2    Deterministic Hitting Sets via Splitters
In order to derandomize the hitting-sets we pick for the Isolating-Cuts procedure, we employ
splitters (see [NSS95]). A splitter is a well-known combinatorial object previously applied in the
areas pseudorandomness and derandomization (see, e.g. Section 5.6.1 in [CFK+ 15]).
Lemma 5.3 (See Lemma III.4 from [LP20]). Given a universe-size parameter n and a size pa-
rameter k one can deterministically construct a family of s = poly(k, log n) subsets U1 , . . . , Us ⊆ [n]
such that for any subset T ⊆ [n] of size |T | ≤ k and a number j ∈ T it holds that Ui ∩ T = {j} for
some i ∈ [s], in time Õ(ns).
   The proof of Lemma III.4 from [LP20] actually proves the stronger Lemma 5.3.

5.2     Single-Source Algorithm using a Dynamic Pivot
The Algorithm Initially, set the pivot p to be the node in V 0 with largest degree (in G), and
initialize an estimate c0 (v) := degG̃ (v) for all v ∈ V 0 along with a witness cut Cv = {v}. There
are O(log N ) stages in the algorithm: the wth stage is guaranteed to compute correct estimates
c0 (v) = λp,v for all v ∈ V 0 such that w ≤ λp,v < 2w, where p is the pivot at the end of that stage.
Moreover, every estimate c0 (v) is witnessed by a good p, v-cut Sv , v ∈ Sv with |Sv ∩ V 0 | ≤ |V 0 |/2
and δ(Sv ) = c0 (v).

                                                   24
 1. For each w = 2j with j ∈ {1c, . . . , dlog N e} do the following.

     (a) Compute a Nagamochi-Ibaraki sparsifier Gw of G0 with O(nw) edges and such that all
         cuts of value < 2w are preserved, and all larger cuts still have value ≥ 2w.
     (b) Construct the set V≥w 0  := {v ∈ V 0 | degG (v) ≥ w} of degree ≥ w nodes, and call the
         Isolating-Cuts procedure (Lemma 2.10) on Gw , p, V≥w           0   to get a (p, v)-cut Sv for all
         v ∈ V≥w such that the sets {Sv }v∈S are disjoint. If there is a node q ∈ V≥w
                0                                                                              0    such that
         |Sq ∩ V | > |V |/2, invoke a Max-Flow algorithm to find the latest minimum p, q-cut with
                  0     0

         respect to p,16 and denote it by Sq .17 If it is still the case that |Sq ∩ V 0 | > |V 0 |/2, perform
         the pivot-change protocol (described below) making q the pivot instead of p. Finally, for
         each v ∈ V≥w
                    0 update the estimate c0 (v) and the witness C if the new cut S has smaller
                                                                          v                    v
         value.
      (c) Initialize the set C = {v ∈ V 0 | c0 (v) > w}.
     (d) While |C| > log n do:
             • Compute an expander decomposition (H1 , . . . , H` ) of G0 (see Theorem 2.9) with
                                                          1/2
               parameters ε := (log n)−1/9 and φ := 2− log n , and demand function:
                                                   (
                                                     w, if v ∈ C
                                            d(v) =                                          (5.1)
                                                     0, otherwise.

             • Define the size of an expander H, denoted sizeG (H), to be the total number of nodes
               from G that appear in (the possibly contracted nodes) of V (H) ⊆ V (G0 ).
             • For each expander Hi such that size(Hi ) ≥ w/2 do:
                 i. (This corresponds to Procedure Righty in Section 4.1.) Use splitters (Lemma 5.3)
                    with universe-size parameter u = |Hi ∩ C| and size parameter ` = 2φ−1 to obtain
                    a family of sets U1 , . . . , Us ⊆ [u].18 For each j ∈ [s] use Uj to do the following:
                    Construct a set S≥w ⊆ V 0 by adding the xth node in (a lexicographic order-
                    ing of) Hi ∩ C to S≥w if and only if x ∈ Uj , and call the Isolating-Cuts
                    procedure (Lemma 2.10) on Gw , p, S≥w to get a (p, v)-cut Sv for all v ∈ S≥w
                    such that the sets {Sv }v∈S≥w are disjoint. If there is a node q ∈ S≥w such
                    that |Sq ∩ V 0 | > |V 0 |/2, invoke a Max-Flow algorithm to find the latest mini-
                    mum p, q-cut with respect to p and denote it by Sq . If it is still the case that
                    |Sq ∩ V 0 | > |V 0 |/2, perform the pivot-change protocol making q the pivot instead
                    of p. Finally, for each v ∈ S≥w update the estimate c0 (v) and the witness Cv if
                    the new cut Sv has smaller value.
                ii. (This corresponds to Procedure Lefty in Section 4.1.) Store the nodes in Hi ∩C
                    in a data structure (e.g. a heap) that allows to extract the node with largest c0 (v),
                    and to decrease c0 (v) for any node. Perform the following operation α = 3φ−1
                    times:
                   A. Extract v ∗ the node in Hi ∩ C with largest c0 (v). Invoke a Max-Flow algo-
                       rithm to obtain the latest minimum p, v ∗ -cut in Gw with respect to p, call it
                       S ∗ , v ∗ ∈ S ∗ and its value λp,v∗ . If c0 (v ∗ ) > λp,v∗ , the number of repetitions to
                       Step 1(d)iiA is increased by one, namely α++. If |S ∗ ∩ V 0 | > |V 0 |/2, perform
16
   That is, the minimum p, q-cut in which the side of q is as small as possible.
17
   The previous Sq can be discarded.
18
   In the notation of Lemma 5.3, u is n and ` is k.


                                                        25
                          the pivot-change protocol making v ∗ the pivot instead of p. For each v ∈ S ∗
                          such that c0 (v) > λp,v∗ do c0 (v) ← λp,v∗ and set S ∗ as the witness cut for v.
                          Remove v ∗ from C.
                   iii. Remove all nodes in Hi from C.
          (e) Once |C| ≤ log n, compute the latest minimum p, v-cut Sv for all v ∈ C by directly
              invoking a Max-Flow algorithm in Gw , and update the estimates accordingly. If any of
              the invocations for a node q ∈ C results in a cut Sq with |Sq ∩ V 0 | > |V 0 |/2 then the
              algorithm calls the pivot-change protocol making q the pivot instead of p.

The pivot-change protocol A pivot change from p to q takes place when the algorithm finds out
that the latest minimum p, q-cut Sp,q , p ∈ Sp,q with respect to p is not good, i.e. |Sp,q ∩ V 0 | < |V 0 |/2.
Since it is latest, it implies that the side of p in all minimum p, q-cuts will contain less than 1/2 of
the nodes of V 0 . Recall that λp,q = δ(Sp,q ). To change the pivot from p to q the algorithm performs
the following operations.

       • Let Sq,p , p ∈ Sq,p be the latest minimum p, q-cut with respect to q.19
       • Go over all nodes v ∈ V 0 and if c0 (v) > λp,q set c0 (v) := λp,q with the witness cut being Sq,p .

   The running time for the pivot change protocol is the time of a Max-Flow algorithm plus O(n)
because we spend O(1) time for each node v ∈ V 0 .
   The key claim is the following, showing that the algorithm can be resumed after a pivot-change
protocol and it will be as if q was the pivot all along: any node that already had a correct good cut
with respect to the old pivot p will also have a correct good cut with respect to the new pivot q.
Claim 5.4. Suppose that, before the pivot-change protocol, the estimate of node v ∈ V 0 was correct,
i.e. c0 (v) = λp,v , and its witness cut was good, i.e. Sv , v ∈ Sv and |Sv ∩ V 0 | ≤ |V 0 |/2, then after the
pivot-change protocol it holds that c0 (v) = λq,v and its witness cut Sv0 , v ∈ Sv0 has |Sv0 ∩ V 0 | ≤ |V 0 |/2.
Moreover, if the witness cut before the change was latest with respect to p then the cut after the
change is also latest with respect to q.
Proof. Let v be such a node and let S1 , v ∈ S1 be its witness cut before the protocol. That is, S1 is
a minimum p, v-cut with δ(S1 ) = λp,v and |S1 ∩ V 0 | ≤ |V 0 |/2. Let S2 be Sq,p , p ∈ Sq,p the cut that
is used as an alternative in the pivot-change protocol. That is, S2 is the latest minimum p, q-cut
with respect to q with δ(S2 ) = λp,q .
    Our goal is to show that one of S1 or S2 is a minimum q, v-cut and that it is the one with smaller
value. (And then also to show that if S1 was latest with respect to p then the one with smaller
value is also latest with respect to q.) There are two cases:

       • If v ∈ S2 then both S1 , S2 are q, v-cuts and both contain ≤ 1/2 of the nodes of V 0 ; the algorithm
         will assign the one with smaller value and our goal is to show that it is optimal. Suppose for
         contradiction that the minimum q, v-cut S 0 , v ∈ S 0 has smaller value than min(δ(S1 ), δ(S2 )).
         The node p is either in S 0 or outside it, both cases are impossible. If p ∈ S 0 then S 0 is a
         p, q-cut with value smaller than δ(S2 ), and if p ∈    / S 0 then S 0 is a p, v-cut with value smaller
         than δ(S1 ). In the same way, suppose for contradiction that the latest minimum q, v-cut S 00
         with respect to q has fewer nodes than the cut we have chosen. If p ∈ S 00 then it is a violation
         to the fact that S2 is latest, and if p ∈/ S 00 then it is also a violation because S 00 is a minimum
         p, v-cut with fewer nodes than S1 .
  19
   In other words, among the minimum p, q-cuts, Sp,q was the cut maximizing the side of p and Sp,q is the cut that
minimizes it. Note that |Sq,p ∩ V 0 | ≤ |Sp,q ∩ V 0 | < |V 0 |/2.


                                                       26
   • If v ∈  / S2 then it must be that δ(S1 ) ≤ δ(S2 ), in which case the algorithm will assign S1 .
     First, observe that S1 is indeed a q, v-cut; otherwise, if q ∈ S1 , it would be a violation to the
     condition of a pivot-change because S1 would be a minimum p, q-cut with |S1 ∩ V 0 | ≤ |V 0 |/2.
     Second, to show the optimality of S1 , suppose for contradiction that the minimum q, v-cut
     S 0 , v ∈ S 0 has δ(S 0 ) < δ(S1 ) ≤ δ(S2 ). It follows that p ∈ S 0 or else S 0 is a p, v-cut with value
     smaller than δ(S1 ). But then S 0 is a p, q-cut with value smaller than δ(S2 ), a contradiction.
     Similarly, suppose for contradiction that the latest minimum q, v-cut S 00 has fewer nodes than
     S1 . Again, p ∈ S 00 or else it violates the fact that S1 is the latest minimum p, v-cut with respect
     to p, but then S 00 contains a node that S1 does not contain (the node p) despite having the
     same value, a contradiction to it being latest.



Running Time Analysis The running time analysis is identical to that of Section 4.1 with the
following minor changes.

   • The deterministic algorithm may invoke the pivot-change protocol after making a call to the
     Isolating-Cuts procedure or after invoking a Max-Flow algorithm. This does not increase
     the total running time because the running time of the protocol is on the order of the time
     for a single Max-Flow invocation.

   • In the proof of Claim 4.4, the number of additional invocations made in Step 4b is upper
     bounded by Õ(N/w) by showing that each such invocation on node vi can be associated with
     a cut Si and then bounding the number of such cuts using Claim 4.5. The latter claim used
     the fact that these cuts were computed in a perturbed graph in order to conclude that they
     are non-crossing. In the deterministic algorithm, this use of the perturbation is replaced by
     working with latest cuts (this is only important in Step 1(d)ii). Indeed, all of the cuts Si
     that are associated with additional invocations are latest cuts with respect to a pivot p and
     this allows us to conclude that they are non-crossing (by Lemma 5.2) and the same proof
     goes through. However, a potential issue is that these cuts might be latest with respect to
     different pivots due to the pivot changes. To resolve this issue, Claim 5.4 proves that after the
     pivot-change (from p to q) any cut that was latest with respect to p is also latest with respect
     to q.

   • The use of splitters (Lemma 5.3) instead of a randomized hitting set only incurs additional
     no(1) factors.

   • Finally, the most consequential change is due to the difference in complexity between the
     current deterministic and randomized Max-Flow algorithms. In stage w the number of edges
     in Gw is m = O(nw) and the time for the Õ(N/w) invocations is Õ(N/w·nw·n2/3 ) = Õ(N n5/3 )
     using the Õ(|E| · |V |2/3 ) bound of Goldberg and Rao [GR98] and it is N/w · (nw)1+o(1) =
     N n1+o(1) assuming an almost-linear time Max-Flow algorithm.

Correctness The same correctness proof as in Section 4.1 works here as well, due to the fact
that the pivot-change protocol makes it as if the new pivot was the pivot from the start (as is
formally proven in Claim 5.4). The only minor difference is in the proof of Claim 4.6 where instead
of arguing that the randomized process in Step 4a succeeds in finding an isolating set (for any given
node v) with high probability, we use Lemma 5.3 that guarantees the success of Step 1(d)i with a
deterministic construction.


                                                     27
5.3    From single-source to all-pairs
After we have the algorithm of Theorem 5.1, constructing a Gomory-Hu Tree becomes easy.

Theorem 1.8 (Restated). There is a deterministic algorithm that constructs a Gomory-Hu Tree
                                                              2
of a simple graph and solves All-Pairs Max-Flow in time Õ(n2 3 ). The time bound improves to
n2+o(1) assuming that single-pair Max-Flow can be computed in deterministic time m1+o(1) in m-
edge weighted graphs.

The Algorithm The input is a simple graph G on N nodes.

    1. Start from an intermediate tree T containing one super-node V , and do the following (recur-
       sive) operations to refine it.

       (a) If |Vi | = 1, stop processing the super-node. Otherwise, continue:
       (b) Compute an auxiliary graph Gi for Vi using the current GH-Equivalent Partition Tree T
           (see Section 2.1).
        (c) Run the algorithm of Theorem 5.1 on the graph G and the auxiliary graph Gi , to get a
            pivot p ∈ Vi and minimum p, v-cuts Sv for all v ∈ Vi , all of which are good in the sense
            that |Sv ∩ Vi | ≤ |Vi |/2.
       (d) Refine T based on the cuts as follows. Assign each node u ∈ Vi to the largest cut Sv
           that separates it from p, i.e. u ∈ Sv , breaking ties in an arbitrary but consistent manner.
           Let S1 , . . . , Sr be the cuts that have at least one node u ∈ Vi assigned to them. Observe
           that all nodes in Vi \ {p} are contained in exactly one of these cuts. Refine Vi by taking
           a Gomory-Hu step using each of these r cuts. This results in r + 1 smaller super-nodes:
           one super-node Vi,j for each cut Sj plus a remainder super-node Vi,0 only containing p.
        (e) Recurse on each of the smaller super-nodes Vi,j for j ∈ {0, . . . , r} by going to Step 1a.

    2. When all super-nodes have been fully processed and contain only one node, the GH-Equivalent
       Partition Tree T is a complete Gomory-Hu tree.

Correctness The correctness follows directly from the correctness of the Gomory-Hu framework
(Section 2.1) and the correctness of the single-source algorithm that we use (Theorem 5.1).

Running Time The analysis of the recursion is very similar to that of Section 4.2. The depth
is logarithmic due to “goodness” of the cuts returned by the dynamic pivot technique. The total
number of nodes in all auxiliary graphs of each level is O(N ), which makes the total running time of
the level N 2+o(1) if a near-linear time Max-Flow algorithm is assumed or N 8/3+o(1) unconditionally
(using Theorem 5.1).


6     A Barrier of Ω(n1.5 )
Theorem 1.7. Assuming Hypothesis 1.6, there is an n1.5−o(1) lower bound for computing a Gomory-
Hu tree of a simple graph on n nodes and O(n) edges.

Proof. Assume for contradiction that there is an n1.5−ε+o(1) time algorithm for computing a Gomory-
                                                                                          0
Hu tree of a simple graph on n nodes and O(n) edges. We will show that it implies an n3−ε +o(1) time


                                                   28
algorithm for unweighted multigraphs, refuting Hypothesis 1.5. Let G = (V, E) be an unweighted
multigraph with |E| = O(|V |2 ). Subdivide each edge (u, v) ∈ E by placing exactly one new node
luv along the edge, and denote the new graph G0 = (V 0 , E 0 ). Observe that the resulting graph is
simple, and has |V 0 | ≤ O(|V |2 ) nodes, and |E 0 | ≤ O(|V 0 |) edges. Using the assumed algorithm on
                                                                                                0
G0 , we get a cut-equivalent tree T 0 for G0 in a total running time of |V 0 |1.5−ε+o(1) ≤ n3−ε +o(1) for
some ε0 = 2ε > 0.
     Next, using T 0 we construct a cut equivalent tree T for G, as follows. Recall that Gusfield’s
algorithm [Gus90] can construct a cut-equivalent tree by calling n − 1 times to a Max-Flow routine
on the input graph. Apply Gusfield algorithm on G, such that whenever a pair s, t is invoked, find
the the partition of V 0 according to T 0 , and output its projection on V (that is, output the partition
ignoring the added nodes in V 0 \ V ).
     Observe that a minimum-cut in G0 between every two nodes u, v ∈ V 0 that have copies in V
projected onto V is a minimum u, v-cut in G, and vice-versa. First, a minimum u, v-cut in G0 has
either (u, luv ) or (v, luv ) (but not both) in the cut: if both are in the cut, then by moving luv to
the other side we can decrease the cost of the cut by 2, a contradiction. As a result, the cost of the
minimum u, v-cut in G0 is precisely the same as the cost of the projection in G. Second, trivially, a
minimum cut in G has a cut in G0 that partitions original nodes the same way and is of the same
cost, as required.



7    Conclusion
The main result of this paper is an n2+o(1) time algorithm for constructing the Gomory-Hu Tree of
an unweighted graph, leading to an almost-optimal algorithm for All-Pairs Max-Flow in unweighted
graphs. Even assuming an almost-linear time Max-Flow algorithm (as in Hypothesis 1.5) the previ-
ously known algorithms [AKT21] could not go below n2.5 . The improvement is achieved by utilizing
a stronger primitive than previous work: an expander decomposition with vertex demands. Fitting
this tool into the Gomory-Hu framework involves several technical challenges, and a new structural
understanding of the Gomory-Hu Tree of a simple graph. To reach the n2+o(1) bound, the algorithm
exploits the simplicity of the graph in a second way compared to the n2.5 algorithm, and therefore it
may be even harder to adapt for weighted graphs. The main open question in the field has become
even more outstanding.

Open Question 1. Can the Gomory-Hu Tree of a weighted graph be constructed in subcubic time?

    The first step towards this question would be to achieve a subcubic algorithm for unweighted
multigraphs on O(n2 ) edges; i.e. to refute Hypothesis 1.6. Interestingly, due to Theorem 1.7, this
is required before an m1+o(1) algorithm can be achieved in simple graphs.
    We also introduce a new derandomization technique that replaces the randomized pivot selection
of recent works with a dynamic pivot. It gives hope that whatever bounds are achieved with
randomized algorithms, in the context of Gomory-Hu Tree algorithms, can also be derandomized.
    Finally, an interesting take-away message from this paper is that All-Pairs Max-Flow suddenly
appears to be an easier problem than All-Pairs Shortest-Paths. At least in unweighted graphs, and
at least with current algorithms, its upper bound is n2+o(1) compared with the nω+o(1) for All-Pairs
Shortest-Paths. The relative easiness is not only theoretical: the methods used by our All-Pairs Max-
Flow algorithm are much less infamous than the fast matrix multiplication that goes into the All-Pairs
Shortest-Paths algorithm. However, formally proving a separation between the two is difficult, as it
requires proving an Ω(n2+ε ) lower bound for matrix multiplication, and may not even be possible


                                                   29
because ω is often conjectured to be 2. Perhaps the more promising direction is by resolving Open
Question 1 with an O(n3−ε ) time algorithm for All-Pairs Max-Flow in weighted graphs. This would
establish a separation, assuming the popular conjecture that All-Pairs Shortest-Paths in weighted
graphs requires n3−o(1) time [VW10], making Open Question 1 even more consequential.


Acknowledgements We are grateful to Thatchaphol Saranurak for helpful clarifications regard-
ing the literature on randomized versus deterministic expander decompositions.


References
[AB17]      A. Abboud and G. Bodwin. The 4/3 additive spanner exponent is tight. Journal of the ACM
            (JACM), 64(4):1–20, 2017.
[ACZ98]     S. R. Arikati, S. Chaudhuri, and C. D. Zaroliagis. All-pairs min-cut in sparse networks. J.
            Algorithms, 29(1):82–110, 1998.
[AGI+ 19]   A. Abboud, L. Georgiadis, G. F. Italiano, R. Krauthgamer, N. Parotsidis, O. Trabelsi, P. Uz-
            nanski, and D. Wolleb-Graf. Faster Algorithms for All-Pairs Bounded Min-Cuts. In 46th
            International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2019), volume
            132, pages 7:1–7:15, 2019. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2019.7.
[AIS+ 16]   T. Akiba, Y. Iwata, Y. Sameshima, N. Mizuno, and Y. Yano. Cut tree construction from
            massive graphs. In 2016 IEEE 16th International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), pages
            775–780. IEEE, 2016.
[AKT20a]    A. Abboud, R. Krauthgamer, and O. Trabelsi. Cut-equivalent trees are optimal for min-cut
            queries. 61st IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2020,
            pages 105–118, 2020. doi:10.1109/FOCS46700.2020.00019.
[AKT20b]    A. Abboud, R. Krauthgamer, and O. Trabelsi. New algorithms and lower bounds for all-
            pairs max-flow in undirected graphs. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First Annual ACM-SIAM
            Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’20, page 48–61, USA, 2020. doi:10.1137/1.
            9781611975994.4.
[AKT21]     A. Abboud, R. Krauthgamer, and O. Trabelsi. Subcubic algorithms for gomory-hu tree in
            unweighted graphs. In STOC, 2021. To Appear.
[AW21]      J. Alman and V. V. Williams. A refined laser method and faster matrix multiplication. In
            D. Marx, editor, Proceedings of the 2021 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms,
            SODA 2021, pages 522–539, 2021. doi:10.1137/1.9781611976465.32.
[BCH+ 08]   A. Bhalgat, R. Cole, R. Hariharan, T. Kavitha, and D. Panigrahi. Efficient algorithms for
            Steiner edge connectivity computationand Gomory-Hu tree construction for unweighted graphs.
            Unpublished full version of [BHKP07], 2008. Available from: http://hariharan-ramesh.com/
            papers/gohu.pdf.
[Ben95]     A. A. Benczúr. Counterexamples for directed and node capacitated cut-trees. SIAM J. Comput.,
            24(3):505–510, 1995. doi:10.1137/S0097539792236730.
[BENW16]    G. Borradaile, D. Eppstein, A. Nayyeri, and C. Wulff-Nilsen. All-pairs minimum cuts in near-
            linear time for surface-embedded graphs. In 32nd International Symposium on Computational
            Geometry, volume 51 of SoCG ’16, pages 22:1–22:16. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer
            Informatik, 2016. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.SoCG.2016.22.
[BHKP07]    A. Bhalgat, R. Hariharan, T. Kavitha, and D. Panigrahi. An O(mn) Gomory-Hu tree con-
            struction algorithm for unweighted graphs. In 39th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
            Computing, STOC’07, pages 605–614. ACM, 2007. doi:10.1145/1250790.1250879.


                                                  30
[BSW15]     G. Borradaile, P. Sankowski, and C. Wulff-Nilsen. Min st-cut oracle for planar graphs with
            near-linear preprocessing time. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 11(3), 2015. doi:10.1145/2684068.
[CFK+ 15]   M. Cygan, F. V. Fomin, L. Kowalik, D. Lokshtanov, D. Marx, M. Pilipczuk, M. Pilipczuk, and
            S. Saurabh. Parameterized Algorithms. Springer, 2015. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-21275-3.
[CGL+ 20]   J. Chuzhoy, Y. Gao, J. Li, D. Nanongkai, R. Peng, and T. Saranurak. A deterministic algorithm
            for balanced cut with applications to dynamic connectivity, flows, and beyond. In IEEE 61st
            Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 1158–1167, 2020. doi:
            10.1109/FOCS46700.2020.00111.
[CH03]      R. Cole and R. Hariharan. A fast algorithm for computing steiner edge connectivity. In
            Proceedings of the Thirty-fifth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’03,
            pages 167–176. ACM, 2003. doi:10.1145/780542.780568.
[CKK16]     R. Chitnis, L. Kamma, and R. Krauthgamer. Tight bounds for gomory-hu-like cut counting.
            In P. Heggernes, editor, Graph-Theoretic Concepts in Computer Science - 42nd International
            Workshop, WG 2016, volume 9941 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 133–144, 2016.
            doi:10.1007/978-3-662-53536-3\_12.
[CWX21]     T. M. Chan, V. V. Williams, and Y. Xu. Algorithms, reductions and equivalences for small
            weight variants of all-pairs shortest paths. CoRR, abs/2102.06181, 2021. Available from: https:
            //arxiv.org/abs/2102.06181, arXiv:2102.06181.
[Dij59]     E. W. Dijkstra. A note on two problems in connexion with graphs. Numer. Math., 1(1):269–271,
            December 1959. doi:10.1007/BF01386390.
[Edm70]     J. Edmonds. Submodular functions, matroids, and certain polyhedra. Combinatorial structures
            and their applications, pages 69–87, 1970.
[EH05]      O. Einstein and R. Hassin. The number of solutions sufficient for solving a family of problems.
            Mathematics of Operations Research, 30(4):880–896, 2005.
[FNY+ 20]   S. Forster, D. Nanongkai, L. Yang, T. Saranurak, and S. Yingchareonthawornchai. Com-
            puting and testing small connectivity in near-linear time and queries via fast local cut al-
            gorithms. In S. Chawla, editor, Proceedings of the 2020 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Dis-
            crete Algorithms, SODA 2020, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, January 5-8, 2020, pages 2046–
            2065. SIAM, 2020. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611975994.126, doi:
            10.1137/1.9781611975994.126.
[Gab91]     H. N. Gabow. Applications of a poset representation to edge connectivity and graph rigidity.
            In 32nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 812–821, 1991. doi:
            10.1109/SFCS.1991.185453.
[Gab95]     H. N. Gabow. A matroid approach to finding edge connectivity and packing arborescences.
            Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 50(2):259–273, 1995.
[Gab06]     H. N. Gabow. Using expander graphs to find vertex connectivity. Journal of the ACM (JACM),
            53(5):800–844, 2006.
[GH61]      R. E. Gomory and T. C. Hu. Multi-terminal network flows. Journal of the Society for Industrial
            and Applied Mathematics, 9:551–570, 1961. Available from: http://www.jstor.org/stable/
            2098881.
[GLP21]     Y. Gao, Y. P. Liu, and R. Peng. Fully dynamic electrical flows: Sparse maxflow faster than
            goldberg-rao. CoRR, 2021. Available from: http://arxiv.org/abs/2101.07233.
[GR98]      A. V. Goldberg and S. Rao. Beyond the flow decomposition barrier. J. ACM, 45(5):783–797,
            1998. doi:10.1145/290179.290181.
[GRST21]    G. Goranci, H. Räcke, T. Saranurak, and Z. Tan. The expander hierarchy and its applications
            to dynamic graph algorithms. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
            Algorithms (SODA), pages 2212–2228. SIAM, 2021.


                                                   31
[GT01]     A. V. Goldberg and K. Tsioutsiouliklis. Cut tree algorithms: an experimental study. Journal
           of Algorithms, 38(1):51–83, 2001.
[Gus90]    D. Gusfield. Very simple methods for all pairs network flow analysis. SIAM Journal on Com-
           puting, 19(1):143–155, 1990.
[Har01]    D. Hartvigsen. Compact representations of cuts. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics,
           14(1):49–66, 2001.
[Has88]    R. Hassin. Solution bases of multiterminal cut problems. Mathematics of operations research,
           13(4):535–542, 1988.
[Has90]    R. Hassin. An algorithm for computing maximum solution bases. Operations research letters,
           9(5):315–318, 1990.
[Has91]    R. Hassin. Multiterminal xcut problems. Annals of Operations Research, 33(3):215–225, 1991.
[HKP07]    R. Hariharan, T. Kavitha, and D. Panigrahi. Efficient algorithms for computing all low s−t edge
           connectivities and related problems. In Proceedings of the 18th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium
           on Discrete Algorithms, pages 127–136. SIAM, 2007. Available from: http://dl.acm.org/
           citation.cfm?id=1283383.1283398.
[HL07]     R. Hassin and A. Levin. Flow trees for vertex-capacitated networks. Discrete Appl. Math.,
           155(4):572–578, 2007. doi:10.1016/j.dam.2006.08.012.
[KL15]     D. R. Karger and M. S. Levine. Fast augmenting paths by random sampling from residual
           graphs. SIAM J. Comput., 44(2):320–339, 2015. doi:10.1137/070705994.
[KLOS14]   J. A. Kelner, Y. T. Lee, L. Orecchia, and A. Sidford. An almost-linear-time algorithm for ap-
           proximate max flow in undirected graphs, and its multicommodity generalizations. In Proceed-
           ings of the twenty-fifth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms, pages 217–226.
           SIAM, 2014.
[KT18]     R. Krauthgamer and O. Trabelsi. Conditional lower bounds for all-pairs max-flow. ACM Trans.
           Algorithms, 14(4):42:1–42:15, 2018. doi:10.1145/3212510.
[KT19]     K. Kawarabayashi and M. Thorup. Deterministic edge connectivity in near-linear time. J.
           ACM, 66(1):4:1–4:50, 2019. doi:10.1145/3274663.
[KVV04]    R. Kannan, S. Vempala, and A. Vetta. On clusterings: Good, bad and spectral. Journal of the
           ACM (JACM), 51(3):497–515, 2004.
[Li21]     J. Li. Deterministic mincut in almost-linear time. In STOC, 2021. To Appear.
[LP20]     J. Li and D. Panigrahi.  Deterministic min-cut in poly-logarithmic max-flows. Ac-
           cepted to FOCS’20, 2020.   Available from: http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~jmli/papers/
           deterministic-mincut-in-polylogarithmic-conf.pdf.
[LP21]     J. Li and D. Panigrahi. Approximate gomory–hu tree is faster than n − 1 max-flows. In STOC,
           2021. To Appear.
[LPW20]    A. Lincoln, A. Polak, and V. V. Williams. Monochromatic triangles, intermediate matrix
           products, and convolutions. In 11th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference,
           ITCS 2020, volume 151 of LIPIcs, pages 53:1–53:18. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
           Informatik, 2020. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ITCS.2020.53.
[LS19]     Y. P. Liu and A. Sidford. Faster energy maximization for faster maximum flow. CoRR, 2019.
           Available from: http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.14276.
[LS20]     Y. P. Liu and A. Sidford. Unit capacity maxflow in almost m4/3 time. CoRR, abs/2003.08929,
           2020. Available from: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.08929, arXiv:2003.08929.
[Mąd16]    A. Mądry. Computing maximum flow with augmenting electrical flows. In Proceedings of the
           57th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’16, pages 593–602.
           IEEE Computer Society, 2016. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2016.70.


                                                  32
[NI92]      H. Nagamochi and T. Ibaraki. Linear time algorithms for finding k-edge connected and k-node
            connected spanning subgraphs. Algorithmica, 7:583–596, 1992. doi:10.1007/BF01758778.
[NSS95]     M. Naor, L. J. Schulman, and A. Srinivasan. Splitters and near-optimal derandomization. In
            36th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 182–191. IEEE Computer
            Society, 1995. doi:10.1109/SFCS.1995.492475.
[NSWN17]    D. Nanongkai, T. Saranurak, and C. Wulff-Nilsen. Dynamic minimum spanning forest with
            subpolynomial worst-case update time. In 2017 IEEE 58th Annual Symposium on Foundations
            of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 950–961. IEEE, 2017.
[NSY19]     D. Nanongkai, T. Saranurak, and S. Yingchareonthawornchai. Breaking quadratic time for
            small vertex connectivity and an approximation scheme. In M. Charikar and E. Cohen, editors,
            Proceedings of the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC
            2019, Phoenix, AZ, USA, June 23-26, 2019, pages 241–252. ACM, 2019. Available from:
            https://doi.org/10.1145/3313276.3316394, doi:10.1145/3313276.3316394.
[OSV12]     L. Orecchia, S. Sachdeva, and N. K. Vishnoi. Approximating the exponential, the lanczos
            method and an o (m)-time spectral algorithm for balanced separator. In Proceedings of the
            forty-fourth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 1141–1160, 2012.
[OV11]      L. Orecchia and N. K. Vishnoi. Towards an sdp-based approach to spectral methods: A
            nearly-linear-time algorithm for graph partitioning and decomposition. In Proceedings of the
            twenty-second annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 532–545. SIAM,
            2011.
[Pan16]     D. Panigrahi. Gomory-Hu trees. In M.-Y. Kao, editor, Encyclopedia of Algorithms, pages
            858–861. Springer New York, 2016. doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-2864-4_168.
[PY21]      S. Pettie and L. Yin. The structure of minimum vertex cuts. CoRR, abs/2102.06805, 2021.
            Available from: https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.06805, arXiv:2102.06805.
[Sar20]     T. Saranurak. A simple deterministic algorithm for edge connectivity.         arXiv preprint
            arXiv:2008.08575, 2020.
[Sei95]     R. Seidel. On the all-pairs-shortest-path problem in unweighted undirected graphs. Journal of
            computer and system sciences, 51(3):400–403, 1995.
[ST13]      D. A. Spielman and S.-H. Teng. A local clustering algorithm for massive graphs and its ap-
            plication to nearly linear time graph partitioning. SIAM Journal on computing, 42(1):1–26,
            2013.
[ST14]      D. A. Spielman and S.-H. Teng. Nearly linear time algorithms for preconditioning and solv-
            ing symmetric, diagonally dominant linear systems. SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and
            Applications, 35(3):835–885, 2014.
[SW19]      T. Saranurak and D. Wang. Expander decomposition and pruning: Faster, stronger, and
            simpler. In T. M. Chan, editor, Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium
            on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2019, pages 2616–2635, 2019. doi:10.1137/1.9781611975482.
            162.
[TZ05]      M. Thorup and U. Zwick. Approximate distance oracles. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 52(1):1–
            24, 2005.
[vdBLL+ 21] J. van den Brand, Y. T. Lee, Y. P. Liu, T. Saranurak, A. Sidford, Z. Song, and D. Wang.
            Minimum cost flows, MDPs, and `1 -regression in nearly linear time for dense instances. In
            STOC, 2021. To Appear.
[VW10]      V. Vassilevska-Williams and R. R. Williams. Subcubic equivalences between path, matrix and
            triangle problems. In 51st IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
            FOCS’10, pages 645–654. IEEE Computer Society, 2010. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2010.67.


                                                  33
