Wide Replacement Products Meet Gray Codes:
Toward Optimal Small-Bias Sets
Gil Cohen #
Tel Aviv University, Israel

Itay Cohen #
Tel Aviv University, Israel

      Abstract
Optimal small-bias sets sit at the crossroads of coding theory and pseudorandomness. Reaching
optimal parameters would, in particular, meet the long-standing goal of matching the Gilbert–
Varshamov bound for binary codes in the high-distance regime. In a breakthrough, Ta-Shma [18]
constructed near-optimal small-bias sets via the Rozenman–Wigderson expander-walk framework,
using the wide-replacement product to maintain s “secure” registers and to route the walk through
them. Within this framework, two barriers remain en route to optimal small-bias sets: (i) the cost
of maintaining registers and (ii) limitations inherited from spectral-gap bounds for expanders.
    We overcome the first – arguably the more critical – barrier. Our key technical insight is that
registers can be reused even after they are exposed. Using a Gray–code–style reuse schedule, we
recycle the same s registers exponentially many times in s, thereby reducing the register-maintenance
cost exponentially. This yields the first improvement over Ta-Shma’s construction in nearly a
decade – quantitatively modest but an important first step toward a truly optimal construction.
The remaining barrier is fairly standard in isolation; the challenge is to overcome it in concert with
our register-reuse framework.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Error-correcting codes; Theory of
computation → Random walks and Markov chains; Theory of computation → Expander graphs and
randomness extractors; Theory of computation → Pseudorandomness and derandomization

Keywords and phrases small-bias sets, bias amplification, expansion-amplification, gray codes

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.CCC.2026.21

Related Version Full Version: https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2025/179/

Funding Gil Cohen: Supported by ERC starting grant 949499 and by the Israel Science Foundation
grant 2989/24.
Itay Cohen: Supported by ERC starting grant 949499.



 1      Introduction

Small-bias sets sit at the crossroads of pseudorandomness and coding theory. From the
pseudorandomness viewpoint, a small-bias set can be thought of as a pseudorandom generator
                                                             n
against linear (parity) tests. Specifically, a set S ⊆ {0, 1} is called ε-biased if for every
                  n
nonzero τ ∈ {0, 1} ,

             ⟨s,τ ⟩ 
     Es∈S (−1)         ≤ ε.

                                                                 h           i
                                                    n                 ⟨u,τ ⟩
For any nonzero τ , a uniformly random u ∈ {0, 1} satisfies E (−1)             = 0. Thus an
ε-biased set behaves like the uniform distribution with respect to parity tests and can be
viewed as the output distribution of a PRG that fools such tests within error ε.
           © Gil Cohen and Itay Cohen;
           licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
41st Computational Complexity Conference (CCC 2026).
Editor: Dana Moshkovitz; Article No. 21; pp. 21:1–21:27
                  Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                  Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
21:2   Wide Replacement Products Meet Gray Codes: Toward Optimal Small-Bias Sets


                                                                                                                 n
           The main challenge is to explicitly construct, for given n and ε, an ε-biased set S ⊆ {0, 1}
       whose size is as small as possible. A standard probabilistic argument shows that ε-biased
       sets of size

           O n/ε2
                    


       exist. This bound is essentially optimal: up to a multiplicative log(1/ε) factor, it matches
       the lower bound given by the classical linear-programming bound [13].
           From the coding-theoretic perspective, an ε-biased set S yields a binary linear code of
                                                                     n
       block length |S|, relative distance δ = 12 − ε, and rate ρ = |S| . In particular, a construction
       matching the probabilistic bound would give an explicit code meeting the Gilbert–Varshamov
       bound [9, 19] – a decades-old open problem in coding theory. In pseudorandomness, small-bias
       sets are key ingredients in PRG constructions that go beyond linear tests [20, 8, 5] and in
       the construction of randomness extractors [15, 7]; they also have applications across adjacent
       areas, including cryptography, combinatorics, and quantum protocols.
           Given their importance, small-bias sets have been studied extensively. Naor and Naor
       gave a construction with linear (optimal) dependence on n but suboptimal dependence
       on ε, namely O(n/εc ) for some constant c > 2 [14]. Alon, Goldreich, Håstad, and Peralta
       providedseveral constructions with optimal dependence on ε but suboptimal in n, particularly
       O n2 /ε2 [1]. From the coding viewpoint, keeping the n-dependence linear is crucial for the
       rate, while from the pseudorandomness perspective polynomial dependence on n is often
       acceptable, so the ε-dependence takes center stage. Several other constructions are known.
       For example, concatenating optimal algebraic–geometric codes with the Hadamard code
                                  3
       yields
          a set of  size O(n/ε ); using Hermitian codes instead gives an incomparable bound of
                   5/4
       O (n/ε2 )         [3].
           About a decade ago, Ta-Shma [18] achieved a breakthrough with an explicit construction
       of size very close to optimal:
                                                  1/3 !
             n                                1
                     where      α=O   e                   .1                                   (1)
           ε2+α                           log(1/ε)


       1.1     Bias reduction
       Ta-Shma’s construction is based on bias reduction: starting from an ε0 -biased set (where ε0
       can even be a small constant), it transforms it into an ε-biased set for the target parameter
       ε. Since linear-in-n starting constructions are available, the heart of the matter is how the
       bias evolves throughout the reduction process.
           A simple and natural way to reduce bias is this: given an ε0 -biased set S, consider
       S + S ≜ { s1 ⊕ s2 : s1 , s2 ∈ S } , where ⊕ denotes bitwise XOR. In pseudorandomness terms,
       the new sample space is obtained by drawing two independent uniform elements from S and
       outputting their XOR. This approach is, however, expensive: treating S + S as a multiset 1 ,
       its size is |S +S| = |S|2 , so in particular the construction incurs at least quadratic dependence
       on n.


       1
         Throughout, we use the convention that O(·)
                                                   e suppresses polylogarithmic factors in its argument; in our
         bounds it hides a factor of (log log(1/ε))O(1) .
       1
         Despite the name, small-bias “sets” are typically allowed to be multisets. This is natural for two
         reasons: (i) basic operations on small-bias sets (e.g., S + S) can introduce duplicates, and (ii) from the
         pseudorandomness viewpoint we often treat S as inducing a (possibly nonuniform) distribution over
         {0, 1}n .
G. Cohen and I. Cohen                                                                                  21:3


    In unpublished work, Rozenman and Wigderson (credited in Bogdanov’s 2012 complexity
course notes) proposed derandomizing this idea using expanders. Instead of sampling two
independent s1 , s2 ∈ S, they suggested taking an expander whose vertex set is S, sample a
random edge {s1 , s2 }, and output s1 ⊕ s2 . They showed that the resulting bias is at most
ε20 + ω, where ω is the spectral expansion of the expander - the penalty one pays for the
derandomization. Iterating this transformation from a constant-bias starting point yields an
ε-biased set of size about n/ε4 .
    An alternative to repeatedly applying the derandomized “sum-of-two” step is to take a
longer walk on the expander G. In particular, for a parameter t ≥ 2, take a length-t random
walk on G and output the bitwise XOR of the t vertices visited. This yields essentially the
same sample-space size as the iterated edge-based version.
    While the random walk approach did not beat the best known constructions at the time,
it was the starting point for Ta-Shma’s construction. He observed that, in the random-walk
approach, two distinct effects account for the exponent 4 in the sample-space size n/ε4 . The
first is the essentially unavoidable quadratic relation between the degree d of a d-regular
expander and its spectral expansion ω; even for Ramanujan graphs one has ω ≈ √2d . The
second factor-of-two loss is the part Ta-Shma managed to eliminate almost entirely.

1.2     Neutralizing adversarial interference
The second factor-of-two arises from the adversary’s ability to correlate the walk with a
fixed linear test τ . A length-t walk on G is governed by the operator W t , where W is
the random-walk (normalized adjacency) matrix of G. In the presence of a linear test, an
additional operator is interleaved. The test τ induces a {±1} labeling of the vertices: for
                           ⟨τ,s⟩
each s ∈ S, χτ (s) = (−1)        . Let Π be the diagonal matrix with (Π)s,s = χτ (s). Writing 1
for the normalized all-ones vector, the bias against τ of the new sample space is

                   t−1
      1⊤ Π (W Π)         1 .

The interleaving of Π with W captures the “adversarial interference” responsible for the
extra factor-of-two loss. Informally, the sign flips introduced by Π can neutralize every other
step of the walk, effectively wasting half the steps.
    The key insight underlying Ta-Shma’s improvement is to restrict, at each step, the
set of neighbors a vertex of G may transition to in a manner that is “hidden” from the
adversary. In this way, the effect of Π on the walk remains largely under our control. Ta-Shma
implements this approach using the s-wide replacement product, introduced by Ben-Aroya
and Ta-Shma [2] for the purpose of constructing near-Ramanujan graphs.
    Informally, the wide–replacement product uses a small “gadget” graph H to subsample
the next vertex in a random walk. It extends operators such as the zig–zag product [16]
and derandomized squaring [17], and has the advantage of saving randomness: subsampling
neighbors uses fewer random bits than choosing a uniformly random neighbor. When H is
itself an expander, this subsampling preserves mixing well, so the walk remains well behaved
while using much less randomness.
    Ta-Shma’s key observation is that, beyond its randomness-saving role – which is also
crucial for keeping the sample space small in our setting – the wide–replacement product
can be used to hide information about steps of the random walk, provided it is implemented
appropriately. To this end, we will require the gadget H to have a specific structure: think
of H as consisting of s registers R1 , . . . , Rs , and at step i we use register Ri . This can be
achieved by taking H to be the Cayley graph of a group that is a direct product of s groups.



                                                                                                     CCC 2026
21:4   Wide Replacement Products Meet Gray Codes: Toward Optimal Small-Bias Sets


       Ta-Shma showed that a length-s walk can be implemented using these s registers, and the
       net effect is that, instead of losing one in every two steps, we effectively lose only one out of
       every s steps.
           Using more registers reduces the bias, but it also increases the sample-space size –
       exponentially in s. Balancing these two effects (by choosing s optimally) yields an ε-biased
       set whose size is as in Equation (1).


       1.3       Our results
       Ta-Shma’s construction is already nearly optimal, but the importance of the problem
       calls for a truly optimal solution. This is especially compelling from the coding-theoretic
       viewpoint: matching the Gilbert–Varshamov bound would be a major breakthrough. From
       the pseudorandomness perspective, linear tests are among the simplest classes, so constructing
       an optimal PRG against them is a particularly natural goal. Indeed, to the best of our
       knowledge, no natural test class currently admits a PRG with optimal parameters; linear
       tests may be the most compelling candidate.
           The goal of this paper is to advance this research program. While we do achieve a
       modest quantitative improvement over Ta-Shma’s result, we view this as secondary. Our
       main technical contribution is to eliminate almost entirely one of the two barriers identified
       by Ta-Shma to further progress in his framework. We believe this is the harder and more
       substantial of the two, and we focus our efforts on overcoming it.
           This barrier is related to the cost of maintaining s registers. As noted, it inflates the
       sample–space size by a factor exponential in s, which we then balance against the bias,
       whose magnitude decreases with the walk length. To obtain a better construction within this
       framework, one must extract more “juice” from the same register budget – namely, enable
       substantially longer walks without increasing s.
           Our key insight is that, if done carefully, registers can be reused. Once a register has
       been used it becomes “compromised” – an adversary may correlated with it – so it no longer
       hides the walk by itself. Nevertheless, with a carefully designed reuse schedule, we show that
       s registers suffice to perform exponentially long walks – in particular, of length 2s/2 . This
       dramatically improves the tradeoff in that aspect.
           Using this idea, we obtain an improvement over Ta-Shma’s construction of small-bias
       sets, even without addressing the second barrier.

                                                                                            n
       ▶ Theorem 1. For every n, ε > 0 there exists an explicit ε-biased set S ⊆ {0, 1} of size

                                                      1/2 !
             n                                  1
                      where     α=O
                                  e                             .
           ε2+α                             log(1/ε)

           The register reuse pattern underlying our construction is a variant of the flip–index
       sequence of the binary-reflected Gray code on s coordinates. These Gray-style sequences
       are defined recursively and yield patterns such as 1 2 1 for two registers and 1 2 1 3 1 2 1 for
       three registers, and so on. We show that, in the absence of the interleaved operator Π, these
       sequences enable long walks on the wide–replacement product in the standard expander
       setting. Although the unmodified Gray pattern does not suffice in the context of bias
       reduction, once Π is present, we introduce a tailored variant that does. For the proof of
       Theorem 1, we refer the reader to the full version of the paper.
G. Cohen and I. Cohen                                                                              21:5


1.3.1    Beyond the current barriers for small-bias sets
The second barrier in Ta-Shma’s framework is the inherent factor-two loss in the degree/ex-
pansion tradeoff, ω ≈ √2d . To push further, we must bypass this bottleneck. In our setting,
the gadget graph required for the bias–reduction step has additional structure that in fact
precludes Ramanujan optimality, so instead of the constant 2 we suffer a super-constant loss.
At any rate, we would like to avoid this factor altogether.
    This may be attainable by switching to a non-backtracking variant of our procedure –
or, essentially equivalently, by using a directed gadget. The main challenge is to integrate
such a modification with the machinery developed here. An alternative is to employ rotating
expanders [6], which keep us within the undirected realm. Although each individual expander
carries a factor-2 (or higher) penalty, suitable compositions avoid exponential blow-up and
incur only a linear loss. Here too, the main challenge is to integrate our framework with
rotating expanders; we leave this to future work.

1.4     Related work
Ta-Shma’s construction [18] has received significant attention over the past decade. Here we
briefly review the works most relevant to ours.
    Blanc and Doron [4] proposed an approach to constructing improved small-bias sets based
on hypergraphs. They showed that a result quantitatively similar to Theorem 1 would follow
from the existence of a hypergraph with certain parameters. While a random hypergraph
satisfies these requirements, no explicit construction is currently known. Hypergraphs with
even better parameters, if they exist, could lead to further improvements. The authors also
obtained the same parameters as ours, although one component of their construction relies
on random objects (they also achieve efficient decoding).
    As for decoding, no decoding algorithm was provided in [18]. This was later remedied
by Jeronimo, Quintana, Srivastava, and Tulsiani [11, 12], who showed that a slight variant
of Ta-Shma’s codes is efficiently decodable – indeed, in almost linear time in n. Blanc and
Doron [4] obtained an improved construction with a better rate. We leave the decodability
of our codes to future work.
    An interesting extension of [18] was obtained by Jeronimo, Mittal, Roy, and Wigderson,
who generalized Ta-Shma’s bias-amplification analysis from scalars to matrices of arbitrary
dimension [10]. We leave extending our construction to this matrix-valued setting to future
work.

1.5     Organization
The wide–replacement product, and in particular its use for bias reduction, is technically
involved. Nevertheless, it admits a clean and intuitive interpretation. We therefore begin by
developing this picture before introducing the additional machinery required for our results.
In Section 2, we give a detailed exposition of Ta-Shma’s bias-reduction framework. Along
the way, we preview several ideas that are later used in our improved construction and
develop a diagrammatic viewpoint that will guide the analysis. Unfortunately, this part –
although we believe it substantially clarifies the paper and places our results and techniques
in proper context – is necessarily lengthy, and thus prevents us from providing a full proof
overview within the first ten pages. Readers already familiar with Ta-Shma’s construction
may therefore skip directly to Section 3. This section relies largely on standard notation and
should be mostly self-contained, though some consultation of the earlier sections may still be
required.



                                                                                                 CCC 2026
21:6   Wide Replacement Products Meet Gray Codes: Toward Optimal Small-Bias Sets


           Readers who prefer to jump straight to the formal sections may safely skip these two
       sections. Section 4 formally develops the framework for working with the wide–replacement
       product. Section 5 introduces the random-walk patterns we employ, and Section 6 analyzes
       their interaction with the interleaved operators.


        2      An Exposition to Ta-Shma’s Construction

       2.1     Rozenman–Wigderson bias reduction
       As discussed in Section 1, Rozenman–Wigderson use expanders to derandomize the S + S
       construction, where S is an ε0 -biased set. Let G = (V, E) be a d-regular graph on n vertices.
       Let W denote the normalized adjacency (random-walk) matrix of G, with eigenvalues
       1 = ω1 ≥ ω2 ≥ · · · ≥ ωn . We say that G has ω-spectral expansion, where ω ≜ max {|ω2 |, |ωn |}.
       The key property for our purposes is that W fixes the normalized all-ones vector 1 (since
       it is an eigenvector with eigenvalue ω1 = 1) and contracts every vector in its orthogonal
       complement 1⊥ by at least a factor ω. That is, for every v ∈ 1⊥ , ∥W v∥ ≤ ω ∥v∥. Moreover,
       1⊥ is an invariant subspace of W : W v ∈ 1⊥ for all v ∈ 1⊥ .
                                                                                                 n
           The Rozenman–Wigderson bias–reduction idea proceeds as follows. Let S ⊆ {0, 1} be
       an ε0 -biased set, and let G = (S, E) be a d-regular graph on the vertex set S with ω-spectral
       expansion. That is, we identify elements of S with the vertices of G. In this setup, the naïve
       reduction considered above takes all pairs of vertices, i.e., sample two independent uniform
       vertices of G and take their bitwise XOR. Rozenman–Wigderson’s idea is to derandomize
       this step by restricting to the edge set, namely, the small-bias set is given by

            S +G S ≜ { su + sv : uv ∈ E } .

       This new set has size
                                   nd
            m ≜ |S +G S| = |E| =      .
                                    2
       As a warm-up, let us analyze this construction and prove

       ▶ Lemma 2. S +G S is an ε-biased set for ε = ε20 + ω.
                                          n                                                  ⟨τ,s⟩
       Proof. Fix a nonzero τ ∈ {0, 1} . For each s ∈ S, label the vertex s by (−1)           . To
       evaluate the bias, we need to compare the fraction of edges in G whose endpoints have the
       same label (either ++ or −−) with the fraction whose endpoints have different labels (+− or
                                                               ⟨τ,s⟩
       −+). To this end, define π : S → R by π(s) = √1 (−1)          and view π as a column vector
                                                          |S|
       indexed by S. The bias of the new set is

             Euv∼E [π(u)π(v)] = π ⊤ W π ,

       where the expectation is over a uniformly random edge of G.
          Recall that by our convention, 1 ∈ R|S| denotes the normalized all-ones vector (so
       ∥1∥ = 1). Then the (signed) bias of the test τ is
                          ⟨τ,s⟩ 
            ετ ≜ Es∈S (−1)         = ⟨π, 1⟩,

       which we know satisfies |ετ | ≤ ε0 . Accordingly, we decompose

            π = ετ 1 + π ⊥ ,     with π ⊥ ∈ 1⊥ .
G. Cohen and I. Cohen                                                                                 21:7


As 1 and 1⊥ are invariant spaces of W , and since W 1 = 1, we have that
                         ⊤
     π ⊤ W π = ετ 1 + π ⊥ W ετ 1 + π ⊥
                                       
                        ⊤
             = ε2τ + π ⊥ W π ⊥ .

Now, by Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, and since ∥π ⊥ ∥ ≤ 1,
            ⊤
       π⊥        W π ⊥ ≤ ∥W π ⊥ ∥ ≤ ω.

Thus, π ⊤ W π ≤ ε2τ + ω ≤ ε20 + ω.                                                            ◀
                                                                 n
    Going forward, we fix a nonzero linear test τ ∈ {0, 1} once and for all and, for simplicity,
write ε0 (the starting small-bias guarantee) instead of ετ . Having fixed τ , it is convenient to
introduce the diagonal matrix Π whose diagonal encodes π. Thus, the bias2 of the resulting
set (with respect to τ ), π ⊤ W π, can be written as

     1⊤ ΠW Π 1.                                                                              (2)

    In what follows – especially as the constructions become more involved – it will be helpful
to reason with diagrams that track the “flow” of a vector, decomposed into several subspaces,
as operators act on it. For example, in the proof of Lemma 2, in light of Equation (2), we
wish to understand how the component in span {1} – and in particular its norm – evolves as
we apply the three operators Π, W, Π, and then project back onto that space.
    This behavior is illustrated in Figure 1. The top row, labeled ∥, represents vectors in
span {1}; the bottom row, labeled ⊥, represents vectors in 1⊥ . The columns correspond to
the operators being applied and should be read right-to-left, matching the order of operator
multiplication when acting on column vectors. From each node there are (typically) two
outgoing edges, indicating to which subspace the operator maps the vector. For example,
if only one horizontal edge appears, the corresponding subspace is invariant under that
operator. A number on an edge denotes the contraction factor guaranteed on the projection
to the target subspace. An unlabeled edge indicates no quantitative bound; however, all
operators we consider have operator norm at most 1, so the norm does not increase.

                                     Π            W             Π
                                     ε0                        ε0
                                                                          ∥


                                                  ω
                                                                          ⊥

     Figure 1 Illustration of the Rozenman–Wigderson bias reduction via expander-edge sampling.

    Using this diagram, one can see the ε20 + ω bound proved in Lemma 2 by summing – over
all paths from the right green circle to the left green circle – the product of the edge weights
along each path.
    Let us instantiate the Rozenman–Wigderson bias reduction procedure with a concrete
expander. In particular, take a Ramanujan graph, which satisfies ω ≈ √2d , and – by Lemma 2
– choose the spectral parameter so that ω = ε20 . A quick calculation then shows that, with


2
    In this section we do not distinguish between bias and signed bias.



                                                                                                    CCC 2026
21:8   Wide Replacement Products Meet Gray Codes: Toward Optimal Small-Bias Sets


       this choice, the procedure transforms3 an ε-biased set of size n/εc , for some constant c, into
       an ε-biased set of size
                   4+c/2 !
                    1
           O n·                .
                    ε

       Thus, iterating the procedure yields ε-biased sets with size n/ε4+oε (1) .

       2.1.1       Taking longer walks
       A perhaps even more natural approach is to take longer walks on the expander graph discussed
       above. In particular, one might take two steps on G (which corresponds to taking the parity
       of three vertices rather than two). Extending Equation (2) to this longer walk, one can show
       that the bias of the resulting set is

            1⊤ ΠW ΠW Π 1.                                                                                     (3)

       Unfortunately, as depicted in Figure 2, the second G step is effectively “wasted”. This is
       because we have very little control over the operator Π (which is induced by the linear
       test). In particular, Π may map a vector in 1⊥ largely into 1∥ (see the bold red edge in the
       diagram), rendering the subsequent G step moot.

                              Π            W             Π            W             Π
                              ε0                         ε0                         ε0
                                                                                               ∥


                                            ω                          ω
                                                                                               ⊥

            Figure 2 Illustration of how the second step is “wasted” by the interleaved operator Π.

          A quick calculation shows that, when we take a long walk, losing every other G-step –
       together with the unavoidable quadratic dependence of the spectral expansion parameter ω
       on the degree d of the expander – again yields a sample space of size about n/ε4 .

       2.1.2       Ta-Shma’s approach
       The difficulty with taking long walks, as discussed in Section 2.1.1, is that the “adversarial”
       operator Π can interfere with the random walk on G in an uncontrolled way – mixing
       the subspaces span(1) and 1⊥ and thereby disrupting the walk on G. As hinted in the
       introduction, the key insight underlying Ta-Shma’s improvement is to restrict, at each step,
       the set of neighbors a vertex of G may transition to in a manner that is “hidden” from the
       adversary. In this way, the effect of Π on the walk remains largely under our control.
           Ta-Shma implements this approach using the s-wide replacement product, introduced by
       Ben-Aroya and Ta-Shma [2] for the purpose of constructing near-Ramanujan graphs. Before
       proceeding, we recall the definitions of the replacement product and the wide-replacement
       product.


       3
           More precisely, as is standard in asymptotic analysis, we apply the procedure to a family of small-bias
           sets that (ideally) contains a set for every choice of n and ε.
G. Cohen and I. Cohen                                                                                             21:9


2.2      The s-wide replacement product
2.2.1       The replacement product
Let G be an undirected d-regular graph with spectral expansion ωG . For each vertex v ∈ V (G)
we arbitrarily label its d neighbors by indices in [d] = {1, . . . , d}. Thus, for i ∈ [d] we may
speak of the i-th neighbor of v. If this neighbor is u, then, in general, u may regard v as its
j-th neighbor for some j ∈ [d]; the labelings need not be consistent, so j need not equal i.
We refer to this labeling as the rotation map of G.
    Let H be an undirected graph on d vertices with vertex set V (H), which we identify
with [d] and use interchangeably. Define the replacement product graph G r H on the
vertex set V (G) × V (H) as follows. For each v ∈ V (G), place a copy of H on the vertices
{(v, i) : i ∈ V (H)}; we call this set the cloud of v. In addition, connect (v, i) to (u, j)
whenever u is the i-th neighbor of v and v is the j-th neighbor of u. Edges within a cloud are
called intra-cloud edges, and edges connecting distinct clouds are called inter-cloud edges.
    The replacement product serves as a basic building block for more elaborate constructions,
such as the zig–zag product [16], a key tool in constructing expander graphs. To obtain
expanders with improved parameters, Ben–Aroya and Ta–Shma introduced a variant of the
replacement product, which we now describe.

2.2.2       The s-wide replacement product
Let s ≥ 1 be a parameter, called the width. For the purposes of bias reduction, it is helpful
to view the s-wide replacement product not primarily as a graph construction but as a
particular random walk on a graph.
    Let G be a graph as in Section 2.2.1. The first departure from the standard replacement
product is that we now take a graph H on d s vertices. As in prior applications for constructing
expanders we would like both G and H to be good expanders. However, for the purposes of
the s-wide replacement product, we also require additional structure on H.4 More precisely,
let Λ be an arbitrary abelian group of order d, and identify [d] with Λ. We then take H to
be a Cayley graph on the product group Λ s with respect to some fixed symmetric generating
set C of size c.
    The vertex set of the graph on which we are going to take a walk is V (G) × V (H). As in
the discussion of the replacement product, we view the set {(v, h) : h ∈ V (H)} as the cloud
of v. We now describe length-s walks.
    Fix a starting vertex (v0 , h0 ) ∈ V (G) × V (H) and a sequence of indices i1 , . . . , is ∈ [c]
(each it selects a neighbor in H). For t = 1, . . . , s perform:
 1. Let ht be the it -th neighbor of ht−1 in H.
                   (1)        (s)                             (t)
 2. Write ht = (ht , . . . , ht ) ∈ Λ s , and let vt be the ht -neighbor of vt−1 in G (recall that
    we identify Λ with [d]).
After phase t the state is (vt , ht ). In particular, phase t uses the t-th coordinate, or “register”,
of ht to determine the step on G.
    To implement Ta–Shma’s idea of “hiding” the random walk from the adversarial operator
Π, we label clouds – rather than individual vertices – by ±1, using the signs induced by
an ε0 -biased set with respect to a fixed linear test. In other words, we identify the initial
small-bias set with the set of clouds V (G) (rather than with the full vertex set V (G) × V (H)).
Equivalently, for every v ∈ V (G) we assign the same label to all vertices (v, h) with h ∈ V (H).


4
    Interestingly, the original version of [2] analyzed a random H; in a later version, imposing structure on
    H enabled a cleaner analysis.



                                                                                                                CCC 2026
21:10   Wide Replacement Products Meet Gray Codes: Toward Optimal Small-Bias Sets


           The combinatorial idea above takes a particularly clean form in the operator viewpoint.
        The three operators we now introduce act on vectors indexed by V (G) × V (H) (equivalently,
        on RV (G)×V (H) ).

           Adversarial operator. Because it is indifferent to the structure within each cloud, it
           factors as

               Π ⊗ I|V (H)| ,

           where we write ⊗ for the Kronecker product, and I|V (H)| is the identity on the |V (H)|
           coordinates inside a cloud. For notational convenience, we overwrite the symbol and
           denote this lifted operator again by Π.
           Intra-cloud operator. The operator H acts identically within each cloud, independent
           of which cloud we are in. Hence it factors as
               e ≜ I|V (G)| ⊗ H.
               H

           We emphasize that Π and H      e act on different registers. This is the operator-level
           manifestation of the combinatorial “hiding” idea: H dictates the within-cloud motion,
           while the adversary Π can only affect the other register.
           Inter-cloud operators. Finally, we have the operators corresponding to G. They
           encode the rotation map of G and keep track of the step index i ∈ [s], which determines
           which register is used. Using the product structure V (H) = Λ s , we view the H part
           as s registers. For each i ∈ [s], define Ġi to encode the rotation map while consulting
           only the i-th register of the H-register. Concretely, Ġi is a permutation that (i) moves in
           the V (G) coordinate according to the value stored in the i-th register, and (ii) updates
           that i-th register to the return label specified by the rotation map; all other H-registers
           remain unchanged.

        2.3    Analysis
        We now sketch the analysis of Ta-Shma’s construction via the s-wide replacement product,
        starting with the special case s = 2. Our state space consists of labelings of the graph with
        vertex set V (G) × V (H), so we consider the function space

           X ≜ RV (G)×V (H) .

        Since there are s = 2 H-registers, together with the G-register we have three registers in
        total. Decomposing each register into Span(1) and its orthogonal complement 1⊥ , we obtain
        a direct-sum decomposition of X into eight subspaces:
                    ∥       ∥      ∥      ∥
           X = V∅ ⊕ V1 ⊕ V2 ⊕ V12 ⊕ V∅⊥ ⊕ V1⊥ ⊕ V2⊥ ⊕ V12
                                                        ⊥
                                                          .                                         (4)

        By our notation, the superscript indicates whether the G-register lies in Span(1) (“∥”) or
        in 1⊥ (“⊥”). The subscript records which of the two H-registers (if any) lie in 1⊥ . Here 1
        denotes the all-ones vector in the relevant register.
            In parallel with Equation (3), the bias of the linear test encoded by Π is now

           1⊤ Π Ġ2 HΠ
                    e Ġ HΠe 1.                                                                     (5)
                | {z } | 1{z }
                   M2      M1

        We trace the effect of the operators from right to left (see Figure 3). First, write 1 as 1⊗1⊗1,
                                                                                                  ∥
        ordered by the three registers – G first, followed by the two H registers – so 1 ∈ V∅ . Now:
G. Cohen and I. Cohen                                                                              21:11


       Π            Ġ2         H
                                e             Π            Ġ1       H
                                                                     e          Π
       ε0                                     ε0                                ε0         ∥
                                                                                         V∅


                    ωG                                     ωG
                                                                                         V∅⊥

            ···                                    ···
              V2⊥                                    V1⊥

   Figure 3 Bias evolution in the s = 2 wide–replacement product.


1. The first operator Π acts only on the G register and decomposes the vector into two
                                                  ∥
   components: an ε0 fraction that remains in V∅ , and a dominant component that moves
   to V∅⊥ (i.e., the G coordinate lies in 1⊥ ).
2. The next operator H  e is agnostic to the G register and acts only within the H registers.
   Since the H part is 1 (as a vector of length |V (H)|), He leaves it unchanged.
                                                                 ∥
3. The third operator applied is Ġ1 , which leaves the V∅ component unchanged. For the
   V∅⊥ component, only an ωG fraction of the mass remains in this space; the rest is moved
   to V1⊥ .
   The key point is that register 1 of H will not be used again. Therefore, from this point on
                         e step acts on a vector in 1⊥ (as a vector of length |V (H)|), so that
   in this branch, every H
   component shrinks by a factor of ωH at each step (in short example, in the remaining
   second step). We therefore stop tracking it in the diagram, and consider it as a “win”.
   We emphasize at this point that our construction departs significantly from Ta-Shma’s:
   we reuse the same register more than once – indeed, exponentially many times (in the
   number of registers). This reuse of “compromised” registers follows a specific pattern and
   requires a more delicate analysis.
4. Now comes the second action of Π. We’ve already analyzed what it is doing on the
                     ∥
   component in V∅ (but for an ε0 mass, it moves to the V∅⊥ ). However, on the V∅⊥
   component we have no control over Π’s adversarial behavior in the sense that it can move
                       ∥
   all mass back to V∅ . What we can say - and this is the key property - is that Π does not
   touch the H component at all (and so we are still within the ∅ subscript).
5. As in the previous application of H,e here too H e ignores the G register and acts only on
   the H registers. Since we consider only branches in which the H part is 1, H    e leaves it
   unchanged.
                               ∥
6. As before, Ġ2 leaves the V∅ component unchanged and shrinks the V∅⊥ component by a
                                          ∥
   factor of ωG , moving most of it to V2 .
                                                               ∥
7. Finally, the operator Π behaves as before: it shrinks the V∅ component by ε0 and may
                          ∥
   move V∅⊥ back to V∅ .
Thus, we can bound the bias in Equation (5) by summing over all branches that start and
         ∥
end in V∅ (the green nodes in Figure 3), yielding

   ε30 + 2ε0 ωG + ωG
                   2
                     .

Setting ωG = ε0 simplifies this to O(ε20 ).




                                                                                                  CCC 2026
21:12   Wide Replacement Products Meet Gray Codes: Toward Optimal Small-Bias Sets


            The bound obtained above may not seem like much: indeed, a 2-wide replacement product
        gives no advantage over plain random walks, as discussed in Section 2.1.1 for bias reduction.
        The advantage of the s-wide replacement product kicks in only as we increase s. The key
                                                                    ∥
        feature is that once we move beyond the two subspaces V∅ and V∅⊥ , we obtain a shrink by
        ωH at every H e step. However, to analyze Ta-Shma’s construction we also have to consider
        bilinear forms beyond the specific quadratic form of Equation (5), corresponding to start/end
                             ∥
        states other than V∅ . In those cases additional contributions involving ωH arise: Loosly
                                                                                   ∥
        speaking, once the adversary leaves the ∅ spaces (that is, V∅ , V∅⊥ ) at every step the vector
        contracts by a factor of ωH . When returning to the the ∅ spaces, in every other step a
        contraction of ωG or ε0 occurs.
           Formalizing this argument, one can show that there exist universal constants a, b – in
        particular, independent of s – such that, setting ωG = ε0 = ωHa , we have

                                                 s−b
            Ms Ms−1 · · · M1          = O(ωH )         .

        For ease of exposition we will assume here a = b = 1, as the exact constants are unimportant.
        In particular, we will simply use the bound ωHs−1 .
            With this in hand, consider a bias-reduction procedure that takes a length-st random walk,
        cycling through the s registers periodically, for a parameter t that we will optimize shortly.
        For simplicity, assume both H and G are Ramanujan graphs. This is, strictly speaking,
        an idealized assumption – H must satisfy structural constraints that preclude Ramanujan
        optimality – but it streamlines the exposition and affects the parameters only mildly at this
        point (though it will become the main remaining challenge for achieving optimal small-bias
        sets beyond our work). Under this assumption, the bias after the procedure is bounded by

                  (s−1)t
           ε = ωH          .

           The size of the resulting ε-biased set is
                                                             
                                               n
           |V (G)| · |V (H)| · cst = O             · ds
                                                        · cst
                                                                .                                                 (6)
                                               ε40

        Substituting ωH for ε0 and ωG , and using the relations between the expander degrees and
        spectral expansions, we obtain (after a slight oversimplification that does not affect the
        asymptotics) a set of size

                       1s + 1t
           n st       1
              ·2 ·               .
           ε2         ε

        The factor multiplying the target size εn2 is symmetric in s and t, so to minimize it we take
                                                                        1/3
        s = t. The minimum is then attained at s = (log 1ε )                  , resulting in an ε-biased set of size
                                2/3 
                              1
             n            log ε
           O 2 ·2                   .
             ε

                                                                    1
        This matches Equation (1) up to a 2poly(log log ε ) factor, stemming from the fact that we
        cannot take H to be Ramanujan.
G. Cohen and I. Cohen                                                                                21:13


 3      Proof Overview

As described in Section 2, Ta-Shma’s approach to bias reduction follows the Rozenman–
Wigderson random-walk framework, but chooses its steps using s registers that are hidden
from the adversary (the linear test we seek to fool), encoded by the operator Π. When
optimizing the parameters, we found in Section 2.3 that it is best to consider a walk of
length s2 , analyze it in blocks of length s, and then apply the submultiplicativity of the
spectral norm to bound the entire product. Specifically, we partition the walk into s phases,
each of length s; in each phase we “restart” the analysis and treat the s registers as fresh
(unused in that phase).
    Our main technical contribution is to show that these s registers can be reused – even
after they have been “compromised” – provided this is done carefully. To illustrate our
approach, we first analyze the simplest setting with no adversary; that is, the operator Π
does not appear in the product. While the s-wide replacement product as used for bias
reduction is not meaningful under this assumption, it is interesting in its own right to reuse
registers in the s-wide replacement product for expander constructions – indeed, this was
Ben-Aroya and Ta-Shma’s original motivation for introducing the wide product [2]. However,
we begin by ignoring Π mainly for expository clarity: it is easier to present some of the core
ideas in this simplified setting and then introduce the additional ideas needed to handle the
presence of Π. In the next section we first consider this setting in the special case s = 2.


3.1     The non-adversarial setting
Since Π is absent, we consider products of the form M3 M2 M1 with Mi = Ġi H.    e We wish to
understand whether registers can be reused; for example, we may study expressions such as
M1 M2 M1 , in which the first register is reused. To this end, we take a closer look at how
the operators H,e Ġ1 , and Ġ2 act on the subspaces V ⊥ and V ∥ for all S ⊆ {1, 2}. Figure 4
                                                        S        S
summarizes the behavior of H e (we prove this formally in Section 4.2). In particular, whenever
S ̸= ∅, we pick up a factor of ωH . Hence, from the adversary’s perspective, the goal is to
                   ∥
“revisit” V∅⊥ or V∅ as often as possible so as to avoid this contraction to the bias. Moreover,
note that H e does not move us between components.
    As we prove in Section 4.4, the operator Ġ1 acts as follows (see Figure 5). On the parallel
subspaces, Ġ1 leaves us in place. On the perpendicular subspaces, Ġ1 moves only along the
axis corresponding to index 1: it maps between V∅⊥ ↔ V{1}   ⊥         ⊥
                                                               and V{2}       ⊥
                                                                         ↔ V{1,2} . Moreover, if
              ⊥      ⊥
we start in V∅ or V{2} , at most an ωG fraction of the norm remains in the original subspace.
The operator Ġ2 acts in the same manner with 1 replaced by 2.
   Think of S as the set of compromised registers, i.e., registers with which we cannot
perform a random-walk step on G. A register in state 1 simulates a truly random step on G,
                                                                                              ∥
while a register in 1⊥ yields an invalid step. However, if we are in the G-parallel register VS ,
the choice of step is immaterial.


3.1.1    The pebble game
A useful way to think about reusing registers is as a pebble game on the s-dimensional
hypercube whose vertices are indexed by subsets S ⊆ [s] ≜ {1, . . . , s}. We will start with the
simplest case s = 2; the extension to general s is discussed afterwards.



                                                                                                    CCC 2026
21:14   Wide Replacement Products Meet Gray Codes: Toward Optimal Small-Bias Sets


                                                 ωH                            ωH


                                                      ∥                             ⊥
                                      ωH            V{1,2}          ωH            V{1,2}



                                           ∥                             ⊥
                                         V{2}                          V{2}


                                                 ωH                            ωH


                                                      ∥                             ⊥
                                                    V{1}                          V{1}



                                   V∅
                                     ∥                           V∅⊥

             Figure 4 Illustration of the action of H.
                                                    e




                                                      ∥                             ⊥
                                                    V{1,2}          ωG            V{1,2}



                                           ∥                             ⊥
                                         V{2}                          V{2}




                                                      ∥                             ⊥
                                                    V{1}            ωG            V{1}



                                   V∅
                                     ∥                           V∅⊥

             Figure 5 An illustration of the action of Ġ1 .


           At the start of the game, the opponent5 places a single pebble at ∅. At each step the
        adversary moves the pebble according to rules specified below. In some cases the pebble may
        duplicate; when multiple pebbles are present, all pebbles move simultaneously according to
        the same rules. Whenever several pebbles are places at the same node, they merge to one.
        The game lasts t steps, and the adversary’s objective is to have a pebble at ∅ for as many
        steps as possible.


        5
            In this game we call the player we face the opponent; we reserve the term adversary for the entity that
            fixes Π.
G. Cohen and I. Cohen                                                                                  21:15


    The opponent plays against us – the bias-reduction designer – who chooses a sequence
          t
in σ ∈ [s] (this corresponds to the order in which registers are used) so as to minimize the
opponent’s gain. The rules of the game are as follows: Let σk ∈ [s] and consider a pebble
placed at node S:
    If σk ∈ S, the pebble stays put but duplicates: the copy is placed at S \ {σk }.
    If σk ∈
          / S, the pebble moves to S ∪ {σk }.
    These rules describe the dynamics in the G-perpendicular registers. The parallel registers
will come into play only after we reintroduce the adversary, so for now we restrict attention
to the G-perpendicular component. We initialize with mass concentrated at V∅⊥ , thereby
giving the opponent a free win in the first step.
    The first rule reflects that when we use a compromised register at time k (i.e., σk ∈ S),
we have no control over the corresponding G operator, and the mass may either remain in
VS⊥ or move to VS\{σ
                   ⊥
                       k}
                          . The second rule corresponds to using a “good” register; in this case,
                                 ⊥
most of the mass moves to VS∪{σ     k}
                                       . Here we ignore the ωG -contracted mass that stays in
place. In the full analysis we account for it as well.
    The following figure captures the rules of the game in a diagram.

                                  2                         2

                                                1
                              {2}                         {1, 2}         1




                              2                                 2




                                  ∅                        {1}           1
                                                1

    Let us play! In this game we are playing a length 3 game corresponding to the string
1 2 1 capturing the reuse of register 1. As the following diagram depicts, in this game we are
able to make this re-usage work. Indeed, the opponent was not able to place a pebble at ∅
except for the initial position.

                         1                      2                            1


      {2}       {1, 2}       {2}       {1, 2}       {2}         {1, 2}           {2}   {1, 2}




       ∅         {1}          ∅         {1}         ∅           {1}              ∅     {1}


    The careful reader may notice that the string 1 2 2 2 2 · · · also works. This is a consequence
of an expository simplification: we analyzed only a particular quadratic form, whereas the
full argument requires handling additional bilinear forms. In the language of the pebble
game, the correct objective is to win on every interval, not just on the entire word.



                                                                                                      CCC 2026
21:16   Wide Replacement Products Meet Gray Codes: Toward Optimal Small-Bias Sets


           The following diagram illustrates the extension to width s = 3. From the figure we see
        that playing the register sequence 1 2 1 3 1 2 1 again prevents the opponent from placing a
        pebble at ∅ after the first step. In this three-register case, register 1 is used every other step.

                                         2                                            2
                                                 3                                             3


                                                            1
                                    {2, 3}                                         {1, 2, 3}       1

                    2                                              2
                         3                                                 3


                                             1
                {2}                                              {1, 2}        1

                                     2                                                    2




                                                 3                                             3
                2                                                      2

                                     {3}                                            {1, 3}         1
                                                             1


                              3                                                3


                    ∅                                            {1}           1
                                             1

           This generalizes to s registers via the flip-index sequence of the binary-reflected Gray
        code on s coordinates, defined recursively by

           F1 = (1),         Fs = (Fs−1 , s, Fs−1 ),

        where juxtaposition denotes concatenation. Note that the sequence has length 2s − 1.
            Using this sequence yields an ωH -factor contraction of the bias at every step except the
        first. Thus far, we have ignored the possibility that the opponent “cheats,” i.e., deviates
        from the rules by paying a cost ωG . Nevertheless, we show that the sequence is robust to
                                                                                                c
        such strategies. In particular, when ωG is only modestly smaller than ωH – say ωG = ωH     for
        some universal constant c independent of s – the opponent has no incentive to cheat. To
        be somewhat more precise, the opponent may be in a superposition of “cheating” and “not
        cheating”; the claim above should be understood as conveying the intended intuition.

        3.2    The return of the adversary
        We now reintroduce the adversary. The game is now played on two s-dimensional hypercubes:
        the G-perpendicular cube and the G-parallel cube. The simplified game above was restricted
        to the perpendicular cube – whose node labels we now denote by S ⊥ – and its rules remain
G. Cohen and I. Cohen                                                                                  21:17


unchanged. The rules on the parallel cube are simpler and can be deduced from Figures 4
and 5: every move is a self-loop, i.e., the pebble stays put. The opponent’s objective is to
maximize the number of time steps with a pebble at ∅⊥ or ∅∥ . As before the game begins
with a single pebble at ∅⊥ .
    The key new feature is that after each instruction σk (the register chosen at time k), a
Π-step occurs that may move pebbles between the two cubes, thereby giving the opponent
additional freedom. To determine the rules for the Π-steps, we first analyze the Π operator.
                                                   ∥
Figure 6 illustrates its behavior. Starting from VS , Π keeps only an ε-fraction of the norm
     ∥                                                                                 ∥
in VS . The self-loops and the horizontal arrow are the only outgoing edges from VS and
  ⊥
VS . For simplicity of exposition, we ignore the ε-contracting steps (much as we ignored the
ωG -contracting steps earlier). With this, the Π-steps follow these rules:
    A pebble at S ∥ moves to S ⊥ .
    A pebble at S ⊥ remains in place and duplicates, creating a new pebble at S ∥ .
We summarize all rules in Figure 7.

                                          ε


                                               ∥                          ⊥
                                              V{1,2}                    V{1,2}
                               ε


                                    ∥                              ⊥
                                   V{2}                          V{2}


                                          ε


                                               ∥                          ⊥
                                              V{1}                      V{1}
                               ε


                           ∥
                          V∅                               V∅⊥

                                                       ∥
   Figure 6 The action of Π on the spaces VS⊥ , VS .

    Let us now play the same 1 2 1 string as before, but interleaved with Π-steps: Π 1 Π 2 Π 1.
The reader may verify that, because of the Π-steps, the number of time steps with a pebble
in the ∅-states is now two, compared with only one in the setting without Π-steps. While
the difference between one and two may not seem compelling, the failure of the Gray-code
strategy becomes much more evident as s increases.
    It turns out that with two registers there is no way to reuse registers. The Gray-code
string 1 2 1 3 1 2 1 (with interleaved Π-steps, omitted for readability) from before also fails for
three registers. However, the following string is a good play: 1 2 3 1 – using it, the opponent
cannot return to the ∅ states. With five registers, one can achieve the same effect with the
string
   1 2 3 1 4 5 1 2 3 1.
In general, we find a string on s registers of length ≈ 2s/2 that guarantees the opponent
never revisits the ∅ states. The factor-2 loss in the exponent relative to the no-Π game is
immaterial.



                                                                                                      CCC 2026
21:18   Wide Replacement Products Meet Gray Codes: Toward Optimal Small-Bias Sets


                                       1                                              1
                                                   2                                          2

                                                            Π
                                     {1, 2}∥                                       {1, 2}⊥        Π

                 1                                                1
                             2                                            2


                      ∥                        Π                      ⊥
               {1}                                              {1}           Π

                                                                                          1




                                       1
                                                   2                                          2
                                                                      1
                                           ∥                                              ⊥
                                     {2}                                           {2}            Π
                                                            Π

                 1
                            2                                                 2


                 ∅∥                                               ∅⊥          Π
                                               Π

           Figure 7 A complete illustration of the two-register pebble game with Π.


            We emphasize that matters become more involved once we reintroduce the “cheats” the
        opponent can perform via ωG -steps and ε0 -steps (i.e., the Π-steps). Nevertheless, by choosing
        ε0 in the same manner as ωG , we prove the opponent has no incentive to cheat. We summarize
        the entire two-register game in Section 4.4.

        3.3    Setting parameters
        We now instantiate our new bias-reduction procedure with s registers (hence walks of length
        ℓ = 2s/2 ), starting from an ε0 -biased set of size O(n/ε40 ) constructed in the previous sections.
        The size of the resulting ε-biased set is
                                                        
                                 2s/2      n    s   2s/2
           |V (G)| · |V (H)| · c      =O 4 ·d ·c           .                                            (7)
                                           ε0
        Compare this with Equation (6), where the walk length is exponentially shorter than in our
        setting.
            Substituting ωH for ε0 and ωG for simplicity, as chosen in the previous sections, and
        using the relations between expander degrees and spectral parameters, we obtain (after a
        slight oversimplification that does not affect the asymptotics)
                        logℓ ℓ
            n ℓ        1
               ·2 ·              .                                                                     (8)
            ε2         ε
G. Cohen and I. Cohen                                                                                 21:19

                                    q
The loss term is minimized at ℓ ≈ log 1ε , yielding an improvement over Ta-Shma’s con-
struction – namely, an ε-biased set of size
      n              
                   e log 1 −1/2 ,
                                
         ,    α = O        ε
    ε2+α
as stated in Theorem 1.


3.4    Toward optimal small-bias sets
The reason we do not obtain optimal small-bias sets is the need to balance the two terms
                                                                       log ℓ
in Equation (8) – namely, 2ℓ , which increases with ℓ, and (1/ε) ℓ , which decreases. The
first “exponential in ℓ” term does not in fact have base 2 but rather some constant (and in
fact, slightly super-constant); we chose to present it as if it is 2 in this informal overview for
simplicity. By inspection, this constant comes from two sources:
    The inherent factor of 2 in the relation between spectral expansion and degree, ω ≈ √2d .
    This was also one of the bottlenecks noted by Ta-Shma in improving his construction.
    A deliberately lossy step in our bias bound: for simplicity we sacrificed absolute constants,
    which are not currently the bottleneck.

    Moving forward, we will need to eliminate both sources of loss. We believe the first
is more inherent, while the second is largely technical. As noted, the factor of 2 is not
even precise, since the expander H needed for our bias-reduction procedure has additional
structure that prevents it from being Ramanujan. Even setting this aside, we still wish to
avoid this factor of 2. We believe this may be achievable by switching to a non-backtracking
version of our procedure or – essentially equivalently – by using a directed graph H. The
main difficulty is to combine such a modification with the machinery developed in this work.
    An alternative is to use rotating expanders [6], which keep us in the realm of undirected
graphs. Although each individual expander carries a factor-2 penalty, suitable compositions
avoid an exponential blow-up and incur only a linear loss. Here too, the challenge is to
integrate our framework with rotating expanders.


 4     A Formal Framework for the Wide-Replacement Product

In this section, we formalize the mechanism underlying the wide-replacement product.
Specifically, we present a variant of the original construction of Ben-Aroya and Ta-Shma [2].
Our presentation is tailored to our needs: it is more abstract, yet it imposes additional
constraints. Moreover, we incorporate into the product an auxiliary operator Π. This
operator is introduced precisely to enable an analysis of the wide-replacement product in the
setting of small-bias sets, following [18].


Ingredients
The components of the wide-replacement product are as follows and will remain fixed
throughout this section:
   Let Λ be a finite group of size D.
   For a parameter s, dubbed the width parameter, let H be the Cayley graph over the
   group Λs corresponding to a generating set C ⊆ Λs ; that is, H = Cay(Λs , C). We denote
   the spectral expansion of H by ωH .



                                                                                                     CCC 2026
21:20   Wide Replacement Products Meet Gray Codes: Toward Optimal Small-Bias Sets


           Let G be a D-regular graph on n vertices, and write ωG for its spectral expansion. We
           represent G via a rotation map

               Rot : V (G) × Λ → V (G) × Λ.

           We assume that the rotation map is locally invertible, i.e., there exists a function
           ϕ : [D] → [D] such that for every g ∈ V (G) and x ∈ [D],

               Rot(g, x) = (h, ϕ(x))

           for some h = h(g, x) ∈ V (G). In words, the second component of the output depends
           only on the second component of the input. We slightly abuse notation by sometimes
           considering only the projection of the rotation map onto the first register.

        The space X
        We denote the R-vector space of all real functions on Λ by V , that is,

           V ≜ {f : Λ → R}.

        We similarly define

           W ≜ {f : V (G) → R},

        where V (G) is the vertex set of G. Define

           X ≜ V ⊗s ⊗ W.                                                                           (9)

        We write V ⊗s as V1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ Vs , where each Vi ∼
                                                         = V as an R-vector space. We refer to Vi as
        the i-th register and to the entire factor V ⊗s as the H-register. We refer to the factor W in
        the tensor product X = V ⊗s ⊗ W as the G-register.

        Decomposing the space X
        For an R-vector space U , there is a natural decomposition into parallel and perpendicular
        subspaces:
                                       ⊥
           U ∥ ≜ span {1} ,    U⊥ ≜ U∥ ,

        where 1 is the all-ones vector, thus U = U ∥ ⊕ U ⊥ . Note that we slightly abuse notation:
        here U ⊥ denotes the orthogonal complement of U ∥ inside U (with respect to the standard
        inner product), rather than the orthogonal complement of U in some ambient space; this
        convention is convenient and will not cause ambiguity.
           Recall that the tensor product distributes over direct sums, namely

           (U1 ⊕ U2 ) ⊗ U3 ∼
                           = (U1 ⊗ U3 ) ⊕ (U2 ⊗ U3 ) .

        Applying this repeatedly yields a decomposition of the space X from Equation (9) into 2s+1
        subspaces: in each coordinate we choose either the parallel or the perpendicular component
        (for each of V1 , . . . , Vs and for the G-register). For a set S ⊆ [s], we denote
                   s
                                                   (
                  O                                  Vi⊥ , i ∈ S,
            VS ≜      Ui ,         where      Ui ≜     ∥
                  i=1                                Vi , i ∈ / S.
G. Cohen and I. Cohen                                                                                21:21


Equivalently (as a shorthand), we may write
        O            O ∥
   VS =      Vi⊥ ⊗      Vi ,
            i∈S         i̸∈S

with the tacit convention that tensor factors are ordered by increasing index. Thus, for
                                                                                 ∥
example, if S = {1, 3} ⊆ [3], then the display above yields VS = V1⊥ ⊗ V3⊥ ⊗ V2 , which we
                      ∥
identify with V1⊥ ⊗ V2 ⊗ V3⊥ by reordering the factors.
   Note that VS itself is not a subspace of X, as it does not include the W factor. To obtain
subspaces of X, define
       ∥




                                                      ⊨
   VS ≜ VS ⊗ W ∥ ,             VS⊥ ≜ VS ⊗ W ⊥ ,      VS ≜ VS ⊗ W.                           (10)
                                ∥
Thus, the superscript in VS and VS⊥ indicates whether we take the parallel or the perpendicular
component of the G-register (equivalently, of the W -factor). We also abuse notation again
and denote

   V ∥ ≜ V ⊗s ⊗ W ∥ ,           V ⊥ ≜ V ⊗s ⊗ W ⊥ ,                                          (11)

so that, with our notation,

   X = V ⊗s ⊗ W = V ∥ ⊕ V ⊥ .

    For each one of the subspaces of X defined above, there is a corresponding orthogonal
projection operator, which we denote by P , with the same subscript and superscript (e.g.
  ∥              ∥
PS projects to VS .)

4.1                                 f and Π
           The Linear Operators Ġ, H
We now describe the linear operators acting on the space X defined in Equation (9) that
are used in the s-wide product. Specifically, we consider the operators H,
                                                                        e Ġ1 , . . . , Ġs which
induce walks over the vertices V (G) × V (H), and the noise operator Π.
    Informally, the operator He corresponds to taking a local H-step within each g-cloud.
Formally,
                             e is the linear operator on X defined as follows. For f ∈ X,
▶ Definition 3. The operator H
     s
x ∈ Λ and g ∈ V (G),

   (Hf
    e ) (x) = Ec∈C [ fg (x + c) ] ,
       g

where the expectation is uniform over the generating set C of H.

▶ Definition 4. For i ∈ [s], we define the linear operator Ġi on X as follows. For f ∈ X,
x = (x1 , . . . , xs ) ∈ Λs and g ∈ V (G), let

   Rot (g, xi ) = (h, ϕ(xi )).

Then
                                 
      Ġi f g (x) ≜ fh ϕ(xi ), x−i .

In words: take a G-step from g according to the label xi , updating the G-register and the
i-th register, while keeping the other registers unchanged.
   Last is Π which we refer to as the noise operator which acts on entire clouds.



                                                                                                    CCC 2026
21:22   Wide Replacement Products Meet Gray Codes: Toward Optimal Small-Bias Sets


        ▶ Definition 5. Let π : V (G) → R be a function. Define the linear operator Π on X as
        follows. For f ∈ X, x ∈ Λs and g ∈ V (G),

           (Πf )g (x) = π(g) fg (x).

        In words, Π multiplies each g-cloud by the scalar π(g).

           Throughout this section, we denote the bias of π by

           ε ≜ Eg∈V (G) [π(g)]                                                                     (12)

        As the notation suggests, we will typically assume that this bias is small, and certainly
        smaller than 1.


        4.2    Action of H
                         f

        ▶ Lemma 6. For every S ⊆ [s] the following hold
        1. H
           e preserves VS locally. That is,
                   ⊨

                          ⊨




               e S ⊆ VS ,
               HV

           Moreover,
                                       ⊨




           a. H
              e acts trivially on V .
                                   ∅
                                           ⊨




           b. For S ̸= ∅, for every f ∈ VS ,

                   Hf
                   e  ≤ ωH ∥f ∥ .                                                                  (13)

           e preserves V ⊥ and V ∥ globally. That is,
        2. H

               e ∥ ⊆ V ∥,
               HV                e ⊥ ⊆ V ⊥.
                                 HV
                                                           ∥
                                          e preserves V and V ⊥ .
        ▶ Corollary 7. For every S ⊆ [s], H            S     S

        We refer the reader to Figure 4 for an illustration of the action of H,
                                                                             e and to the full version
        of the paper for the proof of the lemma.


        4.3    Action of Π
        ▶ Lemma 8. The operator Π satisfies the following properties:
        1. For every f ∈ V ∥ ,

                P ∥ Πf ≤ ε ∥f ∥ .

           In particular, when ε is small, Π maps V ∥ mostly into V ⊥ .
        2. For every S ⊆ [s], Π locally preserves VS , i.e.,
                  ⊨

                         ⊨




               ΠVS ⊆ VS .

        We refer the reader to Figure 6 for an illustration of the action of Π, and to the full version
        of the paper for the proof of the lemma.
G. Cohen and I. Cohen                                                                               21:23


4.4    Action of the Ġi -s
Informally, for each i ∈ [s], the operator Ġi may shift us along the i-th coordinate. It is
therefore convenient to define the combined subspace

   VS±i ≜ VS\{i} ⊕ VS∪{i} ⊆ V ⊗s .

   We extend the subspace VS±i to subspaces of X.
      ⊨




   VS±i ≜ VS±i ⊗W ,          ⊥
                            VS±i ≜ VS±i ⊗W ⊥ ⊆ X.

▶ Lemma 9. The operator Ġi satisfies the following invariance properties:
                       ∥
1. For every S ⊆ [s], VS is Ġi invariant; equivalently,
             ∥     ∥
       Ġi VS ⊆ VS .
                                  ⊥
2. For every S ⊆ [s], Ġi leaves VS±i invariant; equivalently,
            ⊥      ⊥
       Ġi VS±i ⊆ VS±i .

                            / S, Ġi leaves only an ωG -fraction of the norm in VS⊥ . That is,
3. For every S ⊆ [s] with i ∈
                  ⊥
   for every f ∈ VS ,

          PS⊥ Ġi f ≤ ωG ∥f ∥ .

    We refer the reader to Figure 5 for an illustration of the action of the Ġi -s, and to the
full version of the paper for the proof of the lemma.
    We end this section with a Section 4.4 that illustrates the action of all the operators we
discussed in this section.

4.5    Walks based on the wide product
Given s ∈ N and two graphs G and H with suitable parameters, we defined and analyzed the
operators H e and Ġi , for i ∈ [s]. These operators naturally refer to random walks on the set
of vertices V (G) × V (H). Generally, we take a zig-zag walk. First an H-step,
                                                                           e     then a Ġ-step,
then an H-step again. However, we still have the freedom to choose which Ġi to use, as we
          e
have s distinct options in every step. For a word W = W|W | · · · W1 over the alphabet [s], we
define the W -walk of H and G to be the graph with the random walk matrix

   G w H ≜ ĠW|W | H
                   e · · · ĠW H
                              1
                                e


    To construct small biased sets out of wide random walks, we identify the vertices of G
with vectors from a small biased set, Souter , so that each vertex g ∈ V (G) correspond to a
vector in Souter . Similarly to the work of [18], the elements of our new biased set Snew are
defined to be sums of elements from Souter , which correspond to the W -walks over the wide
product of G and H. For each such a walk, we add a new vector to our new biased set Snew .
The vector is the sum of the vectors from Souter that we encountered on the way. Explicitly,
for a walk
                                                                       
    (g0 , h0 ) →H
                e (g0 , h1 ) →Ġ (g1 , h2 ) →H
                                             e · · · →Ġ g|W | , h2|W | ,
                    P|W |
we add the vector i=1 gi to Snew . Given a linear test π : Zk2 → {±1}, the vertex g gets the
                    ⟨g,π⟩
value π (g) = (−1)         . This induces the operator Π.



                                                                                                   CCC 2026
21:24   Wide Replacement Products Meet Gray Codes: Toward Optimal Small-Bias Sets




                                 ωH                                               ωH

                                          ∥                                              ⊥
                                 ε      V{1,2}                                          V{1,2}




               ωH                                              ωH

                        ∥                                               ⊥
               ε      V{1}                                            V{1}

                                                               ωG




                                 ωH                                               ωH

                                           ∥                                               ⊥
                                 ε      V{2}                                             V{2}


                                                                                          ωG


                         ∥
               ε       V∅                                              V∅⊥

                                                               ωG
                                                                       ωG

            Figure 8 Illustration of the action of all operators: Π (black solid), H
                                                                                   e (red loosely dotted), Ġ1
        (blue dashed), and Ġ2 (light-blue densely dotted).



            Throughout, we will have a correspondence between words and linear operators. For a
        letter σ ∈ [s], we define the corresponding operator that helps us track the bias as

            σ
            b = ΠĠσ H.
                     e

        We extend this definition to words. For a word W = σ|W | · · · σ1 ,

            W b|W | · · · σ
            c=σ           b1 ,

            As proved in [18], the bias of the new set on the test π can be expressed algebraically:

        ▷ Claim 10. For every word W over the alphabet [s], the bias of the new set Snew is
        algebraically expressed as

            Bias(Snew ) = 1t ΠĠW|W | H
                                      e · · · ΠĠW HΠ
                                                  2
                                                           e = 1t W
                                                    e ĠW H1
                                                         1
                                                                  c 1.                                   (14)
G. Cohen and I. Cohen                                                                               21:25


 5      Conflict-Free Words
In this brief section, we present a construction of the Gray–code–style string used in our
register-reuse pattern.

▶ Definition 11. A nonempty word w ∈ Σ⋆ has a conflict if every letter that appears in w
appears at least twice (equivalently, no letter appears exactly once). A word w is conflict-free
if there exists a letter σ ∈ Σ that appears in w exactly once, or if it is the empty word.

▶ Definition 12. A word w ∈ Σ⋆ is double conflict-free if either |w| < 2, or there exist two
consecutive positions whose letters each appear exactly once in w.

▶ Definition 13. A word w ∈ Σ⋆ is (double) conflict-free on intervals if every contiguous
subword (interval) of w is (double) conflict-free.

▶ Lemma 14. For every s ∈ N there is an explicit word ws of length 2s − 1 over the alphabet
{σ1 , . . . , σs } that is conflict-free on intervals.

▶ Remark 15. The length 2s − 1 in Lemma 14 is optimal: every word of length 2s over an
alphabet of size s has a conflict.

▶ Lemma 16. For every s ∈ N there exists an explicit word w2s−1 , over the alphabet
{σ1 , . . . , σ2s−1 }, of length 3 · 2s−1 − 2 that is double conflict-free on intervals.

▶ Remark 17. The bound 3 · 2s−1 − 2 in Lemma 16 is tight: every word of length 3 · 2s−1 − 1
over an alphabet of size 2s − 1 fails to be double conflict-free on intervals.
    The explicit constructions of these words and the proofs of the lemmas in this section are
straightforward and are deferred to the full version of the paper.

 6      Tracking the Norm
The following lemma exploits the key property of double-conflict-free words: every word
contains a pair of consecutive letters that appear exactly once in the word. To analyze such
a unique consecutive pair, we “zoom in” the corresponding pair of operators. Let σ and σ ′
such letters, and consider the product of their operators,

     σ
     bσb′ = ΠĠσ H
                 e · ΠĠσ′ H.
                           e

Informally, because the letters σ and σ ′ appear only once, we can assume that before and
after this block the process acts on subspaces that are independent of these coordinates. This
observation motivates the definition of the space of functions that are independent of the
registers σ and σ ′ .
      ⊨




                             ⊨




                  M
    V−{σ,σ′ } =         VS ,                                                              (15)
                S:σ,σ ′ ∈S
                        /
                                                                ⊨




and of the corresponding projection operator to this space, P−{σ,σ′ } .

▶ Lemma 18. For every σ, σ ′ ∈ [s],
        ⊨




                             ⊨




      P−{σ,σ′ } Ġσ HΠ       −{σ,σ ′ } ≤ 2ωG + ε.
                    e Ġσ′ P

   Lemma 18 is the main technical ingredient in the following theorem, which is the key to
proving our main result.



                                                                                                   CCC 2026
21:26   Wide Replacement Products Meet Gray Codes: Toward Optimal Small-Bias Sets


        ▶ Theorem 19. Assume that 2ωG + ε ≤ 32        5
                                                  20 ωH . Let w be a word over the alphabet [s], which
        is double-conflict-free on intervals. Then, the norm of its corresponding operator W = w  b is
        bounded by
             c ≤ 10 · (2ωH )|W |−2
             W

        Using Theorem 19 and Claim 10 we can easily bound the bias of the resulting small-bias
        set that we construct. We refer the reader to the full version of the paper for the proof of
        the lemma and the theorem, as well as the way to combine them in order to prove our main
        theorem.

             References
         1   N. Alon, O. Goldreich, J. Håstad, and R. Peralta. Addendum to: “Simple constructions of
             almost k-wise independent random variables”. Random Structures Algorithms, 4(1):119–120,
             1993. doi:10.1002/rsa.3240040109.
         2   Avraham Ben-Aroya and Amnon Ta-Shma. A combinatorial construction of almost-Ramanujan
             graphs using the zig-zag product. SIAM J. Comput., 40(2):267–290, 2011. doi:10.1137/
             080732651.
         3   Avraham Ben-Aroya and Amnon Ta-Shma. Constructing small-bias sets from algebraic-
             geometric codes. Theory Comput., 9:253–272, 2013. doi:10.4086/toc.2013.v009a005.
         4   Guy Blanc and Dean Doron. New near-linear time decodable codes closer to the GV bound.
             In 37th Computational Complexity Conference, volume 234 of LIPIcs. Leibniz Int. Proc.
             Inform., pages Art. No. 10, 40. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2022.
             doi:10.4230/lipics.ccc.2022.10.
         5   Eshan Chattopadhyay, Pooya Hatami, Kaave Hosseini, and Shachar Lovett. Pseudorandom
             generators from polarizing random walks. Theory Comput., 15:Paper No. 10, 26, 2019.
             doi:10.4086/toc.2019.v015a010.
         6   Gil Cohen and Gal Maor. Random walks on rotating expanders. In Proceedings of the
             55th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 971–984, 2023. doi:10.1145/
             3564246.3585133.
         7   Gil Cohen, Ran Raz, and Gil Segev. Non-malleable extractors with short seeds and applications
             to privacy amplification. In 2012 IEEE 27th Conference on Computational Complexity—CCC
             2012, pages 298–308. IEEE Computer Soc., Los Alamitos, CA, 2012. doi:10.1109/CCC.2012.
             21.
         8   Michael A. Forbes and Zander Kelley. Pseudorandom generators for read-once branching
             programs, in any order. In 59th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer
             Science—FOCS 2018, pages 946–955. IEEE Computer Soc., Los Alamitos, CA, 2018. doi:
             10.1109/FOCS.2018.00093.
         9   Edgar N. Gilbert. A comparison of signalling alphabets. Bell System Technical Journal,
             31(3):504–522, May 1952. URL: https://vtda.org/pubs/BSTJ/vol31-1952/articles/
             bstj31-3-504.pdf.
        10   Fernando Granha Jeronimo, Tushant Mittal, Sourya Roy, and Avi Wigderson. Almost-
             Ramanujan Expanders From Arbitrary Expanders via Operator Amplification. SIAM J.
             Comput., 54(5):FOCS22–120–FOCS22–158, 2025. doi:10.1137/22M1538739.
        11   Fernando Granha Jeronimo, Dylan Quintana, Shashank Srivastava, and Madhur Tulsiani.
             Unique decoding of explicit ε-balanced codes near the Gilbert-Varshamov bound. In 2020
             IEEE 61st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 434–445. IEEE
             Computer Soc., Los Alamitos, CA, [2020] ©2020. doi:10.1109/FOCS46700.2020.00048.
        12   Fernando Granha Jeronimo, Shashank Srivastava, and Madhur Tulsiani. Near-linear time
             decoding of Ta-Shma’s codes via splittable regularity. In STOC ’21—Proceedings of the 53rd
             Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 1527–1536. ACM, New
             York, [2021] ©2021.
G. Cohen and I. Cohen                                                                                21:27


13   Robert J. McEliece, Eugene R. Rodemich, Jr. Rumsey, Howard, and Lloyd R. Welch. New upper
     bounds on the rate of a code via the delsarte–macwilliams inequalities. IEEE Transactions on
     Information Theory, 23(2):157–166, March 1977. doi:10.1109/TIT.1977.1055688.
14   Joseph Naor and Moni Naor. Small-bias probability spaces: efficient constructions and
     applications. SIAM J. Comput., 22(4):838–856, 1993. doi:10.1137/0222053.
15   Ran Raz. Extractors with weak random seeds. In STOC’05: Proceedings of the 37th Annual
     ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 11–20. ACM, New York, 2005. doi:
     10.1145/1060590.1060593.
16   Omer Reingold, Salil Vadhan, and Avi Wigderson. Entropy waves, the zig-zag graph product,
     and new constant-degree expanders and extractors. In Proceedings 41st Annual Symposium on
     Foundations of Computer Science, pages 3–13. IEEE, 2000. doi:10.1109/SFCS.2000.892006.
17   Eyal Rozenman and Salil Vadhan. Derandomized squaring of graphs. In Approximation,
     randomization and combinatorial optimization, volume 3624 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci.,
     pages 436–447. Springer, Berlin, 2005. doi:10.1007/11538462_37.
18   Amnon Ta-Shma. Explicit, almost optimal, epsilon-balanced codes. In Proceedings of the
     49th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 238–251, 2017.
     doi:10.1145/3055399.3055408.
19   R. R. Varshamov. Estimate of the number of signals in error-correcting codes. Doklady
     Akademii Nauk SSSR, 117:739–741, 1957. English translation reprinted in I. F. Blake (ed.),
     Algebraic Coding Theory: History and Development, Dowden, Hutchinson & Ross, 1973,
     pp. 68–71.
20   Emanuele Viola. The sum of d small-bias generators fools polynomials of degree d. Comput.
     Complexity, 18(2):209–217, 2009. doi:10.1007/s00037-009-0273-5.




                                                                                                    CCC 2026
