                                 Modern Interactive Proofs
                                                                by
                                                   Dhiraj Holden
                    B.S., California Institute of Technology (2015)
                  S.M., Massachussetts Institute of Technology (2017)
 Submitted to the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
                                  Science
      in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
                           Doctor of Philosophy in Computer Science
                                                             at the
               MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
                                                     February 2022
    © Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2022. All rights reserved.




Author . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
               Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
                                                                                                     January 15, 2022

Certified by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                                                                                   Shafi Goldwasser
                  Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
                                                                                                 Thesis Supervisor


Accepted by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                                                                       Leslie A. Kolodziejski
               Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
                        Chair, Department Committee on Graduate Students
2
                         Modern Interactive Proofs
                                          by
                                   Dhiraj Holden

   Submitted to the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
                 on January 15, 2022, in partial fulfillment of the
                         requirements for the degree of
                    Doctor of Philosophy in Computer Science



Abstract
In this thesis, we study several extensions of the concept of interactive proofs. First,
we consider non-signaling multi-prover interactive proofs. Interacting with multiple
non-interacting provers increases the ability of the verifier to check the solution by
asking the provers different questions and checking the consistency of their answers.
In a non-signaling multi-prover proof, the provers can interact and correlate their an-
swers, but not in an unlimited way: non-signaling provers must make the distribution
of answers for any subset of provers only depend on the distribution of questions the
verifier sends to that same subset. Non-signaling proofs, have found applications in
cryptography and hardness of approximation. An important open problem is char-
acterizing the power of non-signaling proofs. It is known that 2-prover non-signaling
proofs are characterized by PSPACE, and that non- signaling proofs with poly(𝑛)-
provers are characterized by EXP. However, the power of 𝑘-prover non-signaling
proofs, for 2 < 𝑘 < poly(𝑛) remained an open problem. We show that 𝑘-prover
non-signaling proofs (with negligible soundness) for 𝑘 = 𝑂(𝑝 log 𝑛) are contained in
PSPACE. We prove this via two different routes that are of independent interest. In
both routes we consider a relaxation of non-signaling called sub-non-signaling. Our
main technical contribution (which is used in both our proofs) is a reduction showing
how to convert any sub-non- signaling strategy with value at least 1 − 2−𝑘 into a
                                                                               2


non-signaling one with value at least 2𝑂(−𝑘 ) .
                                             2


    Second, we introduce pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs (psdIP): interactive
proof systems for search problems where the verifier is guaranteed with high proba-
bility to output the same output on different executions. As in the case with classical
interactive proofs, the verifier is a probabilistic polynomial time algorithm interact-
ing with an untrusted powerful prover. We view pseudo-deterministic interactive
proofs as an extension of the study of pseudo-deterministic randomized algorithms:
the goal of the latter is to find canonical solutions to search problems whereas the
goal of the former is to prove that a solution to a search problem is canonical to a
probabilistic polynomial time verifier. Alternatively, one may think of the powerful
prover as aiding the probabilistic polynomial time verifier to find canonical solutions
to search problems, with high probability over the randomness of the verifier. The

                                           3
challenge is that pseudo- determinism should hold not only with respect to the ran-
domness, but also with respect to the prover: a malicious prover should not be able
to cause the verifier to output a solution other than the unique canonical one. The
IP = PSPACE characterization implies that psdIP = IP. The challenge is to find con-
stant round pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs for hard search prob-lems. We
show a constant round pseudo-deterministic interactive proof for the graph isomor-
phism problem: on any input pair of isomorphic graphs (𝐺0 , 𝐺1 ), there exist a unique
isomorphism from 𝐺0 to 𝐺1 (although many isomorphism many exist) which will be
output by the verifier with high probability, regardless of any dishonest prover strat-
egy. In contrast, we show that it is unlikely that psdIP proofs with constant rounds
exist for NP-complete problems by showing that if any NP-complete problem has a
psdIP protocol, then the polynomial hierarchy collapses.
    Third, we define doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic proofs for polynomial time
search problems: pseudo-deterministic proofs with the extra requirement that the
prover runtime is polynomial and the verifier runtime to verify that a solution is
canonical is significantly lower than the complexity of finding any solution, canonical
or otherwise. Naturally this question is particularly interest-ing for search problems
for which a lower bound on its worst case complexity is known or has been widely
conjectured.
    We show doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic algorithms for a host of natural
problems whose complexity has long been conjectured. In particular, linear program-
ming and a variety of problems studied at the center of the fine grained complexity
study.

Thesis Supervisor: Shafi Goldwasser
Title: Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science




                                          4
Acknowledgments
This thesis is based on the following papers: Pseudo-Deterministic Proofs [40], Doubly-
                                                                                √
Efficient Pseudo-Deterministic Proofs [34], and Non-Signaling Proofs with 𝑂( log 𝑛)
provers are in PSPACE [47].
   I would like to thank my advisor Shafi Goldwasser for all the help and support
she has given me. I would like to thank my thesis committee, Yael Kalai and Ryan
Williams. I would like to thank my collaborators Michel Goemans, Ofer Grossmann,
Adam Bouland, Prashant Vasudevan, Justin Thaler, and Lijie Chen. I would like to
thank Rahul Santhanam for hosting me at Oxford in the summer of 2018. I would
like to thank the people who hung out in G5 Lounge on Friday evenings for all the
fun times we had.




                                          5
6
Contents

1 Introduction                                                                         9
  1.1   Pseudo-Deterministic Proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     12
        1.1.1   Our Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    13
        1.1.2   Other Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      18
        1.1.3   Subsequent Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     19
  1.2   Doubly-Efficient Pseudo-Deterministic Proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . .        20
        1.2.1   Our Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
  1.3   Non-Signaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26
        1.3.1   Prior Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    28
        1.3.2   Our Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29

2 Preliminaries                                                                       33
  2.1   Pseudo-determinism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      33
        2.1.1   Definitions of Pseudo-determinism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     33
        2.1.2   Polynomial-round pseudo-determinism . . . . . . . . . . . . .         37
  2.2   Doubly-Efficient Pseudo-Deterministic Proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . .        37
  2.3   Non-Signaling Interactive Proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    39
        2.3.1   No-Signaling Games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      39
        2.3.2   Linear Programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      41

3 Pseudo-Deterministic Proofs                                                         43
  3.1   Pseudo-deterministic-AM algorithm for graph isomorphism . . . . . .           43
  3.2   Lower bound on pseudo-deterministic AM algorithms . . . . . . . . .           45

                                           7
  3.3   Pseudo-deterministic derandomization for BPP in subexponential time
        MA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   46
  3.4   Uniqueness in NL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     48
  3.5   Structural Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   49
  3.6   Discussion and Open Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         53
  3.7   Alternate Algorithm for Graph Isomorphism in pseudo-deterministic
        AM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   55

4 Doubly-Efficient Pseudo-Deterministic Proofs                                         59
  4.1   Doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       59
  4.2   Linear programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       61
  4.3   Problems studied in fine-grained complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        65
        4.3.1   3-SUM and problems reducible to 3-SUM . . . . . . . . . . . .          65
        4.3.2   Hitting Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    66
        4.3.3   Model checking of graph properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       67
        4.3.4   Problems equivalent to All-Pairs Shortest Path       . . . . . . . .   68
  4.4   Conclusions and Open Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        69

5 Non-Signaling Proofs                                                                 71
  5.1   Non-Signaling Games with 𝑘 Players and 2−Ω(𝑘 ) Soundness are in
                                                             2

               (︁         )︁
        SPACE poly(𝑛, 2𝑘 )   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       71
                        2



        5.1.1   From Multi-Prover Non-Signaling Proofs to 2-Prover Non-Signaling
                Proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   72
        5.1.2   Approximating the Sub-Non-Signaling Value of 𝑘-Player Game
                via a Space Efficient Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      74
        5.1.3   Proof of Theorem 5.1.1 via Corollary 5.1.6 . . . . . . . . . . .       80
  5.2   The Proof of Theorem 5.1.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       81




                                           8
Chapter 1

Introduction

This thesis is putting together the work of three papers.
   We introduce pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs (psdIP): interactive proof
systems for search problems where the verifier is guaranteed with high probability
to output the same output on different executions. As in the case with classical
interactive proofs, the verifier is a probabilistic polynomial time algorithm interacting
with an untrusted powerful prover.
   We view pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs as an extension of the study of
pseudo-deterministic randomized polynomial time algorithms: the goal of the latter
is to find canonical solutions to search problems whereas the goal of the former is to
prove that a solution to a search problem is canonical to a probabilistic polynomial
time verifier. Alternatively, one may think of the powerful prover as aiding the prob-
abilistic polynomial time verifier to find canonical solutions to search problems, with
high probability over the randomness of the verifier. The challenge is that pseudo-
determinism should hold not only with respect to the randomness, but also with
respect to the prover: a malicious prover should not be able to cause the verifier to
output a solution other than the unique canonical one.
   The 𝐼𝑃 = 𝑃 𝑆𝑃 𝐴𝐶𝐸 characterization implies that psdIP = 𝐼𝑃 . The challenge is
to find constant round pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs for hard search prob-
lems. We show a constant round pseudo-deterministic interactive proof for the graph
isomorphism problem: on any input pair of isomorphic graphs (𝐺0 , 𝐺1 ), there exist a

                                           9
unique isomorphism 𝜑 from 𝐺0 to 𝐺1 (although many isomorphism many exist) which
will be output by the verifier with high probability, regardless of any dishonest prover
strategy. In contrast, we show that it is unlikely that psdIP proofs with constant
rounds exist for NP-complete problems by showing that if any NP-complete problem
has a psdIP protocol, then the polynomial hierarchy collapses.
   In [40] Goldwasser, Grossman and Holden introduced pseudo-deterministic inter-
active proofs for search problems where a powerful prover can convince a probabilistic
polynomial time verifier that a solution to a search problem is canonical. They stud-
ied search problems for which polynomial time algorithms are not known and for
which many solutions are possible. They showed that whereas there exists a constant
round pseudo deterministic proof for graph isomorphism where the canonical solution
is the lexicographically smallest isomorphism, the existence of pseudo-deterministic
interactive proofs for NP-hard problems would imply the collapse of the polynomial
time hierarchy.
   In Chapter 4, we turn our attention to studying doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic
proofs for polynomial time search problems, as defined in [34]: pseudo-deterministic
proofs with the extra requirement that the prover runtime is polynomial and the
verifier runtime to verify that a solution is canonical is significantly lower than the
complexity of finding any solution, canonical or otherwise. Naturally this question is
particularly interesting for search problems for which a lower bound on its worst case
complexity is known or has been widely conjectured.
   We show doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic algorithms for a host of natural
problems whose complexity has long been conjectured. In particular,

   • We show a doubly efficient pseudo-deterministic proof for linear program-
     ming where the canonical solution which the prover will provide is the lexi-
     cographically greatest optimal solution for the LP. To this end, we show how
     through perturbing the linear program and strong duality this solution can be
     both computed efficiently by the prover, and verified by the verifier. The time
     of the verifier is 𝑂(𝑑2 ) for a linear program with integer data and at most 𝑑 vari-
     ables and constraints, whereas the time to solve such linear program is 𝑂(𝑑
                                                                             ˜ 𝜔)

                                          10
      by randomized algorithms [24] for 𝜔 the exponent for fast matrix multiplication
      .

   • We show a doubly efficient pseudo-deterministic proof for 3-SUM and problems
      reducible to 3-SUM where the prover is a 𝑂(𝑛2 ) time algorithm and the verifier
      takes time 𝑂(𝑛
                 ˜ 1.5 ).

   • We show a doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic proof for the hitting set prob-
      lem where the verifier runs in time 𝑂(𝑚)
                                          ˜    and the prover runs in time 𝑂(𝑚
                                                                           ˜ 2)

      where 𝑚 = 𝑆∈𝒮 |𝑆| + 𝑇 ∈𝒯 |𝑇 | for inputs collections of sets 𝒮, 𝒯 .
                ∑︀           ∑︀


   • We show a doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic proof for the Zero Weight
      Triangle problem where the verifier runs in time 𝑂(𝑛
                                                       ˜ 2+𝜔/3 ) and the prover

      runs in randomized time 𝑂(𝑛
                              ˜ 3 ). The Zero Weight Triangle problem is equivalent

      to the All-Pairs Shortest Path problem, a well-studied problem that is the
      foundation of many hardness results in graph algorithms [88, 87], under sub-
      cubic reductions.

   In the next chapter we turn our attention to non-signaling proofs. Non-signaling
proofs, motivated by quantum computation, have found applications in cryptography
and hardness of approximation. An important open problem is characterizing the
power of non-signaling proofs. It is known that 2-prover non-signaling proofs are
characterized by PSPACE, and that non-signaling proofs with poly(𝑛)-provers are
characterized by EXP. However, the power of 𝑘-prover non-signaling proofs, for
2 < 𝑘 < poly(𝑛) remained an open problem.
   In [47], we show that 𝑘-prover non-signaling proofs (with negligible soundness) for
       √
𝑘 = 𝑂( log 𝑛) are contained in PSPACE. We prove this via two different routes that
are of independent interest. In both routes we consider a relaxation of no-signaling
called sub-no-signaling. Our main technical contribution (which is used in both our
proofs) is a reduction showing how to convert any sub-no-signaling strategy with
value at least 1 − 2−Ω(𝑘 ) into a no-signaling one with value at least 2−𝑂(𝑘 ) .
                          2                                                  2



   In the first route, we show that the classical prover reduction method for converting
𝑘-prover games into 2-prover games carries over to the non-signaling setting with the

                                           11
following loss in soundness: if a 𝑘-player game has value less than 2−𝑐𝑘 (for some
                                                                                   2



constant 𝑐 > 0), then the corresponding 2-prover game has value at most 1 − 2𝑑𝑘
                                                                                               2



(for some constant 𝑑 > 0). In the second route we show that the value of a sub-non-
signaling game can be approximated in space that is polynomial in the communication
complexity and exponential in the number of provers.



1.1        Pseudo-Deterministic Proofs

In [32], Gat and Goldwasser initiated the study of probabilistic (polynomial-time)
search algorithms that, with high probability, output the same solution on differ-
ent executions.      That is, for all inputs 𝑥, the randomized algorithm 𝐴 satisfies
𝑃 𝑟𝑟1 ,𝑟2 (𝐴(𝑥, 𝑟1 ) = 𝐴(𝑥, 𝑟2 )) ≥ 1 − 1/𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦(𝑛).
       Another way of viewing such algorithms is that for a fixed binary relation 𝑅, for
every 𝑥 the algorithm associates a canonical solution 𝑠(𝑥) satisfying (𝑥, 𝑠(𝑥)) ∈ 𝑅,
and on input 𝑥 the algorithm outputs 𝑠(𝑥) with overwhelmingly high probability.
Algorithms that satisfy this condition are called pseudo-deterministic, because they
essentially offer the same functionality as deterministic algorithms; that is, they pro-
duce a canonical output for each possible input (except with small error probability)1 .
In contrast, arbitrary probabilistic algorithms that solve search problems may output
different solutions when presented with the same input (but using different internal
coin tosses); that is, on input 𝑥, the output may arbitrarily distributed among all
valid solutions for 𝑥 (e.g. it may be uniformly distributed).
       Several pseudo-deterministic algorithms have been found which improve (some-
times significantly) on the corresponding best known deterministic algorithm. This
is the case for finding quadratic non-residues modulo primes, generators for certain
cyclic groups, non-zeros of multi-variate polynomials, matchings in bipartite graphs
in RNC, and sub-linear algorithms for several problems [36, 39, 32, 44]. For other
problems, such as finding unique primes of a given length, pseudo-deterministic algo-
   1
    In fact, by amplifying the success probability, one can ensure that as black boxes, pseudo-
deterministic algorithms are indistinguishable from deterministic algorithms by a polynomial time
machine.


                                               12
rithms remain elusive (for the case of primes, it has been shown that there exists a
subexponential time pseudo-deterministic algorithm which works on infinitely many
input sizes [66]).
   In this work we extend the study of pseudo-determinism in the context of proba-
bilistic algorithms to the context of interactive proofs and non-determinism. We view
pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs as a natural extension of pseudo-deterministic
randomized polynomial time algorithms: the goal of the latter is to find canonical
solutions to search problems whereas the goal of the former is to prove that a solution
to a search problem is canonical to a probabilistic polynomial time verifier. Alter-
natively, one may think of the powerful but possibly untrusted prover as aiding the
probabilistic polynomial time verifier to find canonical solutions to search problems.
This naturally models the cryptographic setting when an authority generates system-
wide parameters (e.g. an elliptic curve for all to use or a generator of a finite group)
and it must prove that the parameters were chosen properly. Alternatively, one may
think of the powerful prover as aiding the probabilistic polynomial time verifier to find
canonical solutions to search problems, with high probability over the randomness of
the verifier.


1.1.1     Our Contribution

Consider the search problem of finding a large clique in a graph. A nondeterministic
efficient algorithm for this problem exists: simply guess a set of vertices 𝐶, confirm
in polynomial time that the set of vertices forms a clique, and either output 𝐶 or
reject if 𝐶 is not a clique. Interestingly, in addition to being nondeterministic, there
is another feature of this algorithm; on the same input graph there may be many
possible solutions to the search problem and any one of them may be produced as
output. Namely, on different executions of the algorithm, on the same input graph
𝐺, one execution may guess clique 𝐶 and another execution may guess clique 𝐶 ′ ̸= 𝐶,
and both are valid accepting executions.
   A natural question is whether for each graph with a large clique, there exists a
unique canonical large clique 𝐶 which can be verified by a polynomial time verifier:

                                           13
that is, can the verifier 𝑉 be convinced that the clique 𝐶 is the canonical one for
the input graph? We note that natural candidates which come to mind, such as
being the lexicographically smallest large clique, are not known to be verifiable in
polynomial time (but seem to require the power of Σ2 computation). Indeed, the work
of Hemaspaandra et al [45] implies the collapse of the polynomial time hierarchy if for
every satisfiable SAT formula there exists a canonical assignment which is polynomial
time verifiable.

   In this work, we consider this question in the setting of interactive proofs, going
beyond NP proofs to interactive proofs. Interactive proofs extend NP, and we ask
whether the interactive proof mechanism enables provers to convince a probailistic
verifier of the “uniqueness of their answer” (properly defined) with high probability.

   We define pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs for a search problem 𝑅 (consist-
ing of pairs (𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒, 𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛)) as a pair of interacting algorithms: a probabilistic
polynomial time verifier and a computationally unbounded prover which on a com-
mon input instance 𝑥 engage in rounds of interaction at the end of which with high
probability the verifier output a canonical solution 𝑦 for 𝑥 if any solution exists and
otherwise rejects 𝑥. Analogously to the case of interactive proofs for languages, we
require that for every input 𝑥, there exists an honest prover which sends a correct
solution 𝑦 to the verifier when one exists and for all dishonest provers the probability
that the verifier will accept an incorrect solution is small. Most importantly, we are
interested in an additional feature: for every input 𝑥 the verifier is guaranteed with
high probability over its randomness to accept a canonical (unique) solution 𝑦 if any
solution exists and otherwise reject. Importantly, a dishonest prover may not cause
the verifier to output a solution other than the canonical (unique) one (except with
very low probability).

   One may think of the powerful prover as aiding the probabilistic polynomial time
verifier to find canonical solutions to search problems, with high probability over the
randomness of the verifier. The challenge is that pseudo-determinism should hold not
only with respect to the randomness, but also with respect to the prover: a malicious
prover should not be able to cause the verifier to output a solution other than the

                                          14
canonical unique one. In addition to the intrinsic complexity theoretic interest in this
problem, consistency or predictability of different executions on the same input are
natural requirements from protocols.
   We define pseudo-deterministic IP (psdIP) to be the class of search problems 𝑅
(relation on inputs and solutions) for which there exists a probabilistic polynomial
time verifier for which for every 𝑥 ∈ 𝑅𝐿 , there is a good powerful prover that will
convince the verifier to output with high probability a unique witness 𝑠(𝑥) (referred
to as the “canonical” witness) such that (𝑥, 𝑠(𝑥)) ∈ 𝑅; and for every 𝑥 not in 𝑅𝐿 (the
set of 𝑥 such that there does not exist a 𝑦 satisfying (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ 𝑅), for all provers the
verifier will reject with high probability. Furthermore, for all provers , the probability
that on 𝑥 ∈ 𝑅𝐿 , the verifier will output any witness 𝑦 other than the “canonical” 𝑠(𝑥)
is small.
   Important Remark: We remark that proving uniqueness of a witness for any
NP problem can obviously be done in by an interactive proof with a PSPACE prover
– the prover can convince the verifier that a witness provided is a lexicographically
smallest witness – using an Arthur-Merlin proof which takes a polynomial number of
rounds of interaction between prover and verifier following the celebrated Sum-Check
protocol by [77] (see preliminary section). The interesting question to ask is: do
constant-round pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs exist for hard problems in
NP for which many witnesses exist?
We let psdAM refer to those pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs in which a con-
stant number of rounds is used.


Our Results


Graph Isomorphism is in pseudo-deterministic AM: Theorem 3.1.1: There
exists a pseudo-deterministic constant-round Arthur-Merlin protocol for finding an
isomorphism between two given graphs.
   Recall that the first protocol showing graph non-isomorphism is in constant round
IP was shown by [37] and later shown to be possible using public coins via the

                                           15
general transformation of private to public coins [42]. Our algorithm finds a unique
isomorphism by producing the lexicographically first isomorphism. In order to prove
that a particular isomorphism between input graph pairs is lexicographically smallest,
the prover will prove in a sequence of sub-protocols to the verifier that a sequence
of graphs suitably defined are non-isomorphic. In an alternative construction, we
exhibit an interactive protocol that computes the automorphism group of a graph in
a verifiable fashion.


SAT is not in pseudo-deterministic AM: Theorem 3.2.2: if any NP-complete
problem has a a pseudo-deterministic constant round AM protocol, then, NP ⊆ coNP/𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦
and the polynomial hierarchy collapses to the third level, showing that it is unlikely
that NP complete problems have pseudo-deterministic constant round AM protocols.
   This result extends the work of [45] which shows that if there are polynomial time
unique verifiable proofs for SAT, then the polynomial hierarchy collapses. Essentially,
their result held for deterministic interactive proofs (i.e., NP), and we extend their
result to probabilistic interactive proofs with constant number of rounds (i.e., AM).


Every problem in search-BPP is in subexponential-time pseudo-deterministic
MA: Theorem 3.3.3: For every problem in search-BPP, there exists a pseudo-deterministic
MA protocol where the verifier takes subexponential time on infinitely many input
lengths.
   The idea of the result is to use known circuit lower bounds to get pseudo-deterministic
subexponential time MA protocols for problems in search-BPP for infinitely many in-
put lengths. We remark that recently Oliveira and Santhanam [66] showed a subex-
ponential time pseudo-deterministic algorithm for infinitely many input lengths for
all properties which have inverse polynomial density and are testable in probabilistic
polynomial time. (An example of such a property is the property of being prime, as
the set of primes has polynomial density.) In their construction, the condition of high
density is required in order for the property to intersect with their subexponential-size
hitting set. (Subsequent work in [46] also drops this requirement but only results in

                                           16
an average-case pseudo-deterministic algorithm.) In the case of MA, unconditional
circuit lower bounds for MA with a verifier which runs in exponential time have been
shown by Miltersen et al [64], which allows us to no longer require inverse polyno-
mial density. Hence, we can obtain a pseudo-deterministic MA algorithm from circuit
lower bounds. Thus, compared to [66], our result shows a pseudo-derandomization
(for a subexponential verifier and infinitely many input sizes 𝑛) for all problems in
search-BPP (and not just those with high density), but requires a prover.


Pseudo-deterministic NL equals search-NL: Theorem 3.4.1: For every search
problem in search-NL, there exists a pseudo-deterministic NL protocol.
   We define pseudo-deterministic NL to be the class of search problems 𝑅 (a relation
on inputs and solutions) for which there exists log-space non-deterministic algorithm
𝑀 (Turing machines) such that for every input 𝑥, there exists a unique 𝑠(𝑥) such
that 𝑅(𝑥, 𝑠(𝑥)) = 1 and 𝑀 (𝑥) outputs 𝑠(𝑥) or rejects 𝑥. Namely, there are no two
accepting paths for input 𝑥 that result in different outputs.
   To prove the above theorem, we look at the problem of directed connectivity (that
is, given a directed graph 𝐺 with two vertices 𝑠 and 𝑡, we find a path from 𝑠 to 𝑡), and
we show that it is possible to find the lexicographically first path of shortest length
in NL. To do so, we first find the length 𝑑 of the shortest path, which can be done
in NL. Then, we find the lexicographically first outneighbor 𝑢 of 𝑠 such that there
is a path of length 𝑑 − 1 from 𝑢 to 𝑡. This can be done by going in order over all
outneighbors of 𝑠, and for each of them checking if there is a path of length 𝑑 − 1
to 𝑡 (if there is not such a path, that can be demonstrated in NL since NL = coNL
[50, 78]). By recursively applying this protocol to find a path from 𝑢 to 𝑡, we end up
obtaining the lexicographically first path of shortest length, which is unique.


Structural Results: We show a few structural results regarding pseudo-deterministic
interactive proofs In Section 3.5. Specifically, we show that psdAM equals to the class
search−Ppromise−(AM∩coAM) , where for valid inputs 𝑥, all queries to the oracle must be
in the promise. We show similar results in the case of pseudo-deterministic MA and

                                          17
pseudo-deterministic NP.


1.1.2     Other Related Work

In their seminal paper on NP with unique solutions, Valiant and Vazirani asked the
following question: is the inherent intractability of NP-complete problems caused by
the fact that NP-complete problems have many solutions? They show this is not
the case by exhibiting a problem – SAT with unique solutions – which is NP-hard
under randomized reductions. They then showed how their result enables to show the
NP-hardness under randomized reductions for a few related problems such as parity-
SAT. We point out that our question is different. We are not restricting our study to
problems (e.g. satisfiable formulas) with unique solutions. Rather, we consider hard
problems for which there may be exponentially many solutions, and ask if one can
focus on one of them and verify it in polynomial time. In the language of satisfiability,
𝜑 can be any satisfiable formula with exponentially many satisfying assignments; set
𝑠(𝜑) to be a unique valued function which outputs a satisfying assignment for 𝜑. We
study whether there exists an 𝑠 which can be efficiently computed, or which has an
efficient interactive proof.
   The question of computing canonical labellings of graphs was considered by Babai
and Luks [6] in the early eighties. Clearly graph isomorphism is polynomial time re-
ducible to computing canonical labellings of graphs (compute the canonical labeling
for your graphs and compare), however it is unknown whether the two problems
are equivalent (although finding canonical labellings in polynomial time seems to be
known for all classes of graphs for which isomorphism can be computed in polyno-
mial time). The problem of computing a set of generators (of size 𝑂(log 𝑛)) of the
automorphism group of a graph 𝐺 was shown by Mathon [62] (among other results)
to be polynomial-time reducible to the problem of computing the isomorphism of a
graph. We use this in our proof that graph isomorphism is in psdAM.
   Finally, we mention that recently another notion of uniqueness has been studied in
the context of interactive proofs by Reingold et al [71], called unambiguous interactive
proofs where the prover has a unique successful strategy. This again differs from

                                           18
pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs, in that we don’t assume (nor guarantee) a
unique strategy by the successful prover, we only require that the prover proves that
the solution (or witness) the verifier receives is unique (with high probability).


1.1.3    Subsequent Work

In [46], inspired by this work, Holden shows that for every BPP search problem
there exists an algorithm A which for infinitely many input lengths 𝑛 and for every
polynomial-time samplable distribution over inputs of length 𝑛 runs in subexponential
time and produces a unique answer with high probability on inputs drawn from the
distribution and over A’s random coins.
   [46] expands on the work of Oliveira and Santhanam [66] in several ways. Whereas
the latter give a pseudo-deterministic algorithm for estimating the acceptance proba-
bility of a circuit on inputs of a given length, the former applies to general search-BPP
problems, where the input is a string of a given length over some alphabet and al-
gorithm’s A goal is to output a solution that satisfies a BPP testable relation with
the input string. Holden [46] shows that for infinitely many input lengths, average-
case (over the input distribution) pseudo-deterministic algorithms are possible for
problems in search-BPP.




                                           19
1.2     Doubly-Efficient Pseudo-Deterministic Proofs

Pseudo-deterministic algorithms, introduced by Gat and Goldwasser [32], are proba-
bilistic (polynomial-time) algorithms for search problems that, with high probability,
find a unique output for each input except with negligible error probability. Such
output for input 𝑥 is referred to as the ”canonical” output for 𝑥. Algorithms that sat-
isfy the aforementioned condition are of importance whenever uniqueness or "repro-
ducibility" of the answer is important. This is of particular relevance in a distributed
or parallel setting when an algorithm is executed by multiple parties for whom it
is challenging (for reasons of trust or efficiency requirement) to agree on a common
sequence of unbiased random coins.

   More recently, Goldwasser, Grossman and Holden [40] extended the study to
pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs for search problems, denoted psdIP. The new
goal was to prove to a probabilistic polynomial time verifier that a solution to a search
problem is canonical. The motivation was to address those search problems for which
polynomial time algorithms are not known and for which many solutions are pos-
sible, such as for graph isomorphism. In this case the search problem is to find an
isomorphism between two graphs if one exists and an example of a canonical solution
would be the lexicographically smallest isomorphism. One may think of the powerful
prover as aiding the probabilistic polynomial time verifier to find canonical solutions
to search problems, with high probability over the randomness of the verifier. The
challenge is that a malicious prover should not be able to convince the verifier to ac-
cept any solution other than the unique canonical one and that the interaction should
be constant round. If unbounded number of rounds are allowed, the 𝐼𝑃 = 𝑃 𝑆𝑃 𝐴𝐶𝐸
characterization implies that psdIP = 𝐼𝑃 .

   In this work, we turn our attention to studying doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic
proofs. That is pseudo-deterministic proofs with the extra requirement that the prover
is efficient as well. Our aim is to show doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic proofs for
polynomial time problems, where the prover runs in polynomial time in the complex-
ity of the problem and the verifier can verify that a solution is canonical significantly

                                           20
more efficiently than solving the problem without the presence of the prover. We re-
mark that in the doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic proofs below, except for linear
programming, the runtime of the prover is at most a constant times the runtime of
the best known deterministic algorithm.


1.2.1    Our Results

A new notion: Doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs

We define doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs for a search prob-
lem 𝑅 of complexity 𝑇 (𝑛) (consisting of pairs (𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒, 𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛)) with associated
canonization function 𝑐 as a pair of interacting algorithms: a probabilistic polynomial
time prover which runs in time 𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦(𝑇 (𝑛)) and a probabilistic verifier which runs in
time 𝑜(𝑇 (𝑛)) which on a common input instance 𝑥 engage in constant number of
rounds of interaction at the end of which with high probability the verifier outputs a
canonical solution 𝑦 = 𝑐(𝑥) if any solution exists and otherwise rejects 𝑥. Analogously
to the case of completeness in interactive proofs for languages, we require that for
every input 𝑥, there exists an honest prover which can send the correct solution 𝑐(𝑥)
to the verifier when one exists. Analogously to the case of soundness, no dishonest
prover can cause the verifier to output a solution other than 𝑐(𝑥) (the canonical one)
(except with very low probability).
   A few remarks are in order.

   • Naturally this question is particularly interesting for search problems for which
     a lower bound on its worst case complexity 𝑇 (𝑛) is known or has been widely
     conjectured. This will drive our choice of problems for which we show doubly
     efficient pseudo-deterministic proofs.

   • Doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic proofs for search problems 𝑅 with associ-
     ated canonization function 𝑐 are closely related to computation delegation of
     computing 𝑐(𝑥) on input 𝑥. The delegation problem was posed by Goldwasser,
     Kalai, and Rothblum [41] and become known under the name doubly-efficient
     interactive proof systems. The difference in the requirements is that [41] allow

                                          21
  the prover to be any polynomial time algorithm and the verifier to run in linear
  (up to log factors) time and addresses deterministic computations. Doubly-
  efficient interactive proofs have been shown by [41] for log-space uniform sets
  in NC (or, more generally, to inputs that are acceptable by log-space uniform
  bounded-depth circuits, where the number of rounds in the proof system is lin-
  early related to the depth of the circuit). Reingold, Rothblum and Rothblum
  [71] showed that any set decidable in polynomial-time by an algorithm of space
  complexity 𝑠(𝑛) ≤ 𝑛0.499 , has a constant-round interactive proof system in which
  the prover runs in polynomial time and the verifier runs in time 𝑂(𝑛).
                                                                   ˜     Finally
  Goldreich and Rothblum [38] show direct constructions of doubly-efficient in-
  teractive proof systems for problems in P that are believed to have relatively
  high complexity such as 𝑡-CLIQUE and 𝑡-SUM.

  We remark that works on proof systems and delegation did not stay within
  the realm of theory alone. Rather, they became the theoretical basis for sev-
  eral system implementations of a delegation system as they offered reason-
  ably efficiently realizable protocols. Indeed, there is a flourishing literature
  surrounding the refinement and implementation of these theoretical protocols
  [7, 8, 72, 11, 12, 16, 22, 25, 26, 30, 59, 67, 74, 76, 75, 79, 80, 83, 84] (see [85]
  for a survey). We hope that our proposed study of doubly-efficient pseudo-
  deterministic proofs can similarly impact practice (and beyond).


• The setting of doubly-efficient interactive proofs naturally models a crypto-
  graphic setting where users wish to have access to common cryptographic system-
  wide keys or parameters, such as a pair (𝑔, 𝑝) for 𝑍𝑝 with prime 𝑝 and generator
  𝑔 for a given input length 𝑛. A central authority (with additional computa-
  tional power) can of course choose the common system-wide parameter and
  broadcast it to all, but then who is to say that the central party did not chose
  its randomness in a way that would force an output for which the trusted center
  knew some “trapdoor” information which would enable it to break the under-
  lying cryptographic security? Viewing the generation of a cryptographic key

                                       22
     as a solution to a search problem 𝑅 per security parameter, a doubly-efficient
     pseudo-deterministic proof for 𝑅 would ensure that the prover had no choice in
     which parameter to broadcast as he could prove that his solution is canonical.




Doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic algorithms for linear programming
and fine-grained complexity problems


Linear Programming: We show a doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic proof for
the linear programming problem. Verifying an optimal solution to a linear program-
ming problem can be done thanks to strong duality: there exists a solution to the
dual problem with the same value as the solution to the primal problem. We show
that a special optimal solution, namely the lexicographically greatest solution, can
be efficiently obtained by the prover, and that the prover can convince the verifier
that the LP solution it gives to the verifier is indeed the lexicographically greatest
solution; this is done through perturbing the linear program and strong duality. More
concretely, every linear program (say, where the objective is to maximize) has a cor-
responding dual linear program, a minimization problem, with the property that (i)
(weak duality) any feasible solution to the dual provides an upper bound on the opti-
mal primal value and (ii) (strong duality) there exists an optimal solution to the dual
with the same value as the primal optimal solution. Furthermore, there exist compact
polynomial-sized solutions to the primal and dual linear programs. Therefore such a
polynomial-sized feasible solution to the dual with an equal value as a primal solution
provides a compact certificate for the optimality of this primal solution.

   The currently best known time to solve a linear program with integer data and at
most 𝑑 variables and constraints is 𝑂(𝑑
                                    ˜ 𝜔 ) randomized [24] where 𝜔 corresponds to the

exponent for fast matrix multiplication which is currently at ≈ 2.37 and 𝑂()
                                                                         ˜ hides

polylog factors including a log(1/𝛿) factor to account for the accuracy 𝛿 in solving the
linear program. The time of the verifier to verify a pair of primal and dual optimal
solution is only 𝑂(𝑑2 ) as this only requires matrix-vector multiplication.

                                          23
Problems studied in fine-grained complexity: We next show doubly-efficient
pseudo-deterministic proofs for several fine-grained complexity problems where the
verifier significantly beats the conjectured time. The challenge is to find a proof where
the prover’s running time does not change too much from the running time of the
deterministic algorithm. In the case of two of our problems, making the running time
close to the running time of the deterministic algorithm requires the prover to run in
a randomized fashion.
   The 3-SUM problem has an easy 𝑂(𝑛2 ) time algorithm which can be improved
by polylogarithmic factors. It is an outstanding open question whether there is an
algorithm that significantly improves 𝑂(𝑛2 ). Finding such an algorithm would yield
algorithms for a host of other problems in computational geometry [31, 27]. Here, we
show a doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic proofs that outputs the lexicographically
first such triple of elements where the verifier takes time 𝑂(𝑛
                                                            ˜ 1.5 ). We crucially use

the fact that [20] gives a nondeterministic proof that there is no triple of elements
that sum to 0 where the verifier takes time 𝑂(𝑛
                                            ˜ 1.5 ).

   The hitting set problem is the problem of finding a set in a collection of sets that
intersects every set in a different collection of sets. We show a pseudo-deterministic
proof for the hitting set problem where the verifier runs in time 𝑂(𝑚)
                                                                    ˜     and the prover
runs in time 𝑂(𝑚
               ˜ 2 ) where 𝑚 =
                                                 𝑇 ∈𝒯 |𝑇 | for inputs 𝒮, 𝒯 collections of
                                  ∑︀           ∑︀
                                     𝑆∈𝒮 |𝑆| +

sets. This problem has been conjectured to take 𝑚2−𝑜(1) time [82].
   The All-Pairs Shortest Path problem is a well-studied problem that is the
foundation of many hardness results in graph algorithms [88, 87]. In particular, the
Zero Weight Triangle problem is equivalent to the All-Pairs Shortest Path problem
under subcubic reductions. We show a doubly efficient pseudo-deterministic proof for
the Zero Weight Triangle problem where the verifier runs in time 𝑂(𝑛
                                                                 ˜ 2+𝜔/3 ) and the

prover runs in randomized time 𝑂(𝑛
                               ˜ 3 ).


Techniques

All our results take on the following flavor: For a search problem 𝑅, the pseudo-
deterministic algorithm, given 𝑥, finds the lexicographically first 𝑦 such that 𝑅(𝑥, 𝑦).

                                           24
To do this, it asks whether there exists 𝑦 ′ such that (𝑥, 0𝑦 ′ ) ∈ 𝑅, 𝑦 ′ such that
(𝑥, 1𝑦 ′ ) ∈ 𝑅, etc. and finds the first 𝑦 such that 𝑅(𝑥, 𝑦) recursively. The notion of
"lexicographically first" can be easily generalized to allow other orderings and other
encodings of the input. This suggests that more generally doubly-efficient pseudo-
deterministic proofs for search are the ones where there is a doubly-efficient proof
of existence and a doubly-efficient proof of nonexistence of solutions to said search
problem. A more general theorem (Lemma 4.1.3) follows under general conditions.




                                          25
1.3     Non-Signaling

Shortly after interactive proofs were introduced, multi-party interactive proofs were
introduced by Ben-Or, Goldwasser, Kilian and Wigderson [10]. In a multi-prover in-
teractive proof (MIP) a verifier is interacting with several non-communicating provers.
This class was proven to be extremely powerful, by Babai, Fortnow and Lund, who
showed that MIP = NEXP [5]. The power of this class stems from the assumption
that the provers behave locally, namely, they see only the messages sent to them, and
do not have any information about messages sent to the other provers.

   In reality, however, it is not clear how to ensure that the provers behave locally.
Even if the provers are placed in different rooms, with no communication channels
between them, they may share quantum entanglement, which can cause their strate-
gies to be correlated, and non-local. These attacks can be powerful, even though at
first they may seem to be benign [23].

   These quantum strategies motivated the notion of no-signaling strategies, which
is the subject of this work. The notion of no-signaling strategies was first studied in
physics in the context of Bell inequalities by Khalfin and Tsirelson [58] and Rastall
[70], and it has gained much attention after it was reintroduced by Popescu and
Rohrlich [69]. No-signaling attacks are more general than quantum attacks. In a
no-signaling attack the cheating provers can collude, and thus each answer can be
a function of all the queries. The only restriction is that for any subset of provers
the answers provided by these provers should not convey any information about the
queries given to the other provers. Namely, the only restriction that is placed on
the (possibly colluding) cheating provers, is that their answers cannot be seen as
“evidence" that information has travelled between them.

   If we think of the provers as being placed very far away from each other (say in
different planets), then the no-signaling restriction allows the provers to behave arbi-
trarily, as long as they adhere to the physical principle that information cannot travel
faster than light, a consequence of Einstein’s special relativity theory. In particular,
all the strategies that can be realized by provers that share entangled quantum states

                                          26
are no-signaling strategies. Moreover, the principle that information cannot travel
faster than light is a central principle in physics, and is likely to remain valid in any
future ultimate theory of nature, since its violation means that information could be
sent from future to past. Therefore, soundness against no-signaling strategies is likely
to ensure soundness against provers that obey a future ultimate theory of physics, and
not only the current physical theories that we have, that are known to be incomplete.
       Importantly, although no-signaling strategies are motivated by quantum entan-
glement, they found compelling applications outside the realm of quantum physics.
In particular, they have been proved to be instrumental for constructing succinct
delegation schemes (under standard cryptographic assumptions), and in the realm of
hardness of approximation.


The applicability of no-signaling to computation delegation. Kalai, Raz,
and Rothblum [56] demonstrated the significance of no-signaling by showing that any
MIP that is secure against no-signaling attacks2 can be converted into a single-prover
one-round proof system (with computational soundness). More specifically, they show
that the PIR (or FHE) heuristic, proposed by Biehl, Meyer, and Wetzel et. al. [13],
for converting any MIP to a single prover one-round proof system is sound if the
underlying MIP has no-signaling soundness.
       In [57], the same authors constructed an MIP that is secure against no-signaling
attacks for every language in EXP, thus yielding the first one-round delegation scheme
for all deterministic computations, under standard cryptographic assumptions. This
application of no-signaling to computation delegation has proved to be very fruitful,
and yielded numerous followup works (e.g., [54, 15, 9])


The applicability of no-signaling to hardness of approximation. Kalai, Raz
and Regev [55] showed the significance of no-signaling to hardness of approximation.
In particular, they showed that it is hard to approximate the value of a linear program
                𝑜(1)
in space 2log 𝑛        , even if the polytope is fixed (i.e., even if the algorithm has unbounded
   2
    To be precise, [56] considered a slightly more relaxed notion, which they called statistical no-
signaling. We neglect this difference here.


                                                  27
time to preprocess the polytope), and even if all the coefficients are non-negative
(which is the regime where hardness of approximation is most meaningful). More
specifically, they showed that there exists a fixed polytope (corresponding to the set
of all possible non-signaling strategies) such that approximating the value of a linear
program (with positive coefficients) is P-complete with a polylog-space reduction.
Prior work [28, 73, 29, 61], demonstrated such hardness of approximation for the case
where the polytope was not fixed (and preprocessing is not allowed).
The importance of the notion of no-signaling, gives rise to the following fundamental
question:

   What is the power of multi-prover proofs that are sound against no-signaling strate-
gies?

This is precisely the question we study in this work. In what follows, we denote the
class of one-round multi-prover interactive proofs with no-signaling soundness by NS
MIP. We denote by 𝑘-prover NS MIP the class of one-round 𝑘-prover interactive
proofs with no-signaling soundness.


1.3.1       Prior Work

Ito, Kobayashi and Matsumoto [53] proved that 2-prover NS MIP contains PSPACE
(by proving that the 2-prover scheme of Cai, Condon, and Lipton [18] is in fact secure
against no-signaling strategies). Shortly after, Ito [51] proved that 2-prover NS MIP
is contained in PSPACE, thus characterizing the power of 2-prover NS MIP. The
power of 𝑘-prover NS MIP, for 𝑘 ≥ 2, remained open.
   It is known that NS MIP is contained in EXP since one can find the best no-
signaling strategy by solving an exponential-size linear program. Therefore, the power
of a 𝑘-prover NS MIP lies between PSPACE and EXP. More recently, Kalai, Raz
and Rothblum [57] showed that there exists a constant 𝑐 ∈ N such that for every
𝑘 ≥ log𝑐 𝑛, 𝑘-prover NS MIP contains EXP, thus characterizing the power of 𝑘-prover
NS MIP for 𝑘 ≥ log𝑐 𝑛.
   These works left open the following question: What is the power of 𝑘-prover NS

                                          28
MIP for 2 < 𝑘 < log𝑐 𝑛?


1.3.2       Our Results

Throughout this manuscript, we assume that an MIP has completeness at least
1 − negl(𝑛), and has soundness negl(𝑛), for some negligible function negl(𝑛).3 This
assumption is standard in cryptography. We mention that often in the definition of
interactive proofs (or possibly in the definition of MIPs), completeness is required to
be greater than 2/3 and soundness at most 1/3; this is because it is well known that
this gap can be amplified to 1 − negl(𝑛) and negl(𝑛) via parallel repetition (where
the verifier accepts if 2/3 − 𝜖 of the repetitions are accepted, for some small constant
𝜖 > 0). In the no-signaling regime we do not have a parallel repetition theorem [49],
and hence cannot amplify soundness via parallel repetition.
                                                 √
   We prove that 𝑘-prover NS MIP with 𝑘 = 𝑂( log 𝑛) is contained in PSPACE.
More generally, we prove the following theorem.

Theorem 1.3.1 (Informal). There exist constants 𝑐, 𝑑 > 0 such that any 𝑘-prover
                                                      2                                          2
MIP with no-signaling soundness at most 2−𝑐𝑘 and completeness at least 1 − 2−𝑑𝑘 ,
                      (︁          )︁
                                2
is contained in SPACE poly(𝑛, 2𝑘 ) .

       We emphasize that this theorem holds only for MIPs that have negligible sound-
ness and almost perfect completeness. In particular, we don’t rule out the existence of
a 𝑘-prover MIP with NS soundness 1/3 and completeness 2/3 for EXP, with 𝑘 = log 𝑛.
However, the soundness and completeness gap of such MIPs could not be amplified
(to 1 − negl(𝑛)) without adding provers.
       We present two alternative routes for proving Theorem 1.3.1, each is of indepen-
dent interest. Both routes consider the more relaxed notion of sub-no-signaling, as
defined in [60] (for the goal of obtaining a parallel repetition theorem for no-signaling
strategies). Both rely on the following theorem that asserts that one can convert any
sub-no-signaling strategy into a no-signaling one, albeit with a substantial loss in the
success probability.
   3
    A function 𝜇 : N → N is said to be negligible if approaches zero faster than the inverse of any
polynomial.


                                                29
Theorem 1.3.2 (Informal). There exist constants 𝑐, 𝑑 > 0 such that for any 𝑘-prover
MIP, if there exists a sub-no-signaling strategy that succeeds with probability at least
          2
1 − 2−𝑑𝑘 , then there exists a no-signaling strategy that succeeds with probability at
              2
least 2−𝑐𝑘 .

    The proof of this theorem contains the bulk of technical difficulty of this work,
and is used as a building block in both proofs of Theorem 1.3.1. See Section ?? for
the proof idea, and see Section 5.2 for the precise theorem statement and proof.
    We note that a related theorem was proven by Lancien and Winter [60], who
showed that, for every game, if there exists a sub-no-signaling strategy that succeeds
with probability at least 1 − 𝜖 then there exists a no-signaling strategy that succeeds
with probability at least 1 − Γ𝜖, where Γ may be as large as exponential in the com-
munication complexity. This bound does not seem to be tight enough in order to
obtain Theorem 1.3.1.


    We next present our two alternative routes for proving Theorem 1.3.1 (using The-
orem 1.3.2). The first is via a prover reduction method, and the second is via approx-
imating the sub-no-signaling value efficiently.


Reducing the number of provers. We show that (a slight variant of) the classical
prover reduction method for converting a 𝑘-prover MIP into a 2-prover MIP, carries
over to the no-signaling setting, albeit a substantial loss in soundness (which depends
on 𝑘).
    More specifically, in the seminal work of Ben-Or, Goldwasser, Kilian and Wigder-
son [10], they presented a general method for converting a 𝑘-prover MIP into a 2-
prover MIP, where in the resulting 2-prover MIP the verifier sends one prover the
queries (𝑞1 , . . . , 𝑞𝑘 ) corresponding to all the 𝑘 provers in the underlying 𝑘-prover
scheme, and expects to get back 𝑘 answers (𝑎1 , . . . , 𝑎𝑘 ); he sends the other prover a
single query 𝑞𝑖 corresponding to a random index 𝑖 ∈ [𝑘], and gets back an answer 𝑎′𝑖 .
The verifier accepts if and only if 𝑎′𝑖 = 𝑎𝑖 and if the verifier in the 𝑘-prover MIP
accepts the answers (𝑎1 , . . . , 𝑎𝑘 ).

                                           30
   In the no-signaling setting, we slightly modify this transformation, by having the
verifier in the 2-prover MIP send the second prover a subset of queries {𝑞𝑖 }𝑖∈𝑆 for a
randomly chosen subset 𝑆 ⊂ [𝑘] (as opposed to a single query 𝑞𝑖 corresponding to a
single index 𝑖 ∈ [𝑘]), and accepts if and only if the answers (𝑎1 , . . . , 𝑎𝑘 ) of the first
prover are accepted by the verifier in the 𝑘-prover MIP and if the answers of the
second prover, denote by (𝑎′𝑖 )𝑖∈𝑆 satisfy that 𝑎′𝑖 = 𝑎𝑖 for every 𝑖 ∈ 𝑆.

Theorem 1.3.3 (Informal). There exist constants 𝑐, 𝑑 > 0 such that for every 𝑘-
                                                                                   2
prover MIP Π = (𝑃1 , . . . , 𝑃𝑘 , 𝑉 ) with no-signaling soundness at most 2−𝑐𝑘 , the 2-
prover MIP, obtained by performing the prover reduction transformation (described
                                                               2
above) on Π, has no-signaling soundness at most 1 − 2−𝑑𝑘 .

   We prove Theorem 1.3.3 by using Theorem 1.3.2. We refer the reader to Section ??
for the proof idea, and Section 5.1.1 for the precise theorem statement and proof.
   We next argue that Theorem 1.3.3 implies Theorem 1.3.1. Let 𝑐, 𝑑 be the constants
from Theorem 1.3.3. We prove Theorem 1.3.1 with constants 𝑐′ = 𝑐 and 𝑑′ = 2𝑑. To
this end, fix any 𝑘-prover MIP for a language 𝐿 with no signaling soundness 2−𝑐𝑘 and
                                                                                       2



completeness 1 − 2−2𝑑𝑘 . Use Theorem 1.3.3 to convert this MIP into a 2-prover MIP
                        2



with no-signaling soundness 1 − 2−𝑑𝑘 . By [51], the no-signaling value of any 2-player
                                        2



game can be approximated up to an additive factor of 𝜖 in space poly(𝑛, 1/𝜖). Setting
𝜖 = 2−2𝑑𝑘 , there exists an algorithm 𝒜 that runs in space poly(𝑛, 2𝑘 ), such that on
            2                                                                2



input an element 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 ∩ 𝐿 it outputs a value 𝑣 ≥ 1 − 2 · 2−2𝑑𝑘 , and on input an
                                                                         2



element 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 ∖ 𝐿 it outputs a value 𝑣 ≤ 1 − 2−𝑑𝑘 + 2−2𝑑𝑘 . This algorithm can
                                                           2         2



be used to decide whether 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿 (assuming without loss of generality that 𝑑 > 𝑘22 ),
implying that 𝐿 ∈ SPACE(poly(𝑛, 2𝑘 )).
                                        2




Approximating the sub-no-signaling value. We next present an alternative
route for proving Theorem 1.3.1, without going through the prover reduction method
presented above. Instead we prove the following theorem, which is of independent
interest.

Theorem 1.3.4 (Informal). The sub-no-signaling value of any 𝑘-prover MIP can be
approximated up to an additive factor 𝜖 by a poly(𝑛, 2𝑘 , 1/𝜖)-space algorithm.

                                             31
   In particular this theorem implies the following corollary.

Corollary 1.3.5 (Informal). 𝑘-prover subNS MIP is contained in SPACE poly(𝑛, 2𝑘 ) .
                                                                    (︀           )︀


   We mention that a related (yet weaker) theorem was proven in [48], where it was
shown that given an MIP, one can distinguish between the case that its value is 1
(i.e., there exists a local strategy that is accepted with probability 1) and the case
that its sub-no-signaling value is at most 1 − 𝛿, in space poly(𝑛, 2𝑘 , 1/𝛿). This does
not seem to be strong enough for us to use in order to obtain Theorem 1.3.1.
   We next argue that Theorem 1.3.4 and Theorem 1.3.2 imply Theorem 1.3.1. To
this end, let 𝑐, 𝑑 > 0 be the constants from Theorem 1.3.2. We prove Theorem 1.3.1
with any constants 𝑐′ , 𝑑′ such that 𝑐′ > 𝑐 and 𝑑′ = 2𝑑. Fix any 𝑘-prover MIP with
                      ′ 2
soundness at most 2−𝑐 𝑘 < 2−𝑐𝑘 and completeness at least 1−22𝑑𝑘 . By Theorem 1.3.2
                               2                                  2



for every 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 ∖ 𝐿 the sub-no-signaling value the MIP on input 𝑥 must be less
than 1 − 2−𝑑𝑘 . By Theorem 1.3.4, applied with 𝜖 = 2−2𝑑𝑘 , there exists an algorithm
             2                                              2



𝒜, that given any 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 , runs in space poly(𝑛, 2𝑘 ) and approximates the sub-no-
                                                        2



signaling value of this MIP on input 𝑥 up to an additive factor 2−2𝑑𝑘 . Therefore for
                                                                      2



every 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 ∖𝐿, the algorithm 𝒜(𝑥) outputs an element 𝑣 ≤ 1−2−𝑑𝑘 +2−2𝑑𝑘 , and
                                                                          2        2



for every 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 ∩𝐿 the algorithm 𝒜(𝑥) outputs an element 𝑣 ≥ 1−2·2−2𝑑𝑘 . This
                                                                               2



algorithm can be used to decide whether 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿 (assuming without loss of generality
that 𝑑 > 𝑘22 ), implying that 𝐿 ∈ SPACE(poly(𝑛, 2𝑘 )).
                                                    2




                                          32
Chapter 2

Preliminaries

Here are the definitions that will be used throughout this thesis.



2.1     Pseudo-determinism

2.1.1      Definitions of Pseudo-determinism

In this section, we define pseudo-determinism in the context of nondeterminism and
interactive proofs. We begin by defining a search problem. Intuitively speaking,
a search problem is a problem where for an input, there may be multiple possible
outputs.

Definition 2.1.1 (Search Problem). A search problem is a relation 𝑅 consisting of
pairs (𝑥, 𝑦). We define 𝐿𝑅 to be the set of 𝑥’s such that there exists a 𝑦 satisfying
(𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ 𝑅. An algorithm solving the search problem is an algorithm that, when given
𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅 , finds a 𝑦 such that (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ 𝑅. When 𝐿𝑅 contains all strings, we say that 𝑅
is a total search problem. Otherwise, we say 𝑅 is a promise search problem.

   We now define pseudo-determinism in the context of interactive proofs. Intuitively
speaking, we say that an interactive proof is pseudo-deterministic if an honest prover
causes the verifier to output the same unique solution with high probability (canonical
completeness), and dishonest provers can only cause the verifier to output either the
unique solution or ⊥ with high probability (canonical soundness). In other words,

                                          33
dishonest provers cannot cause the verifier to output an answer which is not the unique
answer. Additionally, we have the condition that for an input 𝑥 with no solutions,
for all provers the verifier will output ⊥ with high probability (standard soundness)
We note that we use psdIP, psdAM, psdNP, psdMA, and so on, to refer to a class of
promise problems, unless otherwise stated.

Definition 2.1.2 (Pseudo-deterministic IP). A search problem 𝑅 is in pseudo-deterministic
IP (often denoted psdIP) if there exists a function 𝑠 where all 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅 satisfy
(𝑥, 𝑠(𝑥)) ∈ 𝑅, and an interactive protocol between a probabilistic polynomial time ver-
ifier algorithm 𝑉 and a prover (unbounded algorithm) 𝑃 such that for every 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅 :

   1. (Canonical Completeness) There exists a 𝑃 such that Pr𝑟 [(𝑃, 𝑉 )(𝑥, 𝑟) = 𝑠(𝑥)] ≥
         2
         3
           . (We use (𝑃, 𝑉 )(𝑥, 𝑟) to denote the output of the verifier 𝑉    when interacting
         with prover 𝑃 on input 𝑥 using randomness 𝑟).

   2. (Canonical Soundness) For all 𝑃 ′ , Pr𝑟 [(𝑃 ′ , 𝑉 )(𝑥, 𝑟) = 𝑠(𝑥) or ⊥] ≥ 23 .

And (Standard Soundness) for every 𝑥 ∈
                                     / 𝐿𝑅 , for all provers 𝑃 ′ , Pr𝑟 [(𝑃 ′ , 𝑉 )(𝑥, 𝑟) ̸=
⊥] ≤ 31 .

       One can similarly define pseudo-deterministic MA, and pseudo-deterministic AM,
where MA is a 1-round protocol, and AM is a 2-round protocol. One can show
that any constant-round interactive protocol can be reduced to a 2-round interactive
protocol [3]. Hence, the definition of pseudo-deterministic AM captures the set of all
search problems solvable in a constant number of rounds of interaction. Furthermore,
in the definition of pseudo-deterministic AM, we use public coins. One can show that
any protocol using private coins can be simulated using public coins1 [42].

Definition 2.1.3 (Pseudo-deterministic AM). A search problem 𝑅 is in pseudo-
deterministic AM (often denoted psdAM) if there exists a function 𝑠 where all 𝑥 ∈
𝐿𝑅 satisfy (𝑥, 𝑠(𝑥)) ∈ 𝑅, a probabilistic polynomial time verifier algorithm 𝑉 , and
polynomials 𝑝 and 𝑞, such that for every 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅 :
   1
    In the case where the prover is not unbounded, private coins may be more powerful than public
coins.


                                               34
   1. Pr𝑟∈{0,1}𝑝(𝑛) (∃𝑧 ∈ {0, 1}𝑞(𝑛) 𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑟, 𝑧) = 𝑠(𝑥)) ≥ 32

   2. Pr𝑟∈{0,1}𝑝(𝑛) (∀𝑧 ∈ {0, 1}𝑞(𝑛) 𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑟, 𝑧) ∈ {𝑠(𝑥), ⊥}) ≥ 32 .

And for every 𝑥 ∈
                / 𝐿𝑅 , we have Pr𝑟∈{0,1}𝑝(𝑛) (∀𝑧 ∈ {0, 1}𝑞(𝑛) 𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑟, 𝑧) = {⊥}) ≥ 23 .

Definition 2.1.4 (Pseudo-deterministic MA). A search problem 𝑅 is in pseudo-
deterministic MA (often denoted psdMA) if there exists a function 𝑠 where all 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅
satisfy (𝑥, 𝑠(𝑥)) ∈ 𝑅 and |𝑠(𝑥)| ≤ 𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦(𝑥), a probabilistic polynomial time verifier 𝑉
such that for every 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅 2 :

   1. There exists a message 𝑀 of polynomial size such that Pr𝑟 [𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑀, 𝑟) = 𝑠(𝑥)] ≥
         2
         3
           .

   2. For all 𝑀 ′ , Pr𝑟 [𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑀 ′ , 𝑟) = 𝑠(𝑥) or ⊥] > 23 .

And for every 𝑥 ∈
                / 𝐿𝑅 , for all 𝑀 ′ , Pr𝑟 [𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑀 ′ , 𝑟) ̸= ⊥] ≤ 31 .

       Pseudo-determinism can similarly be defined in the context of nondeterminism
(which can be viewed as a specific case of an interactive proof):

Definition 2.1.5 (Pseudo-deterministic NP). A search problem 𝑅 is in pseudo-
deterministic NP (often denoted psdNP) if there exists a function 𝑠 where all 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅
satisfy (𝑥, 𝑠(𝑥)) ∈ 𝑅 and |𝑠(𝑥)| ≤ 𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦(𝑥), and there is a deterministic polynomial
time verifier 𝑉 such that for every 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅 :

   1. There exists a message 𝑀 of polynomial size such that 𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑀 ) = 𝑠(𝑥).

   2. For all 𝑀 ′ , 𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑀 ′ ) = 𝑠(𝑥) or 𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑀 ′ ) = ⊥.

And for every 𝑥 ∈
                / 𝐿𝑅 , for all 𝑀 ′ , we have 𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑀 ′ ) = ⊥.

       A similar definition for pseudo-deterministic NL follows naturally:

Definition 2.1.6 (Pseudo-deterministic NL). A search problem 𝑅 is in pseudo-
deterministic NL (often denoted psdNL) if there exists a function 𝑠 where all 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅
satisfy (𝑥, 𝑠(𝑥)) ∈ 𝑅 and |𝑠(𝑥)| ≤ 𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦(𝑥), there is a nondeterministic log-space ma-
chine 𝑉 such that for every 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅 :
   2
   We remark that we use 𝑀 to denote the proof sent by the prover Merlin, and not the algorithm
implemented by the prover.


                                               35
  1. There exist nondeterministic choices 𝑁 for the machine such that such that
      𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑁 ) = 𝑠(𝑥).

  2. For all possible nondeterministic choices 𝑁 ′ , 𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑁 ′ ) = 𝑠(𝑥) or 𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑁 ′ ) = ⊥.

And for every 𝑥 ∈
                / 𝐿𝑅 , for all nondeterministic choices 𝑁 ′ , 𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑁 ′ ) = ⊥.

   It is valuable to contrast the above definition with the definition of search-NL, in
which it is possible to have different nondeterministic guesses of the machine result
in different answers:

Definition 2.1.7 (search-NL). A search problem 𝑅 is in search-NL if there is a
nondeterministic log-space machine 𝑉 such that for every 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅 ,

  1. There exist nondeterministic choices 𝑁 for the machine such that such that
      𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑁 ) = 𝑦, and (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ 𝑅.

  2. For all possible nondeterministic choices 𝑁 ′ , (𝑥, 𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑁 ′ )) ∈ 𝑅, or 𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑁 ′ ) = ⊥.

And for every 𝑥 ∈
                / 𝐿𝑅 , for all nondeterministic choices 𝑁 ′ , 𝑉 (𝑥, 𝑁 ′ ) = ⊥.

   Intuitively speaking, in the case of search-NL, it is okay for the algorithm to output
different correct solutions when using different nondeterministic choices. In the case
of pseudo-deterministic-NL, there should not be two nondeterministic choices for the
algorithm which result in different answers (on input 𝑥, every set of nondeterministic
choices which leads to an answer which is not ⊥ should lead to the same answer 𝑠(𝑥)).
   We will also use the following definition of search-BPP, the class of search problem
solvable (and verifiable) in probabilistic polynomial time:

Definition 2.1.8 (Search-BPP). A binary relation 𝑅 is in search-𝐵𝑃 𝑃 if there exist
probabilistic polynomial-time algorithms 𝐴, 𝐵 such that

  1. Given 𝑥 ∈ 𝑅𝐿 , 𝐴 outputs a 𝑦 such that with probability at least 2/3, (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ 𝑅.

  2. If 𝑦 is output by 𝐴 when run on 𝑥, and (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈
                                                   / 𝑅, then 𝐵 rejects on (𝑥, 𝑦) with
      probability at least 2/3. Furthermore, for all 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅 , with probability at least
      1/2 𝐵 accepts on (𝑥, 𝑦) with probability at least 1/2.

                                             36
When 𝑥 ∈
       / 𝑅𝐿 , 𝐴 outputs ⊥ with probability at least 2/3.

   The intuition of the above definition is that 𝐴 is used to find an output 𝑦, and
then 𝐵 can be used to verify 𝑦, and amplify the success probability.


2.1.2    Polynomial-round pseudo-determinism

Consider what happens in the polynomial-round case. From [77], we know that IP =
PSPACE. It is also known that finding the lexicographically first witness to any NP
problem is in PSPACE. Thus, we have the following lemma:

Lemma 2.1.9. Every language 𝐿 ∈ NP has an polynomial-round psdIP protocol.

Proof. Let us consider the function 𝑓 (𝑥) which outputs the lexicographically first
witness that 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿 if 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿 or ⊥ otherwise. It is easy to see that determining whether
𝑓 (𝑥) = 𝑦 is in PSPACE. As a result, there is an polynomial-round IP protocol to
determine whether 𝑓 (𝑥) = 𝑦. Then, the psdIP protocol is as follows; the prover gives
the verifier 𝑦 and then they run the protocol, and the verifier accepts and outputs 𝑦
if the protocol accepts. This satisfies the conditions for pseudo-determinism because
of the completeness and soundness properties of the IP protocol.

Definition 2.1.10. A linear program is, given a matrix 𝐴 and vectors b, c, the
problem max{c⊤ x} subject to the constraints 𝐴x ≤ b and x ≥ 0. Its dual is the
linear program min{b⊤ y} subject to the constraints 𝐴⊤ y ≥ c and y ≥ 0.

Theorem 2.1.11. (Weak duality) If x, y are feasible solutions to a linear program
given by max{c⊤ x} subject to 𝐴x ≤ b and x ≥ 0 and its dual respectively, then
c⊤ x ≤ b⊤ y. (Strong duality) Furthermore x, y are optimal solutions if and only if
c⊤ x = b⊤ y.



2.2     Doubly-Efficient Pseudo-Deterministic Proofs
In this section we will introduce concepts needed to give pseudo-deterministic proofs
that improve on the best known deterministic algorithms for problems studied in
fine-grained complexity.

                                         37
Definition 2.2.1 (Search Problem). A search problem is a relation 𝑅 consisting of
pairs (𝑥, 𝑦) and we define 𝐿𝑅 to be the set of 𝑥 such that ∃𝑦(𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ 𝑅.

     The goal of an algorithm solving a search problem is to find a 𝑦 such that
(𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ 𝑅. The focus of pseudo-determinism is to give algorithms for search problems
that find canonical solutions; a pseudo-deterministic algorithm will output the same
solution to a search problem with high probability over its randomness. [40] extended
the notion of pseudo-determinism to interactive proofs and brought the concept of
NP search problems with unique answers under the umbrella of pseudo-determinism.
We will refer to this work’s definition of a pseudo-deterministic proof. The pseudo-
deterministic proofs in our setting will always either output the unique solution or
⊥.

Definition 2.2.2 (Pseudo-deterministic proof [40]). A search problem 𝑅 is in pseudo-
deterministic IP (often denoted psdIP) if there exists a function 𝑠 where all 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅
satisfy (𝑥, 𝑠(𝑥)) ∈ 𝑅, and an interactive protocol between a probabilistic polynomial
time verifier algorithm 𝑉 and a prover (unbounded algorithm) 𝑃 such that for every
𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅 :

     1. (Canonical Completeness) There exists a 𝑃 such that Pr𝑟 [(𝑃, 𝑉 )(𝑥, 𝑟) = 𝑠(𝑥)] ≥
        2
        3
          . (We use (𝑃, 𝑉 )(𝑥, 𝑟) to denote the output of the verifier 𝑉     when interacting
        with prover 𝑃 on input 𝑥 using randomness 𝑟).

     2. (Canonical Soundness) For all 𝑃 ′ , Pr𝑟 [(𝑃 ′ , 𝑉 )(𝑥, 𝑟) = 𝑠(𝑥) or ⊥] ≥ 23 .

And (Standard Soundness) for every 𝑥 ∈
                                     / 𝐿𝑅 , for all provers 𝑃 ′ , Pr𝑟 [(𝑃 ′ , 𝑉 )(𝑥, 𝑟) ̸=
⊥] ≤ 31 .

     This is analogous to the definition of pseudo-deterministic NP, except we allow
the prover and verifier to interact. In the setting we consider, the prover and verifier
both run in polynomial time, with the prover given more time than the verifier. Our
goal is to construct pseudo-deterministic proofs for problems such that the verifier
runs in time faster than the best known deterministic algorithm for the problem.

                                               38
2.3        Non-Signaling Interactive Proofs

2.3.1      No-Signaling Games

Definition 2.3.1. A 𝑘-prover, one-round game is a tuple 𝒢 = (𝑄1 , ..., 𝑄𝑘 , 𝐴1 , ..., 𝐴𝑘 , 𝑉, 𝜋),
where 𝑄1 , ..., 𝑄𝑘 are sets of queries, 𝐴1 , ..., 𝐴𝑘 are sets of answers,


                 𝑉 : 𝑄1 × 𝑄2 × ... × 𝑄𝑘 × 𝐴1 × 𝐴2 × ... × 𝐴𝑘 → {0, 1}


is a polynomial-time computable function, and 𝜋 is a polynomial-time sampleable
probability distribution over (𝑄1 , ..., 𝑄𝑘 ).


Notation. We denote by 𝒬 , 𝑄1 × 𝑄2 × ...𝑄𝑘 and 𝒜 , 𝐴1 × 𝐴2 × ... × 𝐴𝑘 . We
also denote by 𝒬𝑆 , 𝑄𝑠1 × 𝑄𝑠2 × ... × 𝑄𝑠|𝑆| , where 𝑆 = {𝑠1 , 𝑠2 , ..., 𝑠|𝑆| }, and similarly
for 𝒜𝑆 .
   We denote by [𝑘] = {1, . . . , 𝑘}. For every 𝑞 = (𝑞1 , . . . , 𝑞𝑘 ) ∈ 𝒬, every 𝑎 =
(𝑎1 . . . , 𝑎𝑘 ) ∈ 𝒜, and every 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘], we denote by 𝑞𝑆 = (𝑞𝑖 )𝑖∈𝑆 and 𝑎𝑆 = (𝑎𝑖 )𝑖∈𝑆 .

Definition 2.3.2. A strategy for a game 𝒢 = (𝒬, 𝒜, 𝑉, 𝜋) is a family of probability
distributions {𝑝𝑞 }𝑞∈𝒬 over 𝒜 ∪ {⊥}.

   For any 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬, any 𝑎 ∈ 𝒜, and any subset 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘], we denote by

                                                 ∑︁
                                𝑝𝑞 (𝑎𝑆 ) ,                   𝑝𝑞 (𝑎* ).
                                             𝑎* ∈𝒜:𝑎*𝑆 =𝑎𝑆



Definition 2.3.3. A strategy {𝑝𝑞 }𝑞∈𝒬 for a 𝑘-player game 𝒢 = (𝒬, 𝒜, 𝑉, 𝜋) is said to
be no-signaling if there exists a family of probability distributions {Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 }𝑆⊆[𝑘],𝑞𝑆 ∈𝒬𝑆 ,
where each Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 is a distribution over 𝒜𝑆 , such that for every 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬, every 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘],
and every 𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜𝑆 ,
                                   𝑝𝑞 (𝑎𝑆 ) = Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 (𝑎𝑆 ).

   Namely, a strategy is no-signaling if the marginal distributions of the answers
are the same regardless of the other queries. Note that if {𝑝𝑞 }𝑞∈𝒬 is a no-signaling

                                                 39
strategy then for every 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬,

                      ∑︁                        ∑︁
                            Pr[𝑝𝑞 = 𝑎𝑆 ] =           Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] = 1,
                       𝑎𝑆                       𝑎𝑆


which implies that Pr[𝑝𝑞 = ⊥] = 0.


   Two relaxations of the notion of no-signaling were considered in the literature: the
first is the notion of sub-no-signaling, by Lancien and Winter [60], and the second is
the notion of honest-referee no-signaling by Holmgren and Yang [49]. In both cases
these relaxed notions were motivated by the goal of proving a parallel repetition
theorem for no-signaling strategies. We begin by defining the latter notion.

Definition 2.3.4. A strategy {𝑝𝑞 }𝑞∈𝒬 for a 𝑘-player game 𝒢 = (𝒬, 𝒜, 𝑉, 𝜋) is said
to be honest-referee no-signaling if the no-signaling condition holds for every 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬
such that Pr[𝜋 = 𝑞] > 0 (and is not required to hold for queries that are not in the
support of 𝜋).
   Formally, {𝑝𝑞 }𝑞∈𝒬 is a honest-referee no-signaling strategy for 𝒢 if there exists
a family of probability distributions {Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 }𝑆⊆[𝑘],𝑞𝑆 ∈𝒬𝑆 , where each Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 is a
distribution over 𝒜𝑆 , such that for every 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬 in the support of 𝜋, every 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘],
and every 𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜𝑆 ,
                                     𝑝𝑞 (𝑎𝑆 ) = Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 (𝑎𝑆 ).

Definition 2.3.5. A strategy {𝑝𝑞 }𝑞∈𝒬 for a 𝑘-player game 𝒢 = (𝒬, 𝒜, 𝑉, 𝜋) is said to
be sub-no-signaling if there exists a family of probability distributions {Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 }𝑆⊆[𝑘],𝑞𝑆 ∈𝒬𝑆 ,
where each Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 is a distribution over 𝒜𝑆 , such that for every 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬, every 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘],
and every 𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜𝑆 ,
                                     𝑝𝑞 (𝑎𝑆 ) ≤ Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 (𝑎𝑆 ).

   If {𝑝𝑞 }𝑞∈𝒬 is a sub-no-signaling set of probability distributions, then for every
𝑞 ∈ 𝒬, if
                             ∑︁                 ∑︁
                                   𝑝𝑞 (𝑎𝑆 ) <        Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 (𝑎𝑆 ) = 1,
                              𝑎𝑆                𝑎𝑆

then in the remaining probability 𝑝𝑞 outputs ⊥.

                                                 40
Definition 2.3.6. Let NS(𝒢) be the set of no-signaling strategies of a 𝑘-prover game
𝒢 = (𝒬, 𝒜, 𝑉, 𝜋). The no-signaling value of 𝒢 is

                                                    ∑︁           ∑︁
                     𝒱NS (𝒢) =        max                 𝜋(𝑞)         𝑝𝑞 (𝑎)𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎).
                                  {𝑝𝑞 }𝑞∈𝒬 ∈NS(𝒢)
                                                    𝑞∈𝒬          𝑎∈𝒜


Similarly, let hrNS(𝒢) be the set of honest-referee no-signaling strategies of 𝒢. The
honest-referee no-signaling value of 𝒢 is

                                                      ∑︁           ∑︁
                   𝒱hrNS (𝒢) =         max                  𝜋(𝑞)         𝑝𝑞 (𝑎)𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎).
                                  {𝑝𝑞 }𝑞∈𝒬 ∈hrNS(𝒢)
                                                      𝑞∈𝒬          𝑎∈𝒜


Let subNS(𝒢) be the set of sub-no-signaling strategies of 𝒢. The sub-no-signaling
value of 𝒢 is

                                                         ∑︁           ∑︁
                   𝒱subNS (𝒢) =         max                    𝜋(𝑞)         𝑝𝑞 (𝑎)𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎).
                                  {𝑝𝑞 }𝑞∈𝒬 ∈subNS(𝒢)
                                                         𝑞∈𝒬          𝑎∈𝒜


2.3.2     Linear Programming

Definition 2.3.7 ([63]). Fix any linear program given by max c⊤ x subject to x𝑆 ≥ 0,
x𝑇 unrestricted, 𝐴𝑈 x ≤ b𝑈 , and 𝐴𝑉 x = b𝑉 , where 𝑆, 𝑇 are disjoint and 𝑆 ∪ 𝑇 = [𝑛],
where 𝑛 = |𝑥|, and where 𝑈, 𝑉 are disjoint and 𝑈 ∪ 𝑉 = [𝑚] where 𝑚 is the number
of rows of 𝐴, where 𝐴 is defined to be the matrix whose rows are the rows of 𝐴𝑈 and
the rows of 𝐴𝑉 .
   The dual of this linear program is defined by min b⊤ y, where |y| = 𝑚, subject to
y𝑈 ≥ 0, y𝑉 unrestricted, 𝐴⊤
                          𝑆 y ≥ c𝑆 , 𝐴𝑇 y = c𝑇 .
                                      ⊤




Theorem 2.3.8 (Strong duality [63]). If the value of a linear program is finite then
it is equal to the value of its dual.


Definition 2.3.9 ([89]). A mixed packing and covering problem is a pair of non-
negative matrices 𝐴, 𝐶 and a pair of non-negative vectors 𝑏, 𝑑. A solution to a mixed
packing and covering problem is a vector 𝑥 such that 𝑥 ≥ 0, 𝐴𝑥 ≤ 𝑏, and 𝐶𝑥 ≥ 𝑑.


                                                    41
Theorem 2.3.10 ([89]). Let (𝐴, 𝑏, 𝐶, 𝑑) be a mixed packing and covering problem.
Then, there exists an algorithm running in space poly(log(|(𝐴, 𝑏, 𝐶, 𝑑)|), 1/𝜖) to deter-
mine whether there does not exist a solution to the mixed packing and covering problem
or to output a solution to the mixed packing and covering problem (𝐴, 𝑏(1 + 𝜖), 𝐶, 𝑑).




                                           42
Chapter 3

Pseudo-Deterministic Proofs

3.1       Pseudo-deterministic-AM algorithm for graph iso-
          morphism
In this section we give an algorithm for finding an isomorphism between two graphs
in AM that outputs the same answer with high probability. The way this algorithm
works is that the prover will send the lexicographically first isomorphism to the verifier
and then prove that it is the lexicographically first isomorphism. To prove that the
isomorphism is the lexicographically first isomorphism, we label the graph and run
a sequence of graph non-isomorphism protocols to show no lexicographically smaller
isomorphism exists. We present an alternate proof of the same result in the appendix
(the proof in the appendix is more group theoretic, whereas the proof below is more
combinatorial).

Theorem 3.1.1. Finding an isomorphism between graphs can be done in psdAM.

Proof. Let the vertices of 𝐺1 be 𝑣1 , 𝑣2 , . . . , 𝑣𝑛 , and the vertices of 𝐺2 be 𝑢1 , 𝑢2 , . . . , 𝑢𝑛 .
We will show an AM algorithm which outputs a unique isomorphism 𝜑. Our algorithm
will proceed in 𝑛 stages (which we will later show can be parallelized). After the 𝑘th
stage, the values 𝜑(𝑣1 ), 𝜑(𝑣2 ), . . . , 𝜑(𝑣𝑘 ) will be determined.
    Suppose that the values 𝜑(𝑣1 ), 𝜑(𝑣2 ), . . . , 𝜑(𝑣𝑘 ) have been determined. Then we
will determine the smallest 𝑟 such that there exists an isomorphism 𝜑* such that for

                                                  43
1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑘, we have 𝜑* (𝑣𝑖 ) = 𝜑(𝑣𝑖 ), and in addition, 𝜑* (𝑣𝑘+1 ) = 𝑢𝑟 . If we find 𝑟, we
can set 𝜑(𝑣𝑘+1 ) = 𝜑* (𝑣𝑘+1 ) and continue to the 𝑘 + 1𝑡ℎ stage.
       To find the correct value of 𝑟, the (honest) prover will tell the verifier the value
of 𝑟 and 𝜑. Then, to show that the prover is not lying, for each 𝑟′ < 𝑟, the prover
will prove that there exists no isomorphism 𝜑′ such that for 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑘, we have
𝜑′ (𝑣𝑖 ) = 𝜑(𝑣𝑖 ), and in addition, 𝜑′ (𝑣𝑘+1 ) = 𝑢𝑟′ . To prove this, the verifier will pick 𝐺1
or 𝐺2 , each with probability 1/2. If the verifier picked 𝐺1 , he will randomly shuffle
the vertices 𝑣𝑘+2 , . . . , 𝑣𝑛 , and send the shuffled graph to the prover. If the verifier
picked 𝐺2 , he will set 𝑢′𝑖 = 𝜑(𝑣𝑖 ) for 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑘, and 𝑢′𝑘+1 = 𝑢𝑟′ , and shuffle the rest of
the vertices. If the prover can distinguish between whether the verifier initially picked
𝐺1 or 𝐺2 , then that implies there is no isomorphism sending 𝑣𝑖 to 𝜑(𝑣𝑖 ) for 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑘,
and sending 𝑣𝑘+1 to 𝑢𝑟′ . The prover now can show this for all 𝑟′ ≤ 𝑟 (in parallel),
as well as exhibit the isomorphism 𝜑, thus proving that 𝑟 is the minimum value such
that there is an isomorphism sending 𝑣𝑖 to 𝜑(𝑣𝑖 ) for 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑘, and sending 𝑣𝑘+1 to
𝑢𝑟 .
       The above 𝑛 stages can be done in parallel in order to achieve a constant round
protocol. To do so, in the first stage, the prover sends the isomorphism 𝜑 to the
verifier. Then, the verifier can test (in parallel) for each 𝑘 whether under the assump-
tion that 𝜑(𝑣1 ), 𝜑(𝑣2 ), . . . , 𝜑(𝑣𝑘 ) are correct, 𝜑(𝑣𝑘+1 ) is the lexicographically minimal
vertex which 𝑣𝑘+1 can be sent to. The correctness of this protocol follows from the
fact that multiple AM protocols can be performed in parallel (as shown in appendix
C.1 of [35]).


       We note that in the above protocol, the prover only needs to have the power to
solve graph isomorphism (and graph non-isomorphism). Also, we note that the above
protocol uses private coins. While the protocol can be simulated with a public coin
protocol [42], the simulation requires the prover to be very powerful. It remains open
to determine whether there is a pseudo-deterministic AM protocol for graph isomor-
phism which uses public coins, and uses a “weak" prover (one which is a polynomial
time machine with access to an oracle solving graph isomorphism).

                                              44
3.2     Lower bound on pseudo-deterministic AM algo-
        rithms
In this section, we establish that if any NP-complete problem has an AM protocol
that outputs a unique witness with high probability, then the polynomial hierarchy
collapses. To do this we show the analog of AM ⊆ NP/𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦 for pseudo-deterministic
algorithms, and then use this fact to get a NP/𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦 algorithm with a unique witness.
We can then use [45] to show that NP ⊆ coNP/𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦.
   We begin by proving that psdAM ⊆ psdNP/𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦:

Lemma 3.2.1. Suppose that there is a psdAM protocol for a search problem 𝑅,
which on input 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅 , outputs 𝑓 (𝑥). Then, the search problem 𝑅 has a psdNP/𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦
algorithm which, on input 𝑥, outputs 𝑓 (𝑥).

Proof. The idea of the proof is similar to the proof that AM ⊆ NP/𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦 (which in itself
uses techniques similar to those of Adleman’s theorem [1], showing BPP ⊆ P/𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦).
   Consider the psdAM protocol, and suppose that on input 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅 , it outputs 𝑓 (𝑥).
   Since we are guaranteed that when the verifier of the the psdAM accepts, it will
output 𝑓 (𝑥) with high probability, we can use standard amplification techniques to
show that the verifier will output 𝑓 (𝑥) with probability 1 − 𝑜(exp(−𝑛)), assuming an
honest prover, and will output anything other than 𝑓 (𝑥) with probability 𝑜(exp(−𝑛)),
even with a malicious prover. Then, by a union bound, there exists a choice of random
string 𝑟 that makes the verifier output 𝑓 (𝑥) for all inputs 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 of size 𝑛 with an
honest prover, and that for malicious provers, the verifier will either reject or output
𝑓 (𝑥). We encode this string 𝑟 as the advice string for the NP/𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦 machine.
   The NP/𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦 machine computing 𝑓 can read 𝑟 off the advice tape and then guess
the prover’s message, and whenever the verifier accepts, 𝑓 (𝑥) will be output by that
branch. Thus 𝑓 (𝑥) can be computed by an NP/𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦 machine.

   Next, we show that if an NP-complete problem has a pseudo-deterministic-NP/𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦
algorithm, then the polynomial hierarchy collapses.


                                           45
Theorem 3.2.2. Let 𝐿 ∈ NP be an NP-complete problem. Let 𝑅 be a polynomial
time algorithm such that there exists a polynomial 𝑝 so that 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿 if and only if
∃𝑦 ∈ {0, 1}𝑝(|𝑥|) 𝑅(𝑥, 𝑦). Suppose that there is a psdAM protocol that when given
some 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿, outputs a unique 𝑓 (𝑥) ∈ {0, 1}𝑝(|𝑥|) such that 𝑅(𝑥, 𝑓 (𝑥)) = 1. Then,
NP ⊆ coNP/𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦 and the polynomial hierarchy collapses to the third level.

Proof. From Lemma 3.2.1, we have that there exists psdNP/𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦 algorithm that given
𝑥 ∈ 𝐿, outputs a unique witness 𝑓 (𝑥) for 𝑥. Refer to [45] for the proof that a NP/𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦
function that outputs a unique witness implies that NP ⊆ coNP/𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦.



3.3        Pseudo-deterministic derandomization for BPP
           in subexponential time MA
In this section, we will show how to use known circuit lower bounds to get pseudo-
deterministic subexponential time (time 𝑂(2𝑛 ) for every 𝜖) MA protocols for problems
                                                     𝜖



in search-BPP for infinitely many input lengths. In [66], it is shown that there is a
subexponential time pseudo-deterministic ZPP algorithm for infinitely many input
lengths for all properties which have inverse polynomial density, and are testable in
polynomial time1 . A notable example of such a property is primality. So as a corollary,
in [66] it is shown that given some integer 𝑛, one can find a prime greater than 𝑛 in
pseudo-deterministic subexponential time, for infinitely many input lengths.
       In their construction, the condition of high density is required because they show
that either there exists a subexponential sized hitting set for infinitely many input
lengths which can be used to find strings with the property deterministically, or a
complexity collapse happens which implies circuit lower bounds which give pseudo-
deterministic algorithms. In the case of MA, unconditional circuit lower bounds
for Merlin-Arthur proofs where the verifier is allowed at least half-exponential time
have been shown [17, 64], which means that inverse polynomial density is no longer
   1
    We believe that their analysis can be improved to get a half-exponential time bounded-error
pseudo-deterministic algorithm, which is better than our result for properties of inverse polynomial
density.


                                                46
required. Hence, we can obtain a pseudo-deterministic MA algorithm directly from
circuit lower bounds. Compared to [66], our result manages to show a certain pseudo-
derandomization for all problems in search-BPP (and not just those with high den-
sity), but requires a prover.
    Our pseudo-deterministic algorithm uses the Nisan-Wigderson pseudo-random
generator. The main lemma that we will use is the lemma that shows that given
the truth-table of a hard function, you can get a pseudorandom generator with the
right parameters.

Lemma 3.3.1 (Lemma 2.4 of [65]). Let 𝑚, 𝑛, 𝑙 be integers; let 𝑓 : {0, 1}𝑚 → {0, 1}
be a boolean function that cannot be approximated with error 12 − 2𝑛1 2 by any circuit
of size 𝑛2 .

    To obtain the best running time for our pseudo-deterministic algorithm, we will
need the iterated exponential functions first used in complexity theory by [64]. We
will be considering functions with half-exponential growth, i.e. functions 𝑓 such that
𝑓 (𝑓 (𝑛)) ∈ 𝑂(2𝑛 ) for some 𝑘.
                𝑘




Definition 3.3.2 (Fractional exponentials [64]). The fractional exponential function
𝑒𝛼 (𝑥) will be defined as 𝐴−1 (𝐴(𝑥) + 𝛼), where 𝐴 is the solution to the functional
equation 𝐴(𝑒𝑥 − 1) = 𝐴(𝑥) + 1. In addition, we can construct such functions so that
𝑒𝛼 (𝑒𝛽 (𝑥)) = 𝑒𝛼+𝛽 (𝑥). It is clear from this definition that 𝑒1 (𝑛) = 𝑂(2𝑛 ) as desired.

Theorem 3.3.3. Given a problem 𝑅 in search-BPP, it is possible to obtain a pseudo-
deterministic MA algorithm for 𝑅 where the verifier takes subexponential time for
infinitely many input lengths.

Proof. From [64], we see that MA ∩ coMA where the verifier runs in half-exponential
time cannot be approximated by polynomial-size circuits. Using the Lemma from
[65], this means that in half-exponential time MA, we can construct a pseudorandom
generator with half-exponential stretch which is secure against any given polynomial-
size circuit for infinitely many input lengths. Let 𝑇 be the truth-table of the hard
function that the pseudorandom generator uses. Then, let 𝑅 be a relation in search-
BPP. Recall from Definition 2.1.8 that there is an algorithm 𝐴 that given 𝑥, produces

                                            47
𝑦 such that (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ 𝑅 with high probability if 𝑥 ∈ 𝑅𝐿 . We will now describe the
protocol. First, the prover sends 𝑇 to the verifier and proves that it is indeed the
truth table of the hard function in half-exponential time MA (which can be done in
half-exponential time). With 𝑇 in hand, the verifier can then compute the output of
the pseudorandom generator. The verifier loops through the seeds in lexicographic
order and uses the pseudorandom generator on each seed to create pseudo-random
strings, which the verifier then uses as the randomness for 𝐴. Each time, the verifier
tests whether (𝑥, 𝐴(𝑥, 𝑟)) ∈ 𝑅 (which can be done in BPP, and hence also in MA)
and returns the first such valid output.
   This will output the same solution whenever the verifier both gets the correct
truth-table for the PRG, and succeeds in testing for each PRG output whether the
output it provides is valid. Both of these happen with high probability, and thus
this is a pseudo-deterministic subexponential-time MA algorithm for any problem in
search-BPP which succeeds on infinitely many input lengths.



3.4      Uniqueness in NL

In this section, we prove that every problem in search-NL can be made pseudo-
deterministic:

Theorem 3.4.1 (Pseudo-determinism NL). Every search problem in search-NL is in
psdNL.

   One can think of the complete search problem for NL as: given a directed graph
𝐺, and two vertices 𝑠 and 𝑡 such that there is a path from 𝑠 to 𝑡, find a path from
𝑠 to 𝑡. Note that the standard nondeterministic algorithm of simply guessing a path
will result in different paths for different nondeterministic guesses. Our goal will be
to find a unique path, so that on different nondeterministic choices, we will not end
up with a path which is not the unique one.
   The idea will be to find the lexicographically first shortest path (i.e, if the min-
length path from 𝑠 to 𝑡 is of length 𝑑, we will output the lexicographically first path of

                                           48
length 𝑑 from 𝑠 to 𝑡). To do so, first we will determine the length 𝑑 of the min-length
path from 𝑠 to 𝑡. Then, for each neighbor of 𝑠, we will check if it has a path of length
𝑑 − 1 to 𝑡, and move to the first such neighbor. Now, we have reduced the problem
to finding a unique path of length 𝑑 − 1, which we can do recursively.
   The full proof is given below:

Proof. Given a problem in search-NL, consider the set of all min-length computation
histories. We will find the lexicographically first successful computation history in
this set.
   To do so, we first (nondeterministically) compute the length of the min-length
computation history. This can be done because coNL = NL (so if the shortest com-
putation history is of size 𝑇 , one can show a history of size 𝑇 . Also, because it is
coNL to show that there is no history of size up to 𝑇 − 1, we can show that there is
no history of size less than 𝑇 in NL).
   In general, using the same technique, given a state 𝑆 of the NL machine, we can
tell what is the shortest possible length for a successful computation history starting
at 𝑆.
   Our algorithm will proceed as follows. Given a state 𝑆 (which we initially set
to be the initial configuration of the NL machine), we will compute 𝑇 , the length
of the shortest successful computation path starting at 𝑆. Then, for each possible
nondeterministic choice, we will check (in NL) whether there exists a computation
history of length 𝑇 − 1 given that nondeterministic choice. Then, we will choose the
lexicographically first such nondeterministic choice, and recurse.
   This algorithm finds the lexicographically first computation path of minimal length
which is unique. Hence, the algorithm will always output the same solution (or reject),
so the algorithm is pseudo-deterministic.



3.5         Structural Results
In [36], Goldreich et al showed that the set of total search problems solved by pseudo-
deterministic polynomial time randomized algorithms equals the set of total search

                                            49
problems solved by deterministic polynomial time algorithms, with access to an oracle
to decision problems in BPP. In [39], this result was extended to the context of
RNC. We show analogous theorems here. In the context of MA, we show that for
total search problems, psdMA = search−PMA∩coMA .2 In other words, any pseudo-
deterministic MA algorithm can be simulated by a polynomial time search algorithm
with an oracle solving decision problems in MA ∩ coMA, and vice versa.
      In the case of search problems that are not total, we show that psdMA equals to
the class search−Ppromise−(MA∩coMA) , where when the input 𝑥 is in 𝐿𝑅 , all queries to
the oracle must be in the promise. We note that generally, when having an oracle to
a promise problem, one is allowed to query the oracle on inputs not in the promise,
as long as the output of the algorithm as a whole is correct for all possible answers
the oracle gives to such queries. In our case, we simply do not allow queries to the
oracle to be in the promise. Such reductions have been called smart reductions [43].
      We show similar theorems for AM, and NP. Specifically, we show psdAM =
search−Ppromise−(AM∩coAM) and psdNP = search−Ppromise−(NP∩coNP) , where the reduc-
tions to the oracles are smart reductions.
      In the case of total problems, one can use a similar technique to show psdAM =
search−PAM∩coAM and psdNP = search−PNP∩coNP , where the oracles can only return
answers to total decision problems.

Theorem 3.5.1. The class psdMA equals the class search−Ppromise−(MA∩coMA) , where
on any input 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅 , the all queries to the oracle are in the promise.

Proof. The proof is similar to the proofs in [36] and [39] which show similar reduc-
tions to decision problems in the context of pseudo-deterministic polynomial time
algorithms and pseudo-deterministic NC algorithms.
      First, we show that a polynomial time algorithm with an oracle for promise−(MA∩
coMA) decision problems which only asks queries in the promise has a corresponding
pseudo-deterministic MA algorithm. Consider a polynomial time algorithm 𝐴 which
uses an oracle for promise−(MA ∩ coMA). We can simulate 𝐴 by an MA protocol
  2
      What we call search−P is often denoted as FP.


                                               50
where the prover sends the verifier the proof for every question which 𝐴 asks the
oracle. Then, the verifier can simply run the algorithm from 𝐴, and whenever he
accesses the oracle, he instead verifies the proof sent to him by the prover.
   We note that the condition of a smart reduction is required in order for the prover
to be able to send to the verifier the list of all queries 𝐴 will make to the oracle. If 𝐴
can ask the oracle queries not in the promise, it may be that on different executions of
𝐴, different queries will be made to the oracle (since 𝐴 is a adaptive, and the queries
𝐴 makes may depend on the answers returned by the oracle for queries not in the
promise), so the prover is unable to predict what queries 𝐴 will need answered.
   We now show that a pseudo-deterministic MA algorithm 𝐵 has a corresponding
polynomial time algorithm 𝐴 that uses a promise−(MA ∩ coMA) oracle while only
querying on inputs in the promise. On input 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅 , the polynomial time algorithm
can ask the promise−(MA ∩ coMA) oracle for the first bit of the unique answer given
by 𝐵. This is a decision problem in promise−(MA ∩ coMA) since it has a constant
round interactive proof (namely, run 𝐵 and then output the first bit). Similarly, the
algorithm 𝐴 can figure out every other bit of the unique answer, and then concatenate
those bits to obtain the full output.
   Note that it is required that the oracle is for promise−(MA ∩ coMA), and not just
for promise−MA, since if one of the bits of the output is 0, the verifier must be able to
convince the prover of that (and this would require a promise−coMA protocol).

   A very similar proof shows the following:

Theorem 3.5.2. The class psdNP equals the class search−Ppromise−(NP∩coNP) , where
on any input 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅 , all queries to the oracle are in the promise.

   We now prove a similar theorem for the case of AM protocols. We note that this is
slightly more subtle, since it’s not clear how to simulate a search−Ppromise−(AM∩coAM)
protocol using only a constant number of rounds of interaction, since the search-P
algorithm may ask polynomial many queries in an adaptive fashion.

Theorem 3.5.3. The class psdAM equals the class search−Ppromise−(AM∩coAM) , where
on any input 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿𝑅 , the all queries to the oracle are in the promise.

                                           51
Proof. First, we show that a polynomial time algorithm with an oracle for promise−(AM∩
coAM) decision problems where the queries are all in the promise has a corresponding
pseudo-deterministic AM algorithm. We proceed similarly to the proof of Theorem
3.5.1. Consider a polynomial time algorithm 𝐴 which uses an oracle for promise−(AM∩
coAM). The prover will internally simulate that algorithm 𝐴, and then send to the
verifier a list of all queries that 𝐴 makes to the promise−(AM ∩ coAM) oracle. Then,
the prover can prove the answer (in parallel), to all of those queries.
   To prove correctness, suppose that the prover lies about at least one of the oracle
queries. Then, consider the first oracle query to which the prover lied. Then, by
a standard simulation argument, one can show that it can be made overwhelmingly
likely that the verifier will discover that the prover lied on that query.
   Once all queries have been answered by the verifier the algorithm 𝐵 can run like
𝐴, but instead of querying the oracle, it already knows the answer since the prover
has proved it to him.
   The proof that a pseudo-deterministic MA algorithm 𝐵 has a corresponding poly-
nomial time algorithm 𝐴 that uses an promise−(AM ∩ coAM) oracle is identical to
the proof of Theorem 3.5.1

   As a corollary of the above, we learn that private coins are no more powerful than
public coins in the pseudo-deterministic setting:

Corollary 3.5.4. A pseudo-deterministic constant round interactive proof using pri-
vate coins can be simulated by a pseudo-deterministic constant round interactive proof
using public coins.

Proof. By Theorem 3.5.3, we can view the algorithm as an algorithm in search−PAM∩coAM .
   By a similar argument to that in Theorem 3.5.3, one can show that psdIP =
search−PIP∩coIP , where in this context IP refers to constant round interactive proofs
using private coins, and AM refers to constant round interactive proofs using public
coins. Since promise−(AM ∩ coAM) = promise−(IP ∩ coIP), since every constant
round private coin interactive proof for decision problems can be simulated by a
constant round interactive proof using public coins [42], we have:

                                           52
      psdAM = search−Ppromise−(AM∩coAM) = search−Ppromise−(IP∩coIP) = psdIP.




3.6     Discussion and Open Problems

Pseudo-determinism and TFNP: The class of total search problems solvable
by pseudo-deterministic NP algorithms is a very natural subset of TFNP, the set
of all total NP search problems. It is interesting to understand how the set of total
psdNP problems fits in TFNP. For example, it is not known whether TFNP = psdNP.
It would be interesting either to show that every problem in TFNP has a pseudo-
deterministic NP algorithm, or to show that under plausible assumptions there is a
problem in TFNP which does not have a pseudo-deterministic NP algorithm.
   Similarly, it is interesting to understand the relationship of psdNP to other sub-
classes of TFNP. For example, one can ask whether every problem in PPAD has a
pseudo-deterministic NP algorithm (i.e., given a game, does there exists a pseudo-
deterministic NP or AM algorithm which outputs a Nash Equilibrium), or whether
under plausible assumptions this is not the case. Similar questions can be asked for
CLS, PPP, and so on.


Pseudo-determinism in Lattice problems: There are several problems in the
context of lattices which have NP (and often also NP ∩ coNP) algorithms [2]. Notable
examples include gap-SVP and gap-CVP, for certain gap sizes. It would be inter-
esting to show pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs for those problems. In other
words, one could ask: does there exists an AM protocol for gap-SVP so that when
a short vector exists, the same short vector is output every time. Perhaps more in-
teresting would be to show, under plausible cryptographic assumptions, that certain
such problems do not have psdAM protocols.

                                         53
Pseudo-determinism and Number Theoretic Problems: The problem of gen-
erating primes (given a number 𝑛, output a prime greater than 𝑛), and the problem
of finding primitive roots (given a prime 𝑝, find a primitive root mod 𝑝) have efficient
randomized algorithms, and have been studied in the context of pseudo-determinism
[44, 32, 66], though no polynomial time pseudo-deterministic algorithms have been
found. It is interesting to ask whether these problems have polynomial time psdAM
protocols.


The Relationship between psdAM and search−BPP: One of the main open
problems in pseudo-determinism is to determine whether every problem in search−BPP
also has a polynomial time pseudo-deterministic algorithm. This remains unsolved.
As a step in that direction (and as an interesting problem on its own), it is interesting
to determine whether search−BPP ⊆ psdAM. In this chapter, we proved a partial
result in this direction, namely that search−BPP ⊆ 𝑖.𝑜.psdMASUBEXP .


Zero Knowledge Proofs of Uniqueness: The definition of pseudo-deterministic
interactive proofs can be extended to the context of Zero Knowledge. In other words,
the verifier gets no information other than the answer, and knowing that it is the
unique/canonical answer. It is interesting to examine this notion and understand its
relationship to psdAM.


The Power of the Prover in pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs: Con-
sider a search problem which can be solved in IP where the prover, instead of being
all-powerful, is computationally limited. We know that such a problem can be solved
in psdIP if the prover has unlimited computational power (in fact, one can show it
is enough for the prover to be in PSPACE). In general, if the prover can be com-
putationally limited for some IP protocol, can it also be computationally limited for
a psdIP protocol for the same problem? It is also interesting in general to compare
the power needed for the psdIP protocol compared to the power needed to solve the
search problem non-pseudo-deterministically. Similar questions can be asked in the
context of AM.

                                           54
The Power of the Prover in pseudo-deterministic private vs public coins
proofs: In our psdAM protocol for Graph Isomorphism, the verifier uses private
coins, and the prover is weak (it can be simulated by a polynomial time machine with
an oracle for graph isomorphism). If using public coins, what power would the prover
need? In general, it is interesting to compare the power needed by the prover when
using private coins vs public coins in psdAM and psdIP protocols.


Pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs for setting cryptographic global
system parameters: Suppose an authority must come up with global parameters
for a cryptographic protocol (for instance, a prime 𝑝 and a primitive root 𝑔 of 𝑝,
which would be needed for a Diffie-Hellman key exchange). It may be important that
other parties in the protocol know that the authority did not come up with these
parameters because he happens to have a trapdoor to them. If the authority proves
to the other parties that the parameters chosen are canonical, the other parties now
know that the authority did not just pick these parameters because of a trapdoor
(instead, the authority had to pick those parameters, since those are the canonical
ones). It would be interesting to come up with a specific example of a protocol along
with global parameters for which there is a pseudo-deterministic interactive proof
showing the parameters are unique.



3.7     Alternate Algorithm for Graph Isomorphism in
        pseudo-deterministic AM
In this section, we present another psdAM algorithm for Graph Isomorphism, this
one more group theoretic (as opposed to the more combinatiorial approach of the
algorithm in Section 3.1). The method we use to do this involves finding the lex-
icographically first isomorphism using group theory. In particular, the verifier will
obtain the automorphism group of one of the graphs from the prover and verify that
it is indeed the automorphism group, and then the verifier will convert an isomor-
phism obtained from the prover into the lexicographically first isomorphism between

                                         55
the two graphs. We will define the group-theoretic terms used below.

Definition 3.7.1 (Automorphism Group). The automorphism group 𝐴𝑢𝑡(𝐺) of a
graph is the set of permutations 𝜑 : 𝐺 → 𝐺 such that for every 𝑢, 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 (𝐺), (𝑢, 𝑣) ∈
𝐸(𝐺) ⇐⇒ (𝜑(𝑢), 𝜑(𝑣)) ∈ 𝐸(𝐺) (i.e., 𝜑 is an automorphism of 𝐺).

Definition 3.7.2 (Stabilize). Given a set 𝑆 and elements 𝛼1 , 𝛼2 , ..., 𝛼𝑖 ∈ 𝑆, we say
that a permutation 𝜑 : 𝑆 → 𝑆 stabilizes {𝛼1 , 𝛼2 , ..., 𝛼𝑘 } iff 𝜑(𝛼𝑖 ) = 𝛼𝑖 for 𝑖 ∈ {1, ..., 𝑘}.
We also say that a group 𝐺 stabilizes {𝛼1 , 𝛼2 , ..., 𝛼𝑘 } when every 𝜑 ∈ 𝐺 stabilizes
{𝛼1 , 𝛼2 , ..., 𝛼𝑘 }.

Definition 3.7.3 (Stabilizer). The stabilizer of an element 𝑠 in 𝑆 for a group 𝐺
acting on 𝑆 is the set of elements of 𝐺 that stabilize 𝑠.

Lemma 3.7.4. Suppose that we are given a tuple (𝐺1 , 𝐺2 , 𝐻, 𝜑) where 𝐺1 and 𝐺2 are
graphs, 𝐻 = 𝐴𝑢𝑡(𝐺1 ) is represented as a set of generators, and 𝜑 an isomorphism
between 𝐺1 and 𝐺2 . Then, in polynomial time, we can compute a unique isomorphism
𝜑* from 𝐺1 to 𝐺2 independent of the choice of 𝜑 and the representation of 𝐻.

Proof. We use the algorithm given in [19] to compute a canonical coset representa-
tive, observing that the set of isomorphisms between 𝐺1 and 𝐺2 is a coset of the
automorphism group of 𝐺1 . Let 𝛼1 , ..., 𝛼𝑡 be a basis of 𝐻, i.e., a set such that any
ℎ ∈ 𝐻 fixing 𝛼1 , ..., 𝛼𝑡 is the identity. Let 𝐻𝑖 be the subgroup of 𝐻 that stabilizes
𝛼1 , ..., 𝛼𝑖−1 . Now, let 𝑈𝑖 be a set of coset representatives of 𝐻𝑖+1 in 𝐻𝑖 . Given the
generators of 𝐻𝑖 , we can calculate 𝑈𝑖 , and by Schreier’s theorem we can calculate the
generators for 𝐻𝑖+1 . In this fashion, we can get generators and coset representatives
for all the 𝐻𝑖 . To produce 𝜑* , we do the following.            Find-First-Isomorphism
𝜑* = 𝜑 For 𝑖 = 1, ..., 𝑡 Let 𝑃𝑖 = {𝜑* 𝑢|𝑢 ∈ 𝑈𝑖 }. Set 𝜑* = arg min𝜑∈𝑃𝑖 (𝜑(𝛼𝑖 )).         To see
that this produces a unique isomorphism that does not depend on 𝜑, observe that
𝜑* (𝛼1 ) is the minimum possible value of 𝜑(𝛼1 ) over all isomorphisms of 𝐺1 to 𝐺2 as
𝑈1 is a set of coset representatives for the stabilizer of 𝛼1 over 𝐻. Also, if 𝜑* (𝛼𝑖 ) is
fixed for 𝑖 ∈ {1, ..., 𝑘}, then 𝜑* (𝛼𝑘+1 ) is the minimum possible value of 𝜑(𝛼𝑘+1 ) over
all isomorphisms which take 𝛼1 to 𝜑* (𝛼1 ), 𝛼2 to 𝜑* (𝛼2 ),..., and 𝛼𝑘 to 𝜑* (𝛼𝑘 ), as 𝑈𝑖+1

                                               56
stabilizes 𝛼1 , ..., 𝛼𝑘 , so everything in 𝑃𝑖+1 takes 𝛼1 to 𝜑* (𝛼1 ), 𝛼2 to 𝜑* (𝛼2 ),..., and 𝛼𝑘
to 𝜑* (𝛼𝑘 ). This implies that 𝜑* does not depend on 𝜑 and is unique.

   Given this result, this means that it suffices to show a protocol that lets the verifier
obtain a set of generators for the automorphism group of 𝐺1 and an isomorphism that
are correct with high probability, as by the above lemma this can be used to obtain
a unique isomorphism between 𝐺1 and 𝐺2 independent of the isomorphism or the
generators.

Theorem 3.7.5. There exists an interactive protocol for graph isomorphism such that
with high probability, the isomorphism that is output by the verifier is unique, where
in the case of a cheating prover the verifier fails instead of outputting a non-unique
isomorphism. In other words, finding an isomorphism between graphs can be done in
psdAM.

Proof. From Lemma 3.7.4, it suffices to show an interactive protocol that computes
the automorphism group of a graph in a verifiable fashion. [62] reduces the problem
of computing the generators of the automorphism group to the problem of finding iso-
morphisms. Using this reduction, we can make a constant-round interactive protocol
to determine the automorphism group by finding the isomorphisms in parallel. The
reason we can do this in parallel is that [62] implies that there are 𝑂(𝑛4 ) different pairs
of graphs to check and for each pair of graphs we either run the graph isomorphism
protocol or the graph non-isomorphism protocol. In the case of the graph isomor-
phism protocol, the verifier need only accept with an isomorphism in hand; for graph
non-isomorphism, the messages sent to the prover are indistinguishable between the
two graphs when they are isomorphic, so since the graphs and permutations are cho-
sen independently, there is no way for the prover to correlate their answers to gain a
higher acceptance probability for isomorphic graphs. Thus this means that the veri-
fier can determine the automorphism group of a graph and verify that it is indeed the
entire automorphism group. Using Lemma 3.7.4 we then see that the prover just has
to give the verifier an isomorphism, and verifier can compute a unique isomorphism
using the automorphism group.


                                              57
58
Chapter 4

Doubly-Efficient
Pseudo-Deterministic Proofs

4.1      Doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic proofs
We want to extend the concept of pseudo-deterministic proofs to the setting where the
prover also runs in polynomial time, and we want to extend the concept of doubly-
efficient interactive proofs to the setting where the verifier outputs a unique solu-
tion. Both of these tasks are accomplished by introducing doubly-efficient pseudo-
deterministic proofs : proofs where both the verifier and prover run in polynomial
time, the verifier running in time asymptotically faster, and where the verifier will
output a unique solution given an input.

Definition 4.1.1. A (𝑡1 (𝑛), 𝑡2 (𝑛)) pseudo-deterministic proof is a pseudo-deterministic
proof where the verifier 𝑉 runs in (probabilistic) time 𝑡1 (𝑛) and the prover 𝑃 runs in
(probabilistic) time 𝑡2 (𝑛).

   Ideally, we want the prover to run in time almost equal to the deterministic run-
ning time of the problem, as this means the total work is not much more than the work
of solving this problem deterministically. However, we say that pseudo-deterministic
proof is non-trivial as long as the verifier runs faster than the deterministic run-
ning time of the problem. To demonstrate the concept, we will consider the pseudo-

                                           59
deterministic proof for graph isomorphism. The prover from [40] only needs the power
to compute 𝑛2 instances of graph isomorphism. We know from [4] that graph isomor-
phism is in quasi-polynomial time. Thus, the result of [40] about graph isomorphism
can be restated as:

Corollary 4.1.2. Graph Isomorphism has a (𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦(𝑛), 𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦(𝑛)) pseudo-deterministic
proof.

   A large class of pseudo-deterministic algorithms have the following format: for a
search problem 𝑅, the pseudo-deterministic algorithm, given 𝑥, finds the lexicograph-
ically first 𝑦 such that 𝑅(𝑥, 𝑦). To do this, it asks whether there exists 𝑦 ′ such that
(𝑥, 0𝑦 ′ ) ∈ 𝑅, 𝑦 ′ such that (𝑥, 1𝑦 ′ ) ∈ 𝑅, etc. and finds the first 𝑦 such that 𝑅(𝑥, 𝑦)
recursively. For instance, [32] gives a pseudo-deterministic algorithm for testing if a
polynomial is non-zero by finding the lexicographically first non-zero solution. Given
𝑝(𝑥1 , ..., 𝑥𝑛 ), the algorithm tests if 𝑝(0, ..., 𝑥𝑛 ) is zero everywhere. If it is not zero ev-
erywhere, then the algorithm checks if 𝑝(0, 0, ..., 𝑥𝑛 ) is zero everywhere, and otherwise
the algorithm checks if 𝑝(1, ..., 𝑥𝑛 ) is zero everywhere. This continues recursively until
the algorithm finds the first element that is non-zero or rejects. Also, [40] provides
a pseudo-deterministic proof for graph isomorphism where the verifier outputs the
lexicographically first isomorphism by going recursively. The algorithm starts by fig-
uring out where the first vertex is mapped in the lexicographically first isomorphism
by looping through the vertices, then where the second vertex is mapped, and so on
until the lexicographically first isomorphism has been found.
   We will use a structure similar to this to define doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic
proofs for a large class of problems studied within the fine grained complexity litera-
ture.

Lemma 4.1.3. Suppose we have a search problem 𝑅(𝑥, 𝑦) such that |𝑦| = 𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦(𝑥),
finding the lexicographically first 𝑦 given 𝑥 such that 𝑅(𝑥, 𝑦) takes time 𝑡1 (𝑛), com-
puting 𝑅(𝑥, 𝑦) takes time 𝑡2 (𝑛), and 𝑦 can be written as 𝑦1 ...𝑦𝑘 such that the following
holds:

   • Given 𝑥, 𝑦1 , ..., 𝑦𝑖 , the problem ∃𝑧𝑖 < 𝑦𝑖 ∃𝑦𝑖+1 , ..., 𝑦𝑘 𝑅(𝑥, 𝑦1 , ..., 𝑦𝑖−1 , 𝑧𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖+1 ...𝑦𝑘 )

                                                  60
       can be solved in co-nondeterministic time 𝑡3 (𝑛) where the prover runs in time
       𝑡4 (𝑛).

Then there exists a (𝑡2 (𝑛) + 𝑘 * 𝑡3 (𝑛), 𝑡1 (𝑛) + 𝑘 * 𝑡4 (𝑛)) pseudo-deterministic proof that
outputs the lexicographically first 𝑦 such that 𝑅(𝑥, 𝑦).

Proof. Our algorithm proceeds in two stages: in the first stage, the prover gives
𝑦, taking time 𝑡1 (𝑛) to find the lexicographically first 𝑦 such that 𝑅(𝑥, 𝑦), and the
verifier checks whether 𝑅(𝑥, 𝑦) and outputs ⊥ otherwise; this takes time 𝑡2 (𝑛). In
the next stage we prove that 𝑦 is the lexicographically first such 𝑦; that is, for all
𝑧 <𝑙𝑒𝑥 𝑦, ¬𝑅(𝑥, 𝑧). To do so, we only need to check that there is no 𝑖 such that
∃𝑧𝑖 < 𝑦𝑖 ∃𝑧𝑖+1 , ..., 𝑧𝑘 such that 𝑅(𝑦1 , 𝑦2 , ..., 𝑦𝑖−1 , 𝑧𝑖 , 𝑧𝑖+1 , ..., 𝑧𝑘 ) for 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑘. Since we
have to do this 𝑘 times, the total time of this stage is 𝑘 * (𝑡2 (𝑛)) for the verifier and
𝑘 * 𝑡4 (𝑛) for the prover. Our algorithm clearly outputs the lexicographically first 𝑦
such that 𝑅(𝑥, 𝑦), and a cheating prover cannot make the verifier output a different
𝑦.

     Now that we have shown a general framework for constructing pseudo-deterministic
proofs, we will proceed to show a number of problems for which there exist pseudo-
deterministic proofs where the verifier runs in time faster than the best known de-
terministic algorithms. In addition, there is evidence suggesting that the best known
deterministic algorithms are nearly optimal; in particular, there is evidence against
being able to turn these pseudo-deterministic proofs into deterministic algorithms
where the running time of the deterministic algorithm is the same as the running
time of the verifier for the pseudo-deterministic proof.



4.2       Linear programming
In [40], we use the fact that graph non-isomorphism has an AM proof to give a pseudo-
deterministic AM proof for graph isomorphism. Here we show a pseudo-deterministic
proof for linear programming. Linear programming is the class of optimization prob-
lems with linear constraints and a linear objective function. We exploit the fact that

                                                  61
linear programming admits a good characterization, a compact way of certifying the
optimality of a solution. Indeed every linear program (say, where the objective is to
maximize) has a corresponding dual linear program, a minimization problem, with
the property that (i) (weak duality) any feasible solution to the dual provides an
upper bound on the optimal primal value and (ii) (strong duality) there exists an
optimal solution to the dual with the same value as the primal optimal solution.
Furthermore, there exist compact polynomial-sized solutions to the primal and dual
linear programs. Therefore such a polynomial-sized feasible solution to the dual with
an equal value as a primal solution provides a compact certificate for the optimality
of this primal solution.
   In order to be able to turn this into a pseudo-deterministic proof, we need the
prover to identify a special, unique optimal solution (as there could be a continuum
of primal optimal solutions), and provide a way for the verifier to efficiently verify
it. As special solution, we use the lexicographically greatest optimal solution to the
primal. Among all optimal solutions, the lexicographically greatest first maximizes
𝑥1 , then 𝑥2 , and so on; see below for a precise definition. To verify it, one option
would be to provide dual optimal solutions to a squence of dual linear programs
corresponding to the definition of lexicographically greatest maximal solution. A
better (more efficient) way, which we describe in this section, is to show that we can
perturb the objective function of the primal linear program in such a way that there
is a unique optimal solution and that this solution is the unique lexicographically
greatest optimal solution for the unperturbed linear program.
   We start with basic notation and linear programming fundamentals.

Definition 4.2.1. A linear program is the problem max{c⊤ x} subject to the con-
straints 𝐴x ≤ b and x ≥ 0. Its dual is the linear program min{b⊤ y} subject to the
constraints 𝐴⊤ y ≥ c and y ≥ 0.

Theorem 4.2.2. (Weak duality) If x, y are feasible solutions to a linear program
given by max{c⊤ x} subject to 𝐴x ≤ b and x ≥ 0 and its dual respectively, then
c⊤ x ≤ b⊤ y. (Strong duality) Furthermore x, y are optimal solutions if and only if

                                         62
c⊤ x = b⊤ y.

   Furthermore, there exist optimal solutions of polynomial size, since any extreme
point (which cannot be expressed as a strict convex combination of feasible points)
has this property.

Theorem 4.2.3 ([33]). Let 𝑃 be the linear program given by max c⊤ x subject to
𝐴x ≤ b, where all inputs are integers and 𝐴 is an 𝑚 × 𝑛 matrix. Define 𝐿 =
𝑚 + 𝑛 + log(max𝐴′ |𝑑𝑒𝑡(𝐴′ )|) + log(max𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 |) + log(max𝑗 |𝑐𝑗 |), where 𝐴′ range over all
square submatrices of 𝐴. Then any extreme point x of 𝑃 is of the form 𝑥𝑖 = 𝑝𝑞𝑖 where
𝑞 and 𝑝𝑖 ’s are integers satisfying 1 ≤ 𝑞 < 2𝐿 and 0 ≤ 𝑝𝑖 < 2𝐿 for all 𝑖.

   This quantity 𝐿 is often used when referring to efficiency of linear programming al-
gorithms, and can be seen (see [33]) to be polynomially related to the binary encoding
of all the input data.

Definition 4.2.4. The lexicographically greatest optimal solution x* to a linear pro-
gram max{c⊤ x} subject to 𝐴x ≤ b and x ≥ 0 is the solution that satisfies (i)
feasibility: 𝐴x* ≤ b and x* ≥ 0, (ii) optimality: c⊤ x* = max𝐴x≤b,x≥0 {c⊤ x}, and
(iii) for every x ∈ arg max𝐴x≤b,x≥0 {c⊤ x}, either x = x* or there exists 𝑖 ≤ 𝑛 with
𝑥𝑖 < 𝑥*𝑖 and 𝑥𝑗 = 𝑥*𝑗 for 𝑗 < 𝑖.

   Now that we have defined the necessary terminology, we can proceed to proving
that linear programming has a pseudo-deterministic interactive proof. To do so,
we perturb our linear program so that the only optimal solution to the new linear
program is the lexicographically greatest solution to the original program, and then
use the dual linear program to prove that the solution given to the verifier is optimal.

Theorem 4.2.5. Let 𝑃 be the linear program given by max c⊤ x subject to 𝐴x ≤ b,
with 𝐿 defined as above. Then, the linear program 𝑃 ′ given by max c⊤ x + 𝜖𝑥1 + 𝜖2 𝑥2 +
... + 𝜖𝑛 𝑥𝑛 , where 𝜖 = 2−3𝐿−2 , has a unique solution which is the lexicographically
greatest solution of 𝑃 .

Proof. First consider the unperturbed linear program 𝑃 , and two extreme point so-
lutions x(1) and x(2) , with corresponding denominators 𝑞1 and 𝑞2 respectively (see
Theorem 4.2.3).

                                           63
     If c⊤ x(1) > c⊤ x(2) then c⊤ x(1) − c⊤ x(2) ≥ 𝑞11𝑞2 > 2−2𝐿 . Let c′ be the perturbed c
(by adding the vector (𝜖, 𝜖2 , · · · , 𝜖𝑛 )). Then

                                       𝑛                                       𝑛
 ⊤            ⊤
                                      ∑︁       (1)     (2)
                                                                              ∑︁
c′ x(1) −c′ x(2) > 2−2𝐿 +                   𝜖𝑖 (𝑥𝑖 −𝑥𝑖 ) > 2−2𝐿 −2𝐿                 𝜖𝑖 > 2−2𝐿 −2𝐿 𝜖/(1−𝜖) > 0,
                                      𝑖=1                                     𝑖=1


given our choice of 𝜖. This shows that, after perturbation, we still have that x(1) has
a greater objective value than x(2) .
     Suppose, on the other hand, that c⊤ x(1) = c⊤ x(2) and that x(1) is lexicographically
greater than x(2) , i.e. that 𝑥1𝑖 > 𝑥2𝑖 while 𝑥1𝑗 = 𝑥2𝑗 for 𝑗 < 𝑖. Then

                            𝑛
                                                      (︃          𝑛−𝑖
                                                                              )︃      (︂                )︂
 ′ ⊤ (1)     ′ ⊤ (2)
                           ∑︁                               1     ∑︁                             𝜖 𝐿
c x −c x               =         𝜖 (𝑥1𝑘 −𝑥2𝑘 ) ≥ 𝜖𝑖
                                  𝑘
                                                                −     𝜖ℓ 2𝐿        > 𝜖 2−2𝐿 −
                                                                                      𝑖
                                                                                                    2        > 0,
                           𝑘=𝑖
                                                           𝑞1 𝑞2 ℓ=1                            1−𝜖


showing that, after perturbation, the lexicographically greater solution x(1) has greater
(perturbed) objective function value. Together, this shows that the unique optimal
solution to the perturbed problem is the lexicographically greatest solution to 𝑃 .

     Observe that the parameter 𝐿′ of the perturbed linear program increases polyno-
mially to 𝑂(𝑛𝐿), but the precision needed to solve the linear program approximately
in order to be able to recover the unique extreme point solution is still 2−𝑂(𝐿) , as this
represents a lower bound on the difference in value between any two extreme point
solutions.

                                               ˜ 𝜔 log(1/𝛿))) pseudo-deterministic
Theorem 4.2.6. There exists a (𝑂(𝑑2 log(1/𝛿)), 𝑂(𝑑
interactive proof for finding an optimal solution to a linear program 𝑃 .

     Linear programs with at most 𝑑 variables and constraints can be solved within an
error of 𝛿 in time 𝑂(𝑑
                   ˜ 2.5 log(1/𝛿)) deterministically [81], and in time 𝑂(𝑑
                                                                       ˜ 𝜔 log(1/𝛿))

randomized [24] with 𝜔 (currently ∼ 2.37) corresponds to the exponent for fast matrix
multiplication. The notation 𝑂
                             ˜ hides polylog factors. The time to verify a pair

of primal and dual optimal solution is only 𝑂(𝑑2 ) (with a log(1/𝛿) factor for bit
complexity) as this only requires matrix vector multiplication. So, verification is
currently more efficient than finding the solution.

                                                             64
Proof. By Theorem 4.2.5, we can perturb the objective function of 𝑃 and obtain a
linear program 𝑃 ′ which has a unique solution, namely the lexicographically greatest
solution of 𝑃 . Let 𝑄′ be the dual linear program to 𝑃 ′ . The prover sends over
optimal solutions to 𝑃 ′ and 𝑄′ . Then, the verifier checks to see whether the solutions
are feasible and also whether the value of the solution to 𝑃 ′ is equal to the value of the
solution to 𝑄′ . If both of these conditions hold, the verifier outputs the solution to 𝑃 ′ ,
otherwise it outputs ⊥. If the prover is honest, then clearly the verifier will output
the solution to 𝑃 ′ . A cheating prover cannot make the verifier output a different
solution to 𝑃 , as this would not correspond to an optimal solution of 𝑃 ′ since it is
unique.



4.3        Problems studied in fine-grained complexity

4.3.1      3-SUM and problems reducible to 3-SUM

3-SUM is the problem to find 3 numbers that sum to 0, where the numbers are drawn
from 3 lists. The 3-SUM problem has an easy 𝑂(𝑛2 ) time algorithm and this can be
improved by polylogarithmic factors [21]. It is an outstanding open question whether
there is an algorithm that is much faster than 𝑂(𝑛2 ), and finding such an algorithm
would give faster algorithms for a host of other problems in computational geometry
[31, 27]. We will show a pseudo-deterministic proof where the verifier runs in time
˜ 1.5 ).
𝑂(𝑛

Definition 4.3.1. We say the 3-SUM problem is the problem of, given 3 lists 𝑎1 , ..., 𝑎𝑛 ,
𝑏1 , ..., 𝑏𝑛 , 𝑐1 , ..., 𝑐𝑛 , of 𝑂(log 𝑛) bit integers, finding a triple 𝑎𝑖 , 𝑏𝑗 , 𝑐𝑘 such that 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑏𝑗 +
𝑐𝑘 = 0.

    In addition, [20] gives a nondeterministic proof that there is no triple of elements
that sum to 0 where the verifier takes time 𝑂(𝑛
                                            ˜ 1.5 ).

Theorem 4.3.2 ([20]). 3-SUM ∈ coNTIME(𝑂(𝑛
                                      ˜ 1.5 )).

Theorem 4.3.3. There exists a non-deterministic proof for 3-SUM where the verifier
             ˜ 1.5 ) and the prover runs in randomized time 𝑂(𝑛
runs in time 𝑂(𝑛                                            ˜ 2 ).

                                                   65
Proof. It takes a bit of work to show that the prover for this algorithm can run in
randomized time 𝑂(𝑛2 ). What the algorithm does is sends a prime 𝑝 such that fewer
than 𝑂(𝑛
     ˜ 1.5 ) triples sum to 0 mod 𝑝, and all of the triples that add to 0 mod 𝑝. Since

there are 𝑛3 triples and each sum must be a product of at most log(𝑛) primes, we
get that there are 𝑂(𝑛
                   ˜ 3 ) pairs (𝑎𝑖 , 𝑏𝑗 , 𝑐𝑘 , 𝑝) such that 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑏𝑗 + 𝑐𝑘 = 0 (mod 𝑝). Thus,

in the first 𝑛1.5 primes, over half the primes 𝑝 will have 𝑂(𝑛
                                                           ˜ 1.5 ) triples that sum to

0 mod 𝑝 by Markov’s inequality. Thus if we sample a random prime in the first 𝑛1.5
primes, we will get a good prime with high probability. Finding the sums equal to 0
mod 𝑝 still takes time 𝑂(𝑛
                       ˜ 2 ) deterministically.

   With this, we can construct a pseudo-deterministic proof for 3-SUM where the
prover runs in time almost equal to the best known deterministic algorithm for 3-
SUM.

                            ˜ 1.5 ), 𝑂(𝑛
Theorem 4.3.4. 3-SUM has a (𝑂(𝑛      ˜ 2 )) pseudo-deterministic proof.

Proof. We split the answer 𝑦 into 𝑦1 = 𝑖, 𝑦2 = 𝑗, and 𝑦3 = 𝑘. We have a 𝑂(𝑛
                                                                        ˜ 1.5 )

algorithm for proving that a list has no 3 integers which sum to 0. To check whether
there is a 3-SUM with 𝑧𝑖 < 𝑦𝑖 , we can simply replace the first 𝑖−1 lists with 𝑦1 , ..., 𝑦𝑖−1
respectively and take out all of the elements of the 𝑖th list after and including 𝑦𝑖 , and
then use a nondeterministic proof to show that there is no 3-SUM in these lists. It
takes time 𝑂(𝑛
           ˜ 2 ) to find a 3-SUM and the prover takes randomized time 𝑂(𝑛
                                                                      ˜ 2 ) in

the nondeterministic proof that there is no 3-SUM. Thus Lemma 4.1.3 implies that
there is a pseudo-deterministic proof where the verifier runs in time 𝑂(𝑛
                                                                      ˜ 1.5 ) and the

prover runs in randomized time 𝑂(𝑛
                               ˜ 2 ).

Corollary 4.3.5. Determining whether there are three collinear points in a set of
                           ˜ 1.5 ), 𝑂(𝑛
points on the plane has a (𝑂(𝑛      ˜ 2 )) pseudo-deterministic proof.


4.3.2     Hitting Set

The Hitting Set problem is, given two collections of sets, find a set in the first collection
that intersects every set in the second collection. The Hitting Set problem is also

                                             66
conjectured to take 𝑚2−𝑜(1) time [82]. Here we give a pseudo-deterministic proof in
which the verifier runs in linear time.


Definition 4.3.6. The Hitting Set problem is, given two collections 𝒮, 𝒯 of sets, find
a set 𝑆 such that 𝑆 ∩ 𝑇 ̸= ∅∀𝑇 ∈ 𝒯 .


Theorem 4.3.7 ([20]). There is a nondeterministic proof where the verifier runs in
time 𝑂(𝑚), 𝑚 = 𝑆∈𝒮 |𝑆| + 𝑇 ∈𝒯 |𝑇 |, and the prover runs in time 𝑂(𝑚2 ) for the
              ∑︀          ∑︀

Hitting Set problem and the complement of the Hitting Set problem.


Theorem 4.3.8. Hitting Set has a (𝑂(𝑚), 𝑂(𝑚2 )) pseudo-deterministic proof.


Proof. We can reduce the problem of showing there is no set 𝑆 ′ that is a hitting set
before 𝑆 to Hitting Set by removing all of the sets after 𝑆 including 𝑆 and proving
that there does not exist a hitting set for 𝑇 . Then, by Lemma 4.1.3, this implies
there exists a pseudo-deterministic proof for Hitting Set where the verifier runs in
time 𝑂(𝑚) and the prover runs in time 𝑂(𝑚2 ).



4.3.3    Model checking of graph properties

A large number of different graph problems can be expressed as model checking of
first-order properties as observed by [20]. For instance both the 𝑘-Dominating Set
problem [68] and asking whether a graph has diameter 2 [14] can be written as model
checking problems. [86] shows that given a first-order property of a graph with 𝑘
quantifiers over vertices, checking whether the graph has this property can be done
in time 𝑂(𝑛
        ˜ 𝑘−3+𝜔 ). We extend the work of [20] on sparse graphs to provide pseudo-

deterministic proofs.


Definition 4.3.9. We say a graph property is a formula 𝑄1 𝑥1 ∈ 𝑋1 𝑄2 𝑥2 ∈ 𝑋2 ...𝑄𝑘 𝑥𝑘 ∈
𝑋𝑘 𝜓, where 𝜓 is a quantifier-free formula on edge predicates and the model checking
problem for a graph property is to determine whether the property holds for a given
graph.

                                          67
Theorem 4.3.10 ([20]). If a formula with 𝑘 does not have the form ∃𝑘−1 ∀, then
the model checking problem for the formula can be solved in co-nondeterministic time
𝑚𝑘−2 where 𝑚 is the number of edges in the graph.

Theorem 4.3.11 ([20]). The deterministic complexity of model checking a 𝑘-quantifier
formula is 𝑂(𝑚𝑘−1 ).

Theorem 4.3.12. If a formula does not have the form ∃𝑘−1 ∀, there exists a (𝑂(𝑚𝑘−2 ), 𝑂(𝑚𝑘−1 ))
pseudo-deterministic proof for finding a setting to the first set of existential quantifiers
of that formula.

Proof. If the first 𝑖 quantifiers are ∃, then we can find 𝑥1 , ..., 𝑥𝑖 such that 𝑄𝑖+1 𝑥𝑖+1 ...𝑄𝑘 𝑥𝑘 𝜓(𝑥1 , ..., 𝑥𝑖 )
nondeterministically in time 𝑂(𝑚𝑘−𝑖 ) for any 1 ≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑖, and we can check for any
1 ≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑖 that ∃𝑥′𝑗 < 𝑥𝑗 𝑄𝑗+1 𝑥𝑗+1 ...𝑄𝑘 𝑥𝑘 𝜓(𝑥1 , ..., 𝑥𝑗−1 ) in co-nondeterministic time
𝑂(𝑚𝑘−2 ) by setting 𝑋𝑗′ = 𝑋𝑗 ∩ {𝑥|𝑥 < 𝑥𝑗 }. For both of these checks, the prover has
to solve a model checking problem with at most 𝑘 quantifiers, which has complex-
ity 𝑂(𝑚𝑘−1 ). This shows that there is a 𝑂(𝑚𝑘−2 ) pseudo-deterministic proof where
the prover runs in time 𝑂(𝑚𝑘−1 ) for finding a setting to the first set of existential
quantifiers of a formula, if the formula does not have the form ∃𝑘−1 ∀.


4.3.4      Problems equivalent to All-Pairs Shortest Path

The All-Pairs Shortest Path problem has been the focus of much research in fine-
grained complexity. It has been shown by [88, 87] that many problems related to
graphs reduce to the All-Pairs Shortest Path problem and vice versa, so finding a
faster algorithm for any one of these problems would yield a fast algorithm for a
host of graph problems. [20] shows that the Zero Weight Triangle problem, which is
equivalent to the All-Pairs Shortest Path problem under subcubic reductions [87], has
a 𝑂(𝑛3−𝜖 ) co-nondeterministic algorithm, which is faster than all known deterministic
algorithms. We use this to construct a pseudo-deterministic proof for the Zero Weight
Triangle problem.

Definition 4.3.13. The Zero Weight Triangle problem is given a graph 𝐺 = (𝑉, 𝐸)
and edge weights 𝑒(𝑖, 𝑗), find 𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑘 ∈ 𝑉 such that 𝑒(𝑖, 𝑗) + 𝑒(𝑖, 𝑘) + 𝑒(𝑗, 𝑘) = 0.

                                                68
Theorem 4.3.14 ([20]). The Zero Weight Triangle problem has a nondeterministic
proof and a co-nondeterministic proof where the verifier runs in time 𝑂(𝑛2+𝜔/3 ), where
𝜔 is the largest number such that matrix multiplication is in time 𝑂(𝑛𝜔 ).

                                                         ˜ 2+𝜔/3 ), 𝑂(𝑛
Theorem 4.3.15. The Zero Weight Triangle problem has an (𝑂(𝑛        ˜ 3 ))

pseudo-deterministic proof.

Proof. There is an easy reduction from Zero Weight Triangle to Zero Weight Triangle
on tripartite graphs. Then, we remove all edges in the first column going from 𝑖′ ≥ 𝑖
to 𝑗, and thus the resulting graph has a triangle with zero weight iff there exists a
triangle in the original graph with zero weight and 𝑖′ < 𝑖, where 𝑖 is the smallest
vertex in the claimed lexicographically first zero weight triangle. A similar argument
as the argument showing the prover for 3-SUM runs in randomized time 𝑂(𝑛
                                                                     ˜ 2 ) shows

that the prover for the pseudo-deterministic proof of Zero Weight Triangle runs in
randomized time 𝑂(𝑛
                ˜ 3 ). By Lemma 4.1.3, this implies that Zero Weight Triangle has

a pseudo-deterministic proof where the verifier runs in time 𝑂(𝑛
                                                             ˜ 2+𝜔/3 ) and the prover

runs in 𝑂(𝑛
        ˜ 3 ).



4.4     Conclusions and Open Problems

We defined the notion of doubly-efficient pseudo-deterministic proofs and gave a num-
ber of examples of search problems for which we showed doubly-efficient pseudo-
deterministic proofs. In all of these cases, the verifier runs faster than the best known
probabilistic algorithm for the problem which can offer significant improvements for
settings in which a more powerful computer (cloud, special purpose device, central-
ized authority) can perform the computation first and prove it to a significantly less
powerful user. In all these cases the prover’s computation increases polynomially
from what is necessary to solve the problem without need for a canonical solution.
An interesting problem would be show that this is true in general. Namely, that for
any doubly-efficient pseudo-eterministic proof the computation of the prover need be
no more than whats necessary to find the canonical solution. Finally, we remark that

                                           69
in all the cases we treated, the canonical solution was the lexicographically smallest
(or largest as in the LP case) but other canonical solutions are possible.




                                          70
Chapter 5

Non-Signaling Proofs

                                                                                       2
5.1     Non-Signaling Games with 𝑘 Players and 2−Ω(𝑘 )
                              (︁           )︁
                                        𝑘2
        Soundness are in SPACE poly(𝑛, 2 )
In what follows we state our main theorem.

                                  / SPACE(poly(𝑛, 2𝑘 )) and any 𝑘-prover one-
Theorem 5.1.1. Fix any language 𝐿 ∈
                                                                            2
round proof system (𝑃1 , . . . , 𝑃𝑘 , 𝑉 ) for 𝐿 with completeness 𝑐 ≥ 1 − 2−5𝑘 . For every
𝑥 consider the game 𝒢𝑥 = (𝒬, 𝒜, 𝑉, 𝜋𝑥 ), where 𝒬 = 𝒬1 × . . . × 𝒬𝑘 and where 𝒬𝑖 is the
set of possible queries sent by 𝑉 to prover 𝑃𝑖 , 𝒜 = 𝒜1 ×, . . . , 𝒜𝑘 and where 𝒜𝑖 is the
set of possible answers sent by 𝑃𝑖 , and 𝜋𝑥 is the distribution of queries sent by 𝑉 (𝑥).
   Then, there exists a constant 𝑎 > 0 and an infinite set 𝑁 ⊆ N, such that for every
                                                                2
𝑛 ∈ 𝑁 there exists 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 ∖ 𝐿 such that 𝒱NS (𝒢𝑥 ) ≥ 2−𝑎·𝑘 .

   We present two different proofs for Theorem 5.1.1. Both make use of the following
theorem which is the main technical contribution of this work.

Theorem 5.1.2. There exists a constant 𝑐 ∈ N, such that for any 𝑘 ∈ N and any
                                           2                        2
𝑘-player game 𝒢, if 𝒱subNS (𝒢) ≥ 1 − 2−4𝑘 then 𝒱NS (𝒢) ≥ 2−𝑐·𝑘 .

   We defer the proof of Theorem 5.1.2 to Section 5.2, and refer the reader to Sec-
tion ?? for the high-level overview of the proof. In what follows we present our proofs
for Theorem 5.1.1, both using Theorem 5.1.2 as a building block.

                                           71
   In the first proof, presented in Section 5.1.1, we rely on a prover reduction theorem
which shows that one can convert any 𝑘-player game with non-signaling value at most
2−𝑂(𝑘 ) into a 2-player game with non-signaling value at most 1−2−Ω(𝑘 ) . In the second
      2                                                                   2



proof, presented in Section 5.1.2, we rely on the fact that one can approximate the
sub-non-signaling of a 𝑘-player game up to an additive factor 𝜖, using an algorithm
running in space poly(cc, 2𝑘 , 1/𝜖), where cc is the communication complexity of the
game.


5.1.1     From Multi-Prover Non-Signaling Proofs to 2-Prover
          Non-Signaling Proofs

In the classical setting there is a well known reduction that converts any 𝑘-player
game into a 2-player. Below we present a slight variant of it, that will be useful in
the non-signaling setting.
   Let 𝒢 = (𝒬, 𝒜, 𝑉, 𝜋) be a 𝑘-player game. Consider the following 2-player game,
denoted by 𝒯 (𝒢) = (𝒬* , 𝒜* , 𝑉 * , 𝜋 * ):


   • 𝒬* = (𝒬*1 , 𝒬*2 ), where 𝒬*1 = 𝒬 and 𝒬*2 = {𝑆, 𝑞𝑆 }𝑆⊆[𝑘],𝑞𝑆 ∈𝒬𝑆 .

   • 𝒜* = (𝒜*1 , 𝒜*2 ), where 𝒜*1 = 𝒜 and 𝒜*2 =            𝑆⊆[𝑘] 𝒜𝑆 .
                                                      ⋃︀


   • 𝜋 * generates 𝑞 ← 𝜋 and generates a random subset 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘]. It outputs
      (𝑞, (𝑆, 𝑞𝑆 )).

   • 𝑉 * ((𝑞, (𝑆, 𝑞𝑆 )), (𝑎, 𝑎′𝑆 )) accepts if and only if 𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎) accepts and 𝑎𝑖 = 𝑎′𝑖 for
      every 𝑖 ∈ 𝑆.

                                                                                           2
Theorem 5.1.3. Let 𝒢 be a 𝑘-player game with non-signaling value less than 2−𝑐𝑘
(where 𝑐 ∈ N is the constant from Theorem 5.1.2). Then the 2-player game 𝒯 (𝒢) has
                                             2
non-signaling value at most 1 − 2−5𝑘 .

Proof. Let 𝒢 be a 𝑘-player game with non-signaling value less than 2−𝑐𝑘 . Suppose
                                                                               2



for the sake of contradiction that the non-signaling value of the 2-player game 𝒯 (𝒢)

                                                 72
is 1 − 𝜖, for 𝜖 < 2−5𝑘 . Let {𝑝𝑞,(𝑆,𝑞𝑆 ) } be a non-signaling strategy that convinces the
                       2



verifier 𝑉 * in the game 𝒯 (𝒢) to accept with probability 1 − 𝜖.
   Consider the sub-non-signaling strategy {𝑝𝑞 } for the 𝑘-player game 𝒢, where 𝑃𝑞
samples answers as follows:

   1. For every 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘], sample (𝑎, 𝑎′𝑆 ) ← 𝑝𝑞,(𝑆,𝑞𝑆 ) .

   2. If there exists 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘] such that the above answers are rejecting (i.e., 𝑉 * ((𝑞, (𝑆, 𝑞𝑆 )), (𝑎, 𝑎′𝑆 )) =
       0) then output ⊥.

   3. Otherwise, choose a random 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘] and output 𝑎 corresponding to this 𝑆.

Claim 5.1.4. {𝑝𝑞 } is a sub-non-signaling strategy for the 𝑘-player game 𝒢.

Proof. By definition, the fact that {𝑝𝑞,(𝑆,𝑞𝑆 ) } is a non-signaling distribution for the 2-
player game 𝒯 (𝒢), implies that there is a family of distributions {Sim𝑞 } ∪ {Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 } ∪
{Sim𝑞,(𝑆,𝑞𝑆 ) } such that for every 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬, for every 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘] and every 𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜𝑆 ,


                        Pr[𝑝𝑞,(𝑆,𝑞𝑆 ) |(𝑆,𝑞𝑆 ) = 𝑎𝑆 ] = Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ].


We prove that {𝑝𝑞 } is sub-non-signaling with respect to {Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 }. Namely, we prove
that for every 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬, every 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘], and every 𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜𝑆 ,


                             Pr[𝑝𝑞 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ≤ Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ].                         (5.1)


We note that Equation (5.1) would clearly hold if we chose 𝑎 corresponding to the
specific set 𝑆 in the equation. However, recall that 𝑝𝑞 chooses 𝑎 corresponding to a
random subset 𝑆 ′ ⊆ [𝑘].
   Thus, we define for every (fixed) 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘] a strategy {𝑝𝑆𝑞 } which is identical to {𝑝𝑞 },
except that if it doesn’t abort then it always outputs 𝑎 corresponding to the fixed
subset 𝑆. Therefore, to conclude the proof that {𝑝𝑞 } is sub-non-signaling it suffices
to prove that for every 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬, every 𝑎 ∈ 𝒜, and every subsets 𝑆, 𝑆 ′ ⊆ [𝑘], it holds
that
                                                        ′
                                 Pr[𝑝𝑆𝑞 = 𝑎] = 𝑃 𝑟[𝑝𝑆𝑞 = 𝑎],

                                               73
which follows directly from the the fact that {𝑝𝑞,(𝑆,𝑞𝑆 ) } is non-signaling (together with
the definition of {𝑝𝑆𝑞 }).


       Note that the sub-non-signaling strategy {𝑝𝑞 } is rejected with probability at most
2𝑘 · 𝜖 (by the union bound).
       This in particular implies that the sub-non-signaling value of 𝒢 is at least

                                                         2              2
                             1 − 2𝑘 · 𝜖 ≥ 1 − 2𝑘 · 2−5𝑘 ≥ 1 − 2−4𝑘 ,


which by Theorem 5.1.2 implies that the non-signaling value of 𝒢 is at least 2−𝑐𝑘 ,
                                                                                                     2



contradicting our assumption.




5.1.2        Approximating the Sub-Non-Signaling Value of 𝑘-Player
             Game via a Space Efficient Algorithm

Theorem 5.1.5. There exists an algorithm ℬ and a polynomial 𝑝 such that for any
𝑘-player game 𝒢 = (𝒬, 𝒜, 𝑉, 𝜋), and any 𝜖 > 0, it holds that ℬ(𝒢, 𝜖) runs in space
𝑝(log(|𝒬, 𝒜|), 1/𝜖, 2𝑘 ) and outputs a value 𝑣 such that |𝑣 − 𝒱subNS (𝒢)| ≤ 𝜖.

Corollary 5.1.6. Fix any language 𝐿 and any 𝑘-prover one-round proof system
(𝑃1 , . . . , 𝑃𝑘 , 𝑉 ) for 𝐿. For every 𝑥 consider the game 𝒢𝑥 = (𝒬, 𝒜, 𝑉, 𝜋𝑥 ), where
𝒬 = 𝒬1 × . . . × 𝒬𝑘 and where 𝒬𝑖 is the set of possible queries sent by 𝑉 to prover 𝑃𝑖 ,
𝒜 = 𝒜1 ×, . . . , 𝒜𝑘 where 𝒜𝑖 is the set of possible answers sent by 𝑃𝑖 , and 𝜋𝑥 is the
distribution of queries sent by 𝑉 (𝑥).
       Denote by 𝑐 the completeness of this proof system.1 If there exists a constant 𝑑 ∈ N,
such that for every large enough 𝑛 ∈ N, and every 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 ∖𝐿, 𝒱subNS (𝒢𝑥 ) ≤ 𝑐− 𝑛1𝑑 ,
                  (︀          )︀
then 𝐿 ∈ SPACE poly(𝑛, 2𝑘 ) .2
   1
     A proof system is said to have completeness 𝑐 if for every 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿 the honest provers convince the
verifier to accept 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿 with probability at least 𝑐. In particular, this implies that 𝒱subNS (𝒢𝑥 ) ≥ 𝑐
for every 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿.
   2
     This is assuming the communication complexity is poly(𝑛).
                                                            (︀        In the
                                                                           )︀ general case, where the
communication complexity is cc, we get that 𝐿 ∈ SPACE poly(𝑛, cc, 2𝑘 )


                                                  74
Proof of Corollary 5.1.6. Fix any language 𝐿 and any 𝑘-prover one-round proof
system (𝑃1 , . . . , 𝑃𝑘 , 𝑉 ) for 𝐿 with completeness 𝑐. For every 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}* , consider
the corresponding game 𝒢𝑥 as defined in the corollary statement. Suppose that there
exists a constant 𝑑 ∈ N, such that for every large enough 𝑛 ∈ N, and every 𝑥 ∈
{0, 1}𝑛 ∖ 𝐿, 𝒱subNS (𝒢𝑥 ) ≤ 𝑐 − 𝑛1𝑑 .

       Fix 𝜖 = 10·𝑛
                 1
                   𝑑 . From Theorem 5.1.5 we know that there exists an algorithm ℬ,


that given any 𝑘-prover game 𝒢 = (𝒬, 𝒜, 𝑉, 𝜋), and any parameter 𝜖, approximates
the value of 𝒢 up to an additive 𝜖 error. Importantly ℬ is an algorithm with space
complexity poly(log(|(𝒬, 𝒜)|), 1/𝜖, 2𝑘 ).

       Given 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}* , we determine if 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿 by running ℬ(𝒢𝑥 , 1/𝜖), and if the value
is at least 𝑐 − 𝜖 then we conclude that 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿, and otherwise conclude that 𝑥 ∈
                                                                             / 𝐿.

       Note that 1/𝜖 is a polynomial in 𝑛 since 𝜖 = 10𝑛
                                                      1
                                                        𝑑 . In addition, the size of 𝒬, 𝒜 is


exponential in 𝑛, which implies that the space complexity of ℬ(𝒢𝑥 , 1/𝜖) is poly(𝑛, 2𝑘 ),
as desired.3 Finally, we note that there may be a finite number of 𝑛’s for which we
do not have the guarantee that 𝒱subNS (𝒢𝑥 ) ≤ 𝑐 − 𝑛1𝑑 . For these 𝑛’s, we can hard-wire
the answers for whether 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿.



       We next prove Theorem 5.1.5. We use the approach of [52] which proves that
the non-signaling value of a two-player, one-round game can be approximated in
PSPACE.




Proof of Theorem 5.1.5. Fix any game 𝒢 = (𝒜, 𝒬, 𝑉, 𝜋). The sub-non-signaling
value of 𝒢 is given by the following linear program (where the variables are 𝑝𝑞 (𝑎) and



   3
    More generally, if (𝑃1 , . . . , 𝑃𝑘 , 𝑉 ) has communication complexity cc then |(𝒬, 𝒜)| ≤ 2cc , in which
case the space complexity of ℬ(𝒢𝑥 , 1/𝜖) is poly(𝑛, cc, 2𝑘 ), as desired.


                                                    75
Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 (𝑎𝑆 ), for every 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬, 𝑎 ∈ 𝒜, and nonempty 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘])


    Maximize
                  ∑︀              ∑︀
                       𝑞∈𝒬 𝜋(𝑞)     𝑎∈𝒜 𝑝𝑞 (𝑎)𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎)




    Subject to                            *
                  ∑︀
                       𝑎* ∈𝒜:𝑎*𝑆 =𝑎𝑆 𝑝𝑞 (𝑎 )) ≤ Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 (𝑎𝑆 )   ∀𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘], ∀𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜𝑆 , ∀𝑞 ∈ 𝒬,

                  ∑︀
                       𝑎𝑆 ∈𝒜𝑆 Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 (𝑎𝑆 ) = 1                 ∀𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘], ∀𝑞𝑆 ∈ 𝒬𝑆


                  𝑝𝑞 (𝑎) ≥ 0                                    ∀𝑎 ∈ 𝒜, ∀𝑞 ∈ 𝒬
                                                                                          (5.2)




   In what follows, we replace 𝑝𝑞 (𝑎) with 𝑥𝑞 (𝑎) = 𝜋(𝑞)𝑝𝑞 (𝑎) to simplify the expression
of the objective value. This gives us the linear program


   Maximize
                 ∑︀       ∑︀
                   𝑞∈𝒬       𝑎∈𝒜 𝑥𝑞 (𝑎)𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎)



   Subject to                         *
                 ∑︀
                   𝑎* ∈𝒜:𝑎*𝑆 =𝑎𝑆 𝑥𝑞 (𝑎 ) ≤ 𝜋(𝑞)Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 (𝑎𝑆 )      ∀𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘], ∀𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜𝑆 ∀𝑞, ∈ 𝒬

                 ∑︀
                   𝑎𝑆 Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 (𝑎𝑆 ) = 1                           ∀𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘], ∀𝑞𝑆 ∈ 𝒬𝑆


                 𝑥𝑞 (𝑎) ≥ 0                                       ∀𝑎 ∈ 𝒜, ∀𝑞 ∈ 𝒬
                                                                                          (5.3)
Observe that the constraints in this linear program above imply that Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 (𝑎𝑆 ) ≥ 0
for every 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘], every 𝑞𝑆 ∈ 𝒬𝑆 and every 𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜𝑆 . Namely, these constraints
can be added without changing the value of the linear program. This implies (by
Definition 2.3.7), that the dual to this linear program can be written as

                                                  76
  Minimize
                ∑︀        ∑︀
                  𝑆⊆[𝑘]        𝑞𝑆 ∈𝒬𝑆 𝑧𝑆 (𝑞𝑆 )




  Subject to
                ∑︀
                  𝑆⊆[𝑘] 𝑦𝑆 (𝑞, 𝑎𝑆 ) ≥ 𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎)                     ∀𝑞 ∈ 𝒬, ∀𝑎 ∈ 𝒜


                                                  *      *
                             ∑︀
                𝑧𝑆 (𝑞𝑆 ) ≥                * =𝑞 𝜋(𝑞 )𝑦𝑆 (𝑞 , 𝑎𝑆 )
                                  𝑞 * ∈𝒬:𝑞𝑆   𝑆
                                                                   ∀𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘], ∀𝑞𝑆 ∈ 𝒬𝑆 , ∀𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜𝑆


                𝑦𝑆 (𝑞, 𝑎𝑆 ) ≥ 0                                    ∀𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘], ∀𝑞 ∈ 𝒬, ∀𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜𝑆
                                                                                            (5.4)
Observe that the constraints in this linear program imply that 𝑧𝑆 (𝑞𝑆 ) ≥ 0 for every
𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘] and every 𝑞𝑆 ∈ 𝒬𝑆 , and thus these constraints can be added without changing
the value.




   Next, transform this linear program into a linear program with non-negative co-
efficients. To do so, observe that the optimal solution to the above linear program
satisfies that 𝑦𝑆 (𝑞, 𝑎𝑆 ) ≤ 1 for every 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘], every 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬 and every 𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜𝑆 . This
follows from the fact that 𝑉 (𝑎, 𝑞) ≤ 1 for every 𝑎 ∈ 𝒜 and every 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬. Therefore,
we can replace 𝑦𝑆 (𝑞, 𝑎𝑆 ) by 𝑦 𝑆 (𝑞, 𝑎𝑆 ) = 1 − 𝑦𝑆 (𝑞, 𝑎𝑆 ), without changing the value of

                                                   77
the linear program. This gives us the linear program


  Minimize
                 ∑︀         ∑︀
                    𝑆⊆[𝑘]        𝑞𝑆 ∈𝒬𝑆 𝑧𝑆 (𝑞𝑆 )




  Subject to                              𝑘
                 ∑︀
                    𝑆⊆[𝑘] 𝑦 𝑆 (𝑞, 𝑎𝑆 ) ≤ 2 − 1 − 𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎)                                      ∀𝑞 ∈ 𝒬, ∀𝑎 ∈ 𝒜


                                                   *       *                              *
                              ∑︀                                         ∑︀
                 𝑧𝑆 (𝑞𝑆 ) +                * =𝑞 𝜋(𝑞 )𝑦 𝑆 (𝑞 , 𝑎𝑆 ) ≥
                                   𝑞 * ∈𝒬:𝑞𝑆                                      * =𝑞 𝜋(𝑞 )
                                                                          𝑞 * ∈𝒬:𝑞𝑆            ∀𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘], ∀𝑞𝑆 ∈ 𝒬𝑆 , ∀𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜
                                               𝑆                                      𝑆




                 𝑦 𝑆 (𝑞, 𝑎𝑆 ) ≤ 1                                                              ∀𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘], ∀𝑞 ∈ 𝒬, ∀𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜𝑆


                 𝑦 𝑆 (𝑞, 𝑎𝑆 ) ≥ 0                                                              ∀𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘], ∀𝑞 ∈ 𝒬, ∀𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜𝑆


                 𝑧𝑆 (𝑞𝑆 ) ≥ 0                                                                  ∀𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘], ∀𝑞𝑆 ∈ 𝒬𝑆
                                                                                                    (5.5)
Note that all of the coefficients of this linear program are non-negative.

      Recall that our goal is to construct a poly(log(|(𝒬, 𝒜)|), 1/𝜖, 2𝑘 )-space algorithm
for computing 𝑣 such that
                                           |𝑣 − 𝒱subNS (𝒢)| ≤ 𝜖.

To this end, we add to our linear program a constraint of the form

                                          ∑︁ ∑︁
                                                        𝑧𝑆 (𝑞𝑆 ) ≤ 𝑣 ′
                                         𝑆⊆[𝑘] 𝑞𝑆 ∈𝒬𝑆


(for some value 𝑣 ′ ), and convert this (restricted) linear program into a mixed packing
and covering program, with the guarantee that for 𝛿 = (𝜖/2)
                                                       2𝑘
                                                            , a (1 + 𝛿)-approximate
solution to the mixed packing and covering program, implies a solution to the (re-
stricted) linear program, which is 𝜖/2-close an optimal solution. We can then use
binary search to find an 𝜖-approximation to the original linear program.

   To turn this restricted linear program into a mixed packing and covering problem,
we use all of the constraints above and include the constraint 𝑆⊆[𝑘] 𝑞𝑆 ∈𝒬𝑆 𝑧𝑆 (𝑞𝑆 ) ≤
                                                              ∑︀    ∑︀

𝑣′.

                                                    78
   A (1 + 𝛿)-approximate solution to a mixed packing and covering problem is (by
definition) a solution to the problem where all of the inequalities of the form 𝑎𝑖 𝑥𝑖 ≤ 𝑐
are relaxed to 𝑎𝑖 𝑥𝑖 ≤ 𝑐(1 + 𝛿). In our case, it means that the above ≤ inequalities are
replaced with
                                        𝑦¯𝑆 (𝑞, 𝑎𝑆 ) ≤ 1 + 𝛿

and
                        ∑︁
                                𝑦 𝑆 (𝑞, 𝑎𝑆 ) ≤ (2𝑘 − 1 − 𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎))(1 + 𝛿).
                        𝑆⊆[𝑘]

We next argue that a (1 + 𝛿)-approximate solution to our mixed packing and covering
problem implies a solution to our (restricted) linear program with value at most 𝑣 ′ +𝜖.




   To this end, suppose there these exists such a solution to the mixed packing and
covering problem, and denote it by

                   (︀                                                      )︀
                     {𝑦𝑆 (𝑞, 𝑎𝑆 )}𝑆∈[𝑘],𝑞∈𝒬,𝑎𝑆 ∈𝒜𝑆 , {𝑧𝑆 (𝑞𝑆 )}𝑆∈[𝑘],𝑞𝑆 ∈𝒬𝑆 .


Consider the solution

                   (︀ ′
                     {𝑦𝑆 (𝑞, 𝑎𝑆 )}𝑆∈[𝑘],𝑞∈𝒬,𝑎𝑆 ∈𝒜𝑆 , {𝑧𝑆′ (𝑞𝑆 )}𝑆∈[𝑘],𝑞𝑆 ∈𝒬𝑆 .
                                                                            )︀



where
                                                     1
                                   𝑦𝑆′ (𝑞, 𝑎𝑆 ) =       𝑦𝑆 (𝑞, 𝑎𝑆 )
                                                    1+𝛿
and
                                                             ∑︁
                           𝑧𝑆′ (𝑞𝑆 ) = 𝑧𝑆 (𝑞𝑆 ) + 𝛿                      𝜋(𝑞 * ).
                                                                 * =𝑞
                                                         𝑞 * ∈𝒬:𝑞𝑆   𝑆


It is easy to see that this solution satisfies the constraints of the (restricted) linear
program, and thus is a solution to the linear program.

                                                    79
   The value of this solution is

                        ∑︁ ∑︁
                                       𝑧𝑆′ (𝑞𝑆 ) =
                        𝑆⊆[𝑘] 𝑞𝑆 ∈𝒬𝑆
                                       ⎛                                         ⎞
                        ∑︁ ∑︁                                  ∑︁
                                       ⎝𝑧𝑆 (𝑞𝑆 ) + 𝛿                        𝜋(𝑞 * )⎠ =
                                                                    * =𝑞
                                                          𝑞 * ∈𝒬* :𝑞𝑆
                        𝑆⊆[𝑘] 𝑞𝑆 ∈𝒬𝑆                                    𝑆
                        ∑︁ ∑︁
                                       𝑧𝑆 (𝑞𝑆 ) + 𝛿(2𝑘 − 1) ≤
                        𝑆⊆[𝑘] 𝑞𝑆 ∈𝒬𝑆

                        𝑣 ′ + 2𝑘 𝛿 < 𝑣 ′ + 𝜖/2


   From Theorem 2.3.10 we can conclude that approximating the sub-non-signaling
value of a game with a constant number of provers takes space 𝑝(log(|(𝒬, 𝒜)|), 1/𝜖, 2𝑘 ).




5.1.3    Proof of Theorem 5.1.1 via Corollary 5.1.6


In what follows we prove Theorem 5.1.1. In the proof we rely on Corollary 5.1.6
which implies that if 𝐿 ∈
                        / SPACE(𝑛, 2𝑘 ) then there is an infinite set 𝑁 ⊆ N such that
for every 𝑛 ∈ 𝑁 there is an element 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 ∖ 𝐿 such that 𝒱subNS (𝒢𝑥 ) ≥ 𝑐 − 𝑛1 .
Consider the infinite set 𝑁0 ⊆ 𝑁 such that for every 𝑛 ∈ 𝑁0 it holds that 𝑛 ≥ 25𝑘 .
                                                                                         2



We conclude that for every 𝑛 ∈ 𝑁0 there exists 𝑥 ∈
                                                 / {0, 1}𝑛 ∖ 𝐿 such that

                                  1           2          2      2          2
             𝒱subNS (𝒢𝑥 ) ≥ 𝑐 −     ≥ 𝑐 − 2−5𝑘 ≥ 1 − 2−5𝑘 − 2−5𝑘 ≥ 1 − 2−4𝑘 .
                                  𝑛

Therefore, to prove Theorem 5.1.1 it suffices to prove the following theorem.

   The rest of this section is devoted to the proof of Theorem 5.1.2.

   We refer the reader to Section ?? for a high-level overview of the proof of Theo-
rem 5.1.2.

                                                     80
5.2     The Proof of Theorem 5.1.2

In this section we prove Theorem 5.1.2, which is our main technical theorem. In the
proof, we use the following theorem from [49].

                                                                                 2
Theorem 5.2.1. [49] For every 𝑘 ∈ N there exists a fixed value 𝛼𝑘 ≥ 2−𝑂(𝑘 ) such
that for any 𝑘-player game 𝒢, 𝒱NS (𝒢) ≥ 𝛼𝑘 · 𝒱hrNS (𝒢).



Proof of Theorem 5.1.2. Let 𝒢 = (𝒬, 𝒜, 𝑉, 𝜋) be a 𝑘-player game such that
𝒱subNS (𝒢) ≥ 1 − 𝜖, for 𝜖 = 2−4𝑘 . Let {𝑝𝑞 }𝑞∈𝒬 be a sub-non-signaling strategy, such
                                  2



that 𝒢 has sub-non-signaling value 1 − 𝜖 with respect to {𝑝𝑞 }𝑞∈𝒬 . Let


                      GOOD = {𝑞| Pr [𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎) = 1] ≥ 1 − 2𝜖]}.
                                      𝑎←𝑝𝑞



Claim 5.2.2. Pr𝑞←𝜋 [𝑞 ∈ GOOD] ≥ 1/2.


Proof. We know that
                              E𝑞←𝜋 [ Pr [𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎) = 0]] ≤ 𝜖.
                                      𝑎←𝑝𝑞


By Markov’s inequality this implies that


                           Pr [ Pr [𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎) = 0] ≥ 2𝜖] ≤ 1/2
                           𝑞←𝜋 𝑎←𝑝𝑞



which in turn implies that Pr𝑞←𝜋 [𝑞 ∈ GOOD] ≥ 1/2.


   Consider the distribution 𝜋 * = 𝜋|(𝑞 ∈ GOOD), and let 𝒢 * = (𝒬, 𝒜, 𝑉, 𝜋 * ). Note
that 𝒢 * is a game with sub-non-signaling value at least 1 − 2𝜖, since {𝑝𝑞 } is a sub-
non-signaling strategy for 𝒢 * that succeeds with probability at least 1 − 2𝜖.
   We next define a sub-non-signaling strategy {˜
                                                𝑝𝑞 } for the game 𝒢 * , such that for
every 𝑞 ∈ GOOD, every 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘], and every 𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜𝑆 , it holds that


                       𝑝𝑞 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ≤ E𝑞* ←𝜋* |(𝑞𝑆* =𝑞𝑆 ) [Pr[𝑝𝑞* |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]]
                    Pr[˜                                                             (5.6)

                                              81
and for every 𝑞 ∈ GOOD,


                                Pr [𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎) = 1] ≥ 1 − 2𝑘+2 𝜖.                           (5.7)
                               𝑎←˜
                                 𝑝𝑞



To this end, we define 𝑝˜𝑞 in a greedy manner, so that Equation (5.6) holds, while
keeping the invariant that for every 𝑞 ∈ GOOD and 𝑎 ∈ 𝒜 it holds that 𝑝˜𝑞 (𝑎) ≤ 𝑝𝑞 (𝑎).
This is done as follows: Fix any 𝑞 ∈ GOOD. Start with 𝑝˜𝑞 = 𝑝𝑞 . For every 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘]
and every 𝑎𝑆 , if


                         𝑝𝑞 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] > E𝑞* ←𝜋* |(𝑞𝑆* =𝑞𝑆 ) [Pr[𝑝𝑞* |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]]
                      Pr[˜


then (arbitrarily) reduce 𝑝˜𝑞 (𝑎* ) for every 𝑎* ∈ 𝒜 such that 𝑎*𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 so that


                        𝑝𝑞 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] = E𝑞* ←𝜋* |(𝑞𝑆* =𝑞𝑆 ) [Pr[𝑝𝑞* |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]],
                     Pr[˜


and in the remaining probability output ⊥. For each 𝑆 and 𝑎𝑆 , this step reduces the
probability that 𝑉 accepts by at most


           𝛿𝑆,𝑎𝑆 (𝑞) , max{0, Pr[𝑝𝑞 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] − E𝑞* ←𝜋* |(𝑞𝑆* =𝑞𝑆 ) [Pr[𝑝𝑞* |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]}.


This follows from the invariant that for every 𝑎 it holds that 𝑝˜𝑞 (𝑎) ≤ 𝑝𝑞 (𝑎). Since
we do this for every 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘] and every 𝑎𝑆 , in total the probability that 𝑉 accepts is
reduced by at most
                                               ∑︁
                                      𝛿(𝑞) =          𝛿𝑆,𝑎𝑆 (𝑞).
                                               𝑆,𝑎𝑆

Note that Equation (5.6) holds by definition of {˜
                                                 𝑝𝑞 }. To prove Equation (5.7), it
suffices to prove the following claim.



Claim 5.2.3. For every 𝑞 ∈ GOOD, it holds that 𝛿(𝑞) ≤ 2𝑘+1 𝜖.



Proof. Since {𝑝𝑞 } is a sub-non-signaling strategy, there exists a family of distributions

                                                82
{Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 } such that for every 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘] and every 𝑞𝑆 ∈ 𝒬𝑆 and 𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜𝑆 ,


                             max   * =𝑞
                                           Pr[𝑝𝑞* |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ≤ Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ].
                         𝑞 * 𝑠.𝑡. 𝑞𝑆   𝑆




Therefore,


                 Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ≥ E𝑞* ←𝜋* |(𝑞𝑆* =𝑞𝑆 ) [Pr[𝑝𝑞* |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] + 𝛿𝑆,𝑎𝑆 (𝑞),


which implies that

      ∑︁                            ∑︁                                            ∑︁                  ∑︁
1=          Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ≥             E𝑞* ←𝜋* |(𝑞𝑆* =𝑞𝑆 ) [Pr[𝑝𝑞* |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]+   𝛿𝑆,𝑎𝑆 (𝑞) ≥ 1−2𝜖+   𝛿𝑆,𝑎𝑆 (𝑞).
       𝑎𝑆                            𝑎𝑆                                           𝑎𝑆                         𝑎𝑆


We thus conclude that           𝑎𝑆 𝛿𝑆,𝑎𝑆 (𝑞) ≤ 2𝜖, which in turn implies that 𝛿(𝑞) =
                            ∑︀                                                                   ∑︀
                                                                                                      𝑆,𝑎𝑆 𝛿𝑆,𝑎𝑆 (𝑞) ≤

2𝑘+1 𝜖, as desired.



      Thus, the strategy {˜
                          𝑝𝑞 } satisfies Equations (5.6) and (5.7).


                                                                        (1)                (1)
We next define a family of sub-distributions4 {Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 }, where Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 is a sub-
distribution over 𝒜𝑆 , such that for every 𝑆, 𝑇 ⊆ [𝑘] such that 𝑆 ⊂ 𝑇 , and every
𝑞 ∈ 𝒬 and 𝑎 ∈ 𝒜,
                                           (1)                      (1)
                              Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ≤ Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]                                    (5.8)

and for every 𝑞 ∈ GOOD,

                                                                              2
                                     Pr          [𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎) = 1] ≥ 1 − 23𝑘 𝜖.                              (5.9)
                                      (1)
                                 𝑎←Sim[𝑘],𝑞



      We start by defining {Sim′𝑆,𝑞𝑆 } by


                      Pr[Sim′𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] , *              max * =𝑞 )
                                                                          𝑝𝑞* |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ].
                                                                       Pr[˜
                                                    𝑞 ∈GOOD|(𝑞𝑆   𝑆



  4
    A sub-distribution is a distribution where the total probability can be less than 1, but the
probability of each event must still be non-negative.


                                                        83
Note that this is a sub-distribution since by Equation (5.6),


  Pr[Sim′𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] = *            max
                                    * =𝑞 )
                                                    𝑝𝑞* |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ≤ E𝑞* ←𝜋* |(𝑞𝑆* =𝑞𝑆 ) Pr[𝑝𝑞* |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ],
                                                 Pr[˜
                          𝑞 ∈GOOD|(𝑞𝑆   𝑆




which together with the linearity of expectation, implies that indeed

 ∑︁                              ∑︁                                                                    ∑︁
         Pr[Sim′𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ≤            E𝑞* ←𝜋* |(𝑞𝑆* =𝑞𝑆 ) Pr[𝑝𝑞* |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] = E𝑞* ←𝜋* |(𝑞𝑆* =𝑞𝑆 )            Pr[𝑝𝑞* |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ≤ 1.
𝑎𝑆 ∈𝒜𝑆                          𝑎𝑆 ∈𝒜𝑆                                                                𝑎𝑆 ∈𝒜𝑆


Moreover, Equation (5.7), together with the definition of {Sim′𝑆,𝑞𝑆 }, implies that for
every 𝑞 ∈ GOOD,
                                    Pr        [𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎) = 1] ≥ 1 − 2𝑘+2 𝜖.                               (5.10)
                                𝑎←Sim′[𝑘],𝑞

                        (1)
We next define {Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 } by modifying {Sim′𝑆,𝑞𝑆 } in a greedy manner, to ensure that
Equation (5.8) is satisfied. This is done by induction starting with sets of size 1. For
every set 𝑇 of size 1, and for every 𝑞𝑇 , define

                                                 (1)
                                            Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 , Sim′𝑇,𝑞𝑇 .

                              (1)                                                                              (1)
Suppose we defined Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 for all sets 𝑆 of size less than 𝑖. We next define Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇
for sets 𝑇 of size 𝑖. To this end, fix any 𝑇 of size 𝑖 and fix any 𝑞𝑇 . Start by setting

                                                 (1)
                                            Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 = Sim′𝑇,𝑞𝑇 .


For every 𝑆 ⊂ 𝑇 and for every 𝑎𝑆 , if

                                      (1)                           (1)
                              Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] > Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]

                                                                     (1)
then (arbitrarily) reduce the total probability of Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 by exactly

                                                 (1)                        (1)
                   𝜉𝑆,𝑎𝑆 (𝑇, 𝑞𝑇 ) , Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] − Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ],




                                                       84
so that
                                     (1)                        (1)
                            Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] = Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]

Clearly this ensures that Equation (5.8) holds. We next argue that despite this
reduction in probability, Equation (5.9) holds. To this end, note that for every 𝑆, 𝑇 ⊆
[𝑘] such that 𝑆 ⊂ 𝑇 , and every 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬 and 𝑎 ∈ 𝒜,

                               {︁                                           }︁
                                                                 (1)
           𝜉𝑆,𝑎𝑆 (𝑇, 𝑞𝑇 ) ≤ max 0, Pr[Sim′𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] − Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] .


Define
                              ∑︁                                          ∑︁
             𝜉𝑆 (𝑇, 𝑞𝑇 ) ,          𝜉𝑆,𝑎𝑆 (𝑇, 𝑞𝑇 ) and 𝜉(𝑇, 𝑞𝑇 ) ,              𝜉𝑆 (𝑇, 𝑞𝑇 ).
                               𝑎𝑆                                         𝑆(𝑇




Claim 5.2.4. For every 𝑇 ⊆ [𝑘] and every 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬

                                                          2
                                           𝜉(𝑇, 𝑞𝑇 ) ≤ 22𝑘 𝜖.




   Note that Claim 5.2.4, together with Equation (5.10), implies that for every 𝑞 ∈
GOOD,
                                                                      2              2
                   Pr        [𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎) = 1] ≥ 1 − 2𝑘+2 𝜖 − 22𝑘 𝜖 ≥ 1 − 23𝑘 𝜖,
                      (1)
                𝑎←Sim[𝑘],𝑞


thus establishing Equation (5.9), as desired.

                                                  85
Proof of Claim 5.2.4. Fix any 𝑇 ⊆ [𝑘] and any 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬. Note that for every 𝑆 ⊂ 𝑇
and for every 𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜𝑆 ,


                         Pr[Sim′𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]
                              ∑︁
                         =             Pr[Sim′𝑇,𝑞𝑇 = 𝑎𝑇 ]
                              𝑎𝑇 :𝑎𝑇 |𝑆 =𝑎𝑆
                                  ∑︁
                         =                         max   * =𝑞
                                                                    𝑝𝑞* |𝑇 = 𝑎𝑇 ]
                                                                 Pr[˜
                                              𝑞 * ∈GOOD|𝑞𝑇   𝑇
                              𝑎𝑇 :𝑎𝑇 |𝑆 =𝑎𝑆
                                    ∑︁
                         ≤                    E𝑞* ←𝜋* |𝑞* |𝑇 =𝑞𝑇 Pr[𝑝𝑞* |𝑇 = 𝑎𝑇 ]
                              𝑎𝑇 :𝑎𝑇 |𝑆 =𝑎𝑆

                         = E𝑞* ←𝜋* |𝑞𝑇* =𝑞𝑇 Pr[𝑝𝑞* |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]

                         ≤ Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ].

                                         (1)
By the definition of Sim′𝑆,𝑞𝑆 , Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 , and 𝑝˜𝑞 , it holds that

                                                                                  (1)
                Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ≥ Pr[Sim′𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ≥ Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ].


Therefore, the equations above imply that

                                                                            (1)
                   𝜉𝑆,𝑎𝑆 (𝑇, 𝑞𝑇 ) ≤ Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] − Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ],


which in turn implies that

                                ∑︁                               ∑︁           (1)
                𝜉𝑆 (𝑇, 𝑞𝑇 ) =         𝜉𝑆,𝑎𝑆 (𝑇, 𝑞𝑇 ) = 1 −             Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ].   (5.11)
                                 𝑎𝑆                               𝑎𝑆


Note that by definition

                ∑︁             (1)
                                                  ∑︁
                      Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] =               Pr[Sim′𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] − 𝜉(𝑆, 𝑞𝑆 ).     (5.12)
                 𝑎𝑆                                𝑎𝑆


Therefore

                              ∑︁
          𝜉𝑆 (𝑇, 𝑞𝑇 ) ≤ 1 −          Pr[Sim′𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] + 𝜉(𝑆, 𝑞𝑆 ) ≤ 2𝑘+2 𝜖 + 𝜉(𝑆, 𝑞𝑆 ),
                               𝑎𝑆


                                                        86
where the second inequality follows from Equation (5.10). This implies that

                                                          ∑︁
                           𝜉(𝑇, 𝑞𝑇 ) ≤ 2|𝑇 | · 2𝑘+2 𝜖 +          𝜉(𝑆, 𝑞𝑆 ).         (5.13)
                                                          𝑆(𝑇


We use Equation (5.13), to prove that for every 𝑇 ⊆ [𝑘] and for every 𝑞𝑇 ,


                                       𝜉(𝑇, 𝑞𝑇 ) ≤ 22|𝑇 |𝑘 𝜖.                       (5.14)


We prove Equation (5.14) by induction on the size of 𝑇 , starting from |𝑇 | = 1. For
every 𝑇 of size 1 and for every 𝑞𝑇 , by definition 𝜉(𝑇, 𝑞𝑇 ) = 0.

   Suppose Equation (5.14) holds for every 𝑇 of size less than 𝑖, we prove that it
holds for 𝑇 of size 𝑖 as follows:

                                                         ∑︁
                          𝜉(𝑇, 𝑞𝑇 ) ≤ 2|𝑇 | · 2𝑘+2 𝜖 +          𝜉(𝑆, 𝑞𝑆 )
                                                         𝑆(𝑇

                                    ≤ 2|𝑇 | · 2𝑘+2 𝜖 + 2|𝑇 | 22(|𝑇 |−1)𝑘 𝜖

                                    ≤ 22𝑘+2 𝜖 + 2|𝑇 | 22|𝑇 |𝑘−2𝑘 𝜖

                                    ≤ 22𝑘+2 𝜖 + 22|𝑇 |𝑘−𝑘 𝜖 ≤ 22|𝑇 |𝑘 𝜖,


as desired, where the first inequality follows from Equation (5.13), the second inequal-
ity follows from the induction hypothesis, and the other inequalities follow from basic
arithmetic.




                          (1)
   We next modify Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 to ensure that its total probability is independent of 𝑞𝑆 .
                                    (2)                                       (1)
More specifically, we define Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 , which is a modification of Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 , such that for
every ℓ ∈ [𝑘] there exists 𝛼ℓ ∈ [0, 1] such that for every 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘[ of size ℓ and for every
𝑞𝑆 ∈ 𝒬𝑆 , it holds that
                                 ∑︁            (2)
                                       Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] = 𝛼ℓ                       (5.15)
                                  𝑎𝑆

In addition, we still ensure that for every 𝑆, 𝑇 ⊆ [𝑘] such that 𝑆 ⊂ 𝑇 , and for every

                                                87
𝑞 ∈ 𝒬 and 𝑎 ∈ 𝒜,
                                            (2)                              (2)
                               Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ≤ Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]                        (5.16)

and for every 𝑞 ∈ GOOD,

                                                                                   2
                                   Pr        [𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎) = 1] ≥ (1 − 23𝑘 𝜖)𝑘+1 .5                (5.17)
                                   (2)
                              𝑎←Sim[𝑘],𝑞



To this end, for every 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘] and every 𝑞𝑆 ∈ 𝒬𝑆 let

                                                     ∑︁              (1)
                                        𝛽𝑞𝑆 =              Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ].
                                                     𝑎𝑆


We argue that for every 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘],

                                                                         2
                                                    𝛽𝑞𝑆 ≥ 1 − 23𝑘 𝜖,                           (5.18)


as follows:

                        ∑︁                  (1)
                               Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]
                         𝑎𝑆
                              ∑︁
                        =                    max
                                               * =𝑞 )
                                                                   𝑝𝑞* |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] − 𝜉(𝑆, 𝑞𝑆 )
                                                                Pr[˜
                                   𝑞 * ∈GOOD|(𝑞𝑆   𝑆
                              𝑎𝑆
                                                                                       2
                              ∑︁
                        ≥                     max *                𝑝𝑞* |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] − 22𝑘 𝜖
                                                                Pr[˜
                                   𝑞 * ∈GOOD|(𝑞𝑆 =𝑞𝑆 )
                              𝑎𝑆
                                                                     2
                              ∑︁
                        ≥             𝑝𝑞* |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] − 22𝑘 𝜖
                                   Pr[˜
                              𝑎𝑆
                                                       2
                        ≥ 1 − 2𝑘+2 𝜖 − 22𝑘 𝜖
                                        2
                        ≥ 1 − 23𝑘 𝜖,


where the first equation follows from Equation (5.12) together with the definition of

                                                            2
  5
      Note that by our assumption that 𝜖 < 2−4𝑘 , Equation (5.17) implies that for every 𝑞 ∈ GOOD,
                                                                               2
                                        Pr         [𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎) = 1] ≥ (1 − 2−𝑘 )𝑘+1 .
                                             (2)
                                   𝑎←Sim[𝑘],𝑞




                                                                88
Sim′𝑆,𝑞𝑆 , the second equation follows from Claim 5.2.4, the third equation holds for
every 𝑞 * such that 𝑞𝑆* = 𝑞𝑆 , the forth equation follows from Equation (5.7), and the
last equation follows from basic arithmetic.

   For every ℓ ∈ [𝑘], let
                                                          2
                                          𝛼ℓ = (1 − 2−3𝑘 𝜖)ℓ .

For every 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘] of size ℓ, and for every 𝑞𝑆 ∈ 𝒬𝑆 and 𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜𝑆 , define

                                   (2)                    (1)          𝛼ℓ
                         Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] , Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ·           .
                                                                       𝛽𝑞𝑆

Note that by definition
                                    ∑︁             (2)
                                          Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] = 𝛼ℓ ,
                                     𝑎𝑆

                             (2)
as desired. Moreover, Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 is a sub-distribution, since

                   (2)                         (1)            𝛼ℓ          (1)
            Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] = Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ·               ≤ Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ],
                                                              𝛽𝑞𝑆

                                                                      (2)
where the first equality follows from the definition of Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 and the last inequality
follows from Equation (5.18) together with the the definition of 𝛼ℓ .
                                   (2)
   We next argue that Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 satisfies Equation (5.16). To this end, fix any 𝑆 ⊂
𝑇 ⊆ [𝑘] and fix any 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬 and 𝑎 ∈ 𝒜. Note that

                                             (2)
                                    Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] =
                                          (1)              𝛼|𝑇 |
                                    Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ·       ≤
                                                           𝛽𝑞𝑇
                                          (1)           𝛼|𝑇 |
                                    Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ·       ≤
                                                        𝛽𝑞𝑇
                                          (1)           𝛼|𝑆|
                                    Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ·       =
                                                        𝛽𝑞𝑆
                                             (2)
                                    Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ],

                                                                                  (2)
as desired, where the first equation follows from the definition of Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 , the second
equation follows from Equation (5.8), the third equation follows from the definition

                                                     89
of 𝛼ℓ together with Equation (5.18), and the last equation follows again from the
                      (2)
definition of Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 .




    Finally, note that for every 𝑞 ∈ GOOD,

                                                                  𝛼𝑘                                  2
   Pr        [𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎) = 1] =        Pr         [𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎) = 1]·      ≥   Pr [𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎) = 1]·𝛼𝑘 ≥ (1−23𝑘 𝜖)𝑘+1 ,
      (2)
𝑎←Sim[𝑘],𝑞
                                          (1)
                                  𝑎←Sim[𝑘],𝑞                      𝛽𝑞        (1)
                                                                       𝑎←Sim[𝑘],𝑞


                                                                                               (2)
as desired, where the first equation follows from the definition of Sim[𝑘],𝑞 , the second
equation follows from the fact that 𝛽𝑞 ≤ 1, and the last inequality follows from Equa-
tion (5.9) and from the definition of 𝛼𝑘 .




                                    (2)                                                              (3)
    We next modify {Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 } to a new family of sub-distributions {Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 } that
satisfies that for every 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬 and every 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘],

                                       𝑘−|𝑆|
                   (3)
                                          ∑︁                    ∑︁                  (3)
             Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ≥                (−1)𝑖−1                     Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ].          (5.19)
                                          𝑖=1             𝑇 )𝑆,|𝑇 |=|𝑆|+𝑖


To this end, we define

                                          (3)                 1               (2)
                              Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ,                    Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]
                                                            𝑘 2|𝑆|




                            (3)
Claim 5.2.5. {Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 } satisfies Equation (5.19).

                                                           90
Proof. Fix any 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬 and any subset 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘]. Note that

                         𝑘−|𝑆|
                         ∑︁                         ∑︁                  (3)
                                 (−1)𝑖−1                        Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]
                         𝑖=1                  𝑇 )𝑆,|𝑇 |=|𝑆|+𝑖
                             𝑘−|𝑆|
                             ∑︁           ∑︁                      (3)
                         ≤                             Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]
                               𝑖=1 𝑇 )𝑆,|𝑇 |=|𝑆|+𝑖
                             𝑘−|𝑆|
                             ∑︁           ∑︁               1                  (2)
                         =                                          Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]
                               𝑖=1 𝑇 )𝑆,|𝑇 |=|𝑆|+𝑖
                                                       𝑘 2(|𝑆|+𝑖)
                             𝑘−|𝑆|
                             ∑︁           ∑︁               1                  (2)
                         ≤                                          Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]
                               𝑖=1 𝑇 )𝑆,|𝑇 |=|𝑆|+𝑖
                                                       𝑘 2(|𝑆|+𝑖)
                             𝑘−|𝑆| (︂    )︂
                             ∑︁  𝑘 − |𝑆|         1              (2)
                         ≤                    2(|𝑆|+𝑖)
                                                       Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]
                           𝑖=1
                                     𝑖      𝑘
                                                       𝑘−|𝑆| (︂
                             1         (2)
                                                       ∑︁ 𝑘 − |𝑆|)︂ 1
                         ≤ 2|𝑆| Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ·
                           𝑘                            𝑖=1
                                                                    𝑖     𝑘 2𝑖
                                                𝑘−|𝑆| (︂
                                 (3)
                                                 ∑︁ 𝑘 − |𝑆|)︂ 1
                         ≤ Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ·
                                                 𝑖=1
                                                            𝑖        𝑘 2𝑖
                                        (3)
                         ≤ Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]


as desired, where the first equation follows from basic arithmetic, the second equation
                                              (3)
follows from the definition of Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 , the third equation follows from Equation (5.16),
the forth and fifth equations follow from basic arithmetic, the six follows from the
                   (3)
definition of Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 , and the last equation follows from the fact that

        𝑘−|𝑆| (︂      )︂        𝑘−|𝑆|          𝑘−|𝑆|       𝑘−|𝑆|      ∞
        ∑︁     𝑘 − |𝑆| 1        ∑︁        1    ∑︁ 1        ∑︁
                                                                  −𝑖
                                                                     ∑︁
                              ≤        𝑖
                                      𝑘 · 2𝑖 =           ≤       2 ≤     2−𝑖 = 1.
         𝑖=1
                  𝑖      𝑘 2𝑖    𝑖=1
                                         𝑘      𝑖=1
                                                     𝑘 𝑖
                                                            𝑖=1      𝑖=1




                                                                                (3)
   Equation (5.17), together with the definition of {Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 } and the assumption that

                                                          91
𝜖 ≤ 2−4𝑘 , implies that for every 𝑞 ∈ GOOD,
          2




                                 Pr      [𝑉 (𝑞, 𝑎) = 1] ≥ 2−3𝑘 log 𝑘 .            (5.20)
                                (3)
                           𝑎←Sim[𝑘],𝑞


                                                                       (3)
Equation (5.16), together with the definition of {Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 }, implies that for every
𝑆, 𝑇 ⊆ [𝑘] such that 𝑆 ( 𝑇 , and every 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬 and 𝑎 ∈ 𝒜,

                                  (3)                      (3)
                         Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ≤ Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]                 (5.21)


since

                           (3)                       1           (2)
                    Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] =              Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]
                                                𝑘 2|𝑇 |
                                                  1           (2)
                                               ≤ 2|𝑇 | Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]
                                                𝑘
                                                  1           (2)
                                               ≤ 2|𝑆| Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]
                                                𝑘
                                                         (3)
                                               = Pr[Sim𝑆,𝑞𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ].


   In what follows, we define an honest-referee non-signaling strategy for the game
𝒢 * that convinces 𝑉 to accept with probability at least 2−3𝑘 log 𝑘 . By Theorem 5.2.1
this implies that
                                                2                            2
                        𝒱NS (𝒢 * ) ≥ 2−𝑂(𝑘 ) · 2−3𝑘 log 𝑘 = 2−𝑂(𝑘 ) .

By the definition of 𝒢 * (and by Claim 5.2.2), this implies that

                                              1 −𝑂(𝑘2 )        2
                            𝒱NS (𝒢) ≥           ·2      ≥ 2−𝑂(𝑘 ) ,
                                              2

as desired.
   Therefore, it suffices to define an honest-referee non-signaling strategy for the
game 𝒢 * that convinces 𝑉 to accept with probability at least 2−3𝑘 log 𝑘 . We do this in
stages.
                                        (1)
   First, we define a strategy {𝑝𝑞 }. This strategy is not defined over 𝒜 but over
𝒜* = 𝒜*1 × . . . × 𝒜*𝑘 , where for each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑘], 𝒜*𝑖 , 𝒜𝑖 ∪ {*}. Fix any 𝑞 ∈ 𝒬.

                                                    92
     For any non-empty subset 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘] and every 𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜𝑆 , we define

                                               𝑘−|𝑆|
                                                ∑︁                  ∑︁                  (3)
           Pr[𝑝(1)
               𝑞 = (𝑎𝑆 , (*)
                            𝑘−|𝑆|
                                  )] ,                 (−1)𝑖                     Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ].
                                                𝑖=0            𝑇 ⊇𝑆,|𝑇 |=|𝑆|+𝑖


Equation (5.19) implies that this value is non-negative. Moreover, note that for every
𝑎 ∈ 𝒜,
                                                                    (3)
                                     Pr[𝑝(1)
                                         𝑞 = 𝑎] = Pr[Sim[𝑘],𝑞 = 𝑎].

                            (1)
We next ensure that 𝑝𝑞 is a distribution. To this end, note that




                  ∑︁
                         Pr[𝑝(1)
                             𝑞 = 𝑎] =
                  𝑎∈𝒜*
                     ∑︁       ∑︁
                                       Pr[𝑝(1)
                                           𝑞 = (𝑎𝑆 , (*)
                                                        𝑘−|𝑆|
                                                              )] =
                  𝑆⊆[𝑘]:|𝑆|≥1 𝑎𝑆 ∈𝒜𝑆

                     ∑︁       ∑︁ 𝑘−|𝑆|
                                 ∑︁                        ∑︁                     (3)
                                             (−1)𝑖                      Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] ≤
                  𝑆⊆[𝑘]:|𝑆|≥1 𝑎𝑆 ∈𝒜𝑆 𝑖=0              𝑇 ⊇𝑆,|𝑇 |=|𝑆|+𝑖
                             𝑘−|𝑆|
                     ∑︁      ∑︁                   ∑︁           ∑︁                 (3)
                                     (−1)𝑖                              Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]
                  𝑆⊆[𝑘]:|𝑆|≥1 𝑖=0            𝑇 ⊇𝑆,|𝑇 |=|𝑆|+𝑖 𝑎𝑆 ∈𝒜𝑆




                              (3)                              (3)
Note that                                         𝑎𝑇 ∈𝒜𝑇 Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 = 𝑎𝑇 ] depends only on 𝑇 ,
            ∑︀                                 ∑︀
                 𝑎𝑆 ∈𝒜𝑆 Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] =

and is otherwise independent of 𝑞𝑇 . This follows from Equation (5.15) and from the
                 (3)                         (1)
definition of Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 . Therefore, 𝑎∈𝒜* Pr[𝑝𝑞 = 𝑎] is independent of 𝑞. We denote
                                  ∑︀

by
                                                  ∑︁
                                             𝛼,          Pr[𝑝(1)
                                                             𝑞 = 𝑎].
                                                  𝑎∈𝒜*

                                       (1)                                (2)
If 𝛼 > 1 then we convert 𝑝𝑞                  to a distribution 𝑝𝑞               defined as follows: For every
𝑎 ∈ 𝒜* ,
                                                           1
                                     Pr[𝑝(2)
                                         𝑞 = 𝑎] ,            Pr[𝑝(1)
                                                                 𝑞 = 𝑎].
                                                           𝛼
                                                         93
                            (1)                     (2)
If 𝛼 < 1 then we convert 𝑝𝑞 to a distribution 𝑝𝑞 defined as follows: Let


                                   Pr[𝑝(2)    𝑘
                                       𝑞 = (*) ] , 1 − 𝛼,



and for every 𝑎 ∈ 𝒜* ∖ {(*)𝑘 } let


                                  Pr[𝑝(2)          (1)
                                      𝑞 = 𝑎] , Pr[𝑝𝑞 = 𝑎]


                                         (2)
It is easy to see that in either case, 𝑝𝑞 is a distribution.




                  (2)
Claim 5.2.6. {𝑝𝑞 } satisfies the honest referee non-signaling condition.




                                                             (1)                         (1)
Proof. In what follows, we use the following notation: If 𝑝𝑞 satisfies 𝛼 =
                                                                             ∑︀
                                                                              𝑎* ∈𝒜* Pr[𝑝𝑞 =

𝑎] > 1 then let 𝛾 = 𝛼1 , and otherwise let 𝛾 = 1.


   Fix any subset 𝑆 ⊆ [𝑘]. We argue that for every 𝑞, 𝑞 * ∈ GOOD such that 𝑞𝑆 = 𝑞𝑆* ,
and for every 𝑎𝑆 ∈ 𝒜*𝑆 ,

                                                    (2)
                            Pr[𝑝(2)
                                𝑞 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] = Pr[𝑝𝑞 * |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ].



Define 𝑆 ′ ⊆ 𝑆 to be the subset for which for every 𝑖 ∈ 𝑆 ′ it holds that 𝑎𝑖 ∈ 𝒜, and
for every 𝑖 ∈ 𝑆 ∖ 𝑆 ′ it holds that 𝑎𝑖 = *.

                                               94
      Pr[𝑝(2)
          𝑞 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] =

                                           𝑘−|𝑆 ′ ∪𝑉 |
       ∑︁ ∑︁
                  Pr[𝑝(2)
                       𝑞 = (𝑎𝑆 ′ , 𝑎𝑉 , (*)            )=
      𝑉 ⊆[𝑘]∖𝑆 𝑎𝑣 ∈𝒜𝑉
                                        ′
       ∑︁                 ∑︁∪𝑉 |
                     ∑︁ 𝑘−|𝑆                                        ∑︁                                      (3)
                                            (−1)𝑖                                       𝛾 · Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 ′ ∪𝑉 = 𝑎𝑆 ′ ∪𝑉 ] =
      𝑉 ⊆[𝑘]∖𝑆 𝑎𝑣 ∈𝒜𝑉              𝑖=0                   𝑇 ⊇𝑆 ′ ∪𝑉,|𝑇 |=|𝑆 ′ ∪𝑉 |+𝑖
                    𝑘−|𝑆 ′ ∪𝑉 |
       ∑︁             ∑︁                                  ∑︁                          ∑︁                    (3)
                                  (−1)𝑖                                      𝛾·               Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 ′ ∪𝑉 = 𝑎𝑆 ′ ∪𝑉 ] =
      𝑉 ⊆[𝑘]∖𝑆         𝑖=0                  𝑇 ⊇𝑆 ′ ∪𝑉,|𝑇 |=|𝑆 ′ ∪𝑉 |+𝑖               𝑎𝑣 ∈𝒜𝑉
                    𝑘−|𝑆 ′ ∪𝑉 |
       ∑︁             ∑︁                                  ∑︁                                      (3)
                                  (−1)𝑖                                      𝛾 · Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 ′ = 𝑎𝑆 ′ ] =
      𝑉 ⊆[𝑘]∖𝑆         𝑖=0                  𝑇 ⊇𝑆 ′ ∪𝑉,|𝑇 |=|𝑆 ′ ∪𝑉 |+𝑖
                                                              ⎛                                         ⎞
                                                                                              ′
           ∑︁                     (3)
                                                                   ∑︁
      𝛾·            Pr[Sim𝑇,𝑞𝑇 |𝑆 ′ = 𝑎𝑆 ′ ] · ⎝                            (−1)|𝑇 |−|𝑆 ∪𝑉 | ⎠
           𝑇 ⊇𝑆 ′                                                 𝑉 ⊆𝑇 ∖𝑆


Therefore, to argue that indeed

                                                                                       (2)
                                            Pr[𝑝(2)
                                                𝑞 |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ] = Pr[𝑝𝑞 * |𝑆 = 𝑎𝑆 ]



it suffices to prove that for every 𝑇 ⊇ 𝑆 ′ such that ℓ , |𝑇 ∖ 𝑆| ≥ 1, it holds that

                                                                                  ′
                                                     ∑︁
                                                                (−1)|𝑇 |−|𝑆 ∪𝑉 | = 0,
                                                   𝑉 ⊆𝑇 ∖𝑆


or equivalently that for every such 𝑇 ,

                                                                              ′
                                                             ∑︁
                                                                   (−1)|𝑆 ∪𝑉 | = 0.
                                                         𝑉 ⊆𝑇 ∖𝑆


This follows from the following calculation:




                                                                                         ℓ (︂ )︂
       ∑︁
                         |𝑆 ′ ∪𝑉 |              |𝑆 ′ |
                                                              ∑︁
                                                                              |𝑉 |
                                                                                        ∑︁   ℓ
               (−1)                  = (−1)              ·             (−1)           =         (−1)𝑗 = (1 − 1)ℓ = 0,
                                                                                        𝑗=0
                                                                                             𝑗
     𝑉 ⊆𝑇 ∖𝑆                                                 𝑉 ⊆𝑇 ∖𝑆


                                                                        95
as desired.




              96
Bibliography

[1] Leonard Adleman. Two theorems on random polynomial time. In Foundations
    of Computer Science, 1978., 19th Annual Symposium on, pages 75–83. IEEE,
    1978.

[2] Dorit Aharonov and Oded Regev. Lattice problems in NP ∩ coNP. Journal of
    the ACM (JACM), 52(5):749–765, 2005.

[3] László Babai. Trading group theory for randomness. In Proceedings of the seven-
    teenth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 421–429. ACM,
    1985.

[4] László Babai. Graph isomorphism in quasipolynomial time. In Proceedings of the
    forty-eighth annual ACM symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 684–697.
    ACM, 2016.

[5] László Babai, Lance Fortnow, and Carsten Lund. Non-deterministic exponential
    time has two-prover interactive protocols. Computational Complexity, 1:3–40,
    1991.

[6] László Babai and Eugene M Luks. Canonical labeling of graphs. In Proceedings
    of the fifteenth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 171–183.
    ACM, 1983.

[7] Michael Backes, Manuel Barbosa, Dario Fiore, and Raphael M Reischuk. Ad-
    snark: Nearly practical and privacy-preserving proofs on authenticated data. In
    2015 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, pages 271–286. IEEE, 2015.

[8] Michael Backes, Dario Fiore, and Raphael M Reischuk. Verifiable delegation
    of computation on outsourced data. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC
    conference on Computer & communications security, pages 863–874. ACM, 2013.

[9] Saikrishna Badrinarayanan, Yael Tauman Kalai, Dakshita Khurana, Amit Sahai,
    and Daniel Wichs. Succinct delegation for low-space non-deterministic compu-
    tation. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory
    of Computing, STOC 2018, Los Angeles, CA, USA, June 25-29, 2018, pages
    709–721, 2018.

                                       97
[10] Michael Ben-Or, Shafi Goldwasser, Joe Kilian, and Avi Wigderson. Efficient iden-
     tification schemes using two prover interactive proofs. In Advances in Cryptology
     - CRYPTO ’89, 9th Annual International Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara,
     California, USA, August 20-24, 1989, Proceedings, pages 498–506, 1989.

[11] Eli Ben-Sasson, Alessandro Chiesa, Daniel Genkin, Eran Tromer, and Madars
     Virza. Snarks for c: Verifying program executions succinctly and in zero knowl-
     edge. In Annual Cryptology Conference, pages 90–108. Springer, 2013.

[12] Eli Ben-Sasson, Alessandro Chiesa, Eran Tromer, and Madars Virza. Suc-
     cinct non-interactive zero knowledge for a von neumann architecture. In 23rd
     {USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security 14), pages 781–796, 2014.

[13] Ingrid Biehl, Bernd Meyer, and Susanne Wetzel. Ensuring the integrity of agent-
     based computations by short proofs. In Mobile Agents, Second International
     Workshop, MA’98, Stuttgart, Germany, September 1998, Proceedings, pages 183–
     194, 1998.

[14] Michele Borassi, Pierluigi Crescenzi, and Michel Habib. Into the square: On
     the complexity of some quadratic-time solvable problems. Electronic Notes in
     Theoretical Computer Science, 322:51–67, 2016.

[15] Zvika Brakerski, Justin Holmgren, and Yael Tauman Kalai. Non-interactive del-
     egation and batch NP verification from standard computational assumptions. In
     Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Com-
     puting, STOC 2017, Montreal, QC, Canada, June 19-23, 2017, pages 474–482,
     2017.

[16] Benjamin Braun, Ariel J Feldman, Zuocheng Ren, Srinath Setty, Andrew J
     Blumberg, and Michael Walfish. Verifying computations with state. In Proceed-
     ings of the Twenty-Fourth ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles,
     pages 341–357. ACM, 2013.

[17] Harry Buhrman, Lance Fortnow, and Thomas Thierauf. Nonrelativizing sep-
     arations. In Computational Complexity, 1998. Proceedings. Thirteenth Annual
     IEEE Conference on, pages 8–12. IEEE, 1998.

[18] Jin-yi Cai, Anne Condon, and Richard J. Lipton. PSPACE is provable by two
     provers in one round. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 48(1):183–193, 1994.

[19] John J Cannon. Construction of defining relators for finite groups. Discrete
     Mathematics, 5(2):105–129, 1973.

[20] Marco L Carmosino, Jiawei Gao, Russell Impagliazzo, Ivan Mihajlin, Ramamo-
     han Paturi, and Stefan Schneider. Nondeterministic extensions of the strong ex-
     ponential time hypothesis and consequences for non-reducibility. In Proceedings
     of the 2016 ACM Conference on Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science,
     pages 261–270. ACM, 2016.

                                         98
[21] Timothy M Chan. More logarithmic-factor speedups for 3sum,(median,+)-
     convolution, and some geometric 3sum-hard problems. In Proceedings of the
     Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages
     881–897. SIAM, 2018.

[22] Alessandro Chiesa, Eran Tromer, and Madars Virza. Cluster computing in zero
     knowledge. In Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications
     of Cryptographic Techniques, pages 371–403. Springer, 2015.

[23] Richard Cleve, Peter Høyer, Benjamin Toner, and John Watrous. Consequences
     and limits of nonlocal strategies. In 19th Annual IEEE Conference on Compu-
     tational Complexity (CCC 2004), 21-24 June 2004, Amherst, MA, USA, pages
     236–249, 2004.

[24] Michael Cohen, Yin-Tat Lee, and Zhao Song. Solving linear programs in the
     current matrix multiplication time. CoRR, abs/1810.07896, 2018.

[25] Graham Cormode, Michael Mitzenmacher, and Justin Thaler. Practical veri-
     fied computation with streaming interactive proofs. In Proceedings of the 3rd
     Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference, pages 90–112. ACM,
     2012.

[26] Craig Costello, Cédric Fournet, Jon Howell, Markulf Kohlweiss, Benjamin
     Kreuter, Michael Naehrig, Bryan Parno, and Samee Zahur. Geppetto: Versa-
     tile verifiable computation. In 2015 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy,
     pages 253–270. IEEE, 2015.

[27] Mark De Berg, Marko M de Groot, and Mark H Overmars. Perfect binary space
     partitions. Computational geometry, 7(1-2):81–91, 1997.

[28] David P. Dobkin, Richard J. Lipton, and Steven P. Reiss. Linear programming
     is log-space hard for P. Inf. Process. Lett., 8(2):96–97, 1979.

[29] Uriel Feige and Joe Kilian. Making games short (extended abstract). In Proceed-
     ings of the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing,
     El Paso, Texas, USA, May 4-6, 1997, pages 506–516, 1997.

[30] Dario Fiore, Rosario Gennaro, and Valerio Pastro. Efficiently verifiable compu-
     tation on encrypted data. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGSAC Conference
     on Computer and Communications Security, pages 844–855. ACM, 2014.

[31] Anka Gajentaan and Mark H Overmars. On a class of o(nˆ2) problems in com-
     putational geometry. Computational geometry, 5(3):165–185, 1995.

[32] Eran Gat and Shafi Goldwasser. Probabilistic search algorithms with unique
     answers and their cryptographic applications. In Electronic Colloquium on Com-
     putational Complexity (ECCC), volume 18, page 136, 2011.

                                        99
[33] Michel     Goemans.              18.415/6.854     advanced     algo-
     rithms   lecture    11,   2008.            URL:https://ocw.mit.edu/
     courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/
     6-854j-advanced-algorithms-fall-2008/lecture-notes/lec11.pdf.

[34] Michel Goemans, Shafi Goldwasser, and Dhiraj Holden. Doubly-efficient pseudo-
     deterministic proofs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00994, 2019.

[35] Oded Goldreich. Modern cryptography, probabilistic proofs and pseudorandom-
     ness, volume 17. Springer Science & Business Media, 1998.

[36] Oded Goldreich, Shafi Goldwasser, and Dana Ron. On the possibilities and lim-
     itations of pseudodeterministic algorithms. In Proceedings of the 4th conference
     on Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science, pages 127–138. ACM, 2013.

[37] Oded Goldreich, Silvio Micali, and Avi Wigderson. Proofs that yield nothing but
     their validity or all languages in NP have zero-knowledge proof systems. Journal
     of the ACM (JACM), 38(3):690–728, 1991.

[38] Oded Goldreich and Guy N Rothblum. Simple doubly-efficient interactive proof
     systems for locally-characterizable sets. In 9th Innovations in Theoretical Com-
     puter Science Conference (ITCS 2018). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer
     Informatik, 2018.

[39] Shafi Goldwasser and Ofer Grossman. Perfect bipartite matching in pseudo-
     deterministic RNC. In Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity
     (ECCC), volume 22, page 208, 2015.

[40] Shafi Goldwasser, Ofer Grossman, and Dhiraj Holden. Pseudo-deterministic
     proofs. In 9th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS
     2018). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2018.

[41] Shafi Goldwasser, Yael Tauman Kalai, and Guy N. Rothblum. Delegating com-
     putation: interactive proofs for muggles. In STOC, pages 113–122, 2008.

[42] Shafi Goldwasser and Michael Sipser. Private coins versus public coins in inter-
     active proof systems. In Proceedings of the eighteenth annual ACM symposium
     on Theory of computing, pages 59–68. ACM, 1986.

[43] Joachim Grollmann and Alan L Selman. Complexity measures for public-key
     cryptosystems. SIAM Journal on Computing, 17(2):309–335, 1988.

[44] Ofer Grossman. Finding primitive roots pseudo-deterministically. In Electronic
     Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC), volume 22, page 207, 2015.

[45] Lane A Hemaspaandra, Ashish V Naik, Mitsunori Ogihara, and Alan L Selman.
     Computing solutions uniquely collapses the polynomial hierarchy. SIAM Journal
     on Computing, 25(4):697–708, 1996.

                                        100
[46] Dhiraj Holden.     A note on unconditional subexponential-time pseudo-
     deterministic algorithms for BPP search problems.       arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1707.05808, 2017.
[47] Dhiraj Holden and Yael Tauman Kalai. Non-signaling proofs with o ( log n)
     provers are in pspace. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual ACM SIGACT Sym-
     posium on Theory of Computing, pages 1024–1037, 2020.
[48] Justin Holmgren and Lisa Yang. Characterizing parallel repetition of non-
     signaling games: Counterexamples and a dichotomy theorem. Electronic Col-
     loquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC), 25:121, 2018.
[49] Justin Holmgren and Lisa Yang. The parallel repetition of non-signaling games:
     counterexamples and dichotomy. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual ACM
     SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 185–192. ACM, 2019.
[50] Neil Immerman. Nondeterministic space is closed under complementation. SIAM
     Journal on computing, 17(5):935–938, 1988.
[51] Tsuyoshi Ito. Polynomial-space approximation of no-signaling provers. In Au-
     tomata, Languages and Programming, 37th International Colloquium, ICALP
     2010, Bordeaux, France, July 6-10, 2010, Proceedings, Part I, pages 140–151,
     2010.
[52] Tsuyoshi Ito. Polynomial-space approximation of no-signaling provers. In Inter-
     national Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, pages 140–151.
     Springer, 2010.
[53] Tsuyoshi Ito, Hirotada Kobayashi, and Keiji Matsumoto. Oracularization and
     two-prover one-round interactive proofs against nonlocal strategies. In IEEE
     Conference on Computational Complexity, pages 217–228, 2009.
[54] Yael Tauman Kalai and Omer Paneth. Delegating RAM computations. In Theory
     of Cryptography - 14th International Conference, TCC 2016-B, Beijing, China,
     October 31 - November 3, 2016, Proceedings, Part II, pages 91–118, 2016.
[55] Yael Tauman Kalai, Ran Raz, and Oded Regev. On the space complexity of linear
     programming with preprocessing. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on
     Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science, Cambridge, MA, USA, January
     14-16, 2016, pages 293–300, 2016.
[56] Yael Tauman Kalai, Ran Raz, and Ron D. Rothblum. Delegation for bounded
     space. In Symposium on Theory of Computing Conference, STOC’13, Palo Alto,
     CA, USA, June 1-4, 2013, pages 565–574, 2013.
[57] Yael Tauman Kalai, Ran Raz, and Ron D. Rothblum. How to delegate computa-
     tions: the power of no-signaling proofs. In Symposium on Theory of Computing,
     STOC 2014, New York, NY, USA, May 31 - June 03, 2014, pages 485–494,
     2014.

                                        101
[58] Leonid A. Khalfin and Boris S. Tsirelson. Quantum and quasi-classical analogs
     of Bell inequalities. In In Symposium on the Foundations of Modern Physics,
     pages 441–460, 1985.

[59] Ahmed E Kosba, Dimitrios Papadopoulos, Charalampos Papamanthou, Mah-
     moud F Sayed, Elaine Shi, and Nikos Triandopoulos. {TRUESET}: Faster ver-
     ifiable set computations. In 23rd {USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX}
     Security 14), pages 765–780, 2014.

[60] Cecilia Lancien and Andreas Winter. Parallel repetition and concentration for
     (sub-)no-signalling games via a flexible constrained de finetti reduction. CoRR,
     abs/1506.07002, 2015.

[61] Michael Luby and Noam Nisan. A parallel approximation algorithm for positive
     linear programming. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual ACM Sympo-
     sium on Theory of Computing, May 16-18, 1993, San Diego, CA, USA, pages
     448–457, 1993.

[62] Rudolf Mathon. A note on the graph isomorphism counting problem. Information
     Processing Letters, 8(3):131–136, 1979.

[63] Jiri Matousek and Bernd Gärtner. Understanding and using linear programming.
     Springer Science & Business Media, 2007.

[64] Peter Bro Miltersen, N Variyam Vinodchandran, and Osamu Watanabe. Super-
     polynomial versus half-exponential circuit size in the exponential hierarchy. In In-
     ternational Computing and Combinatorics Conference, pages 210–220. Springer,
     1999.

[65] Noam Nisan and Avi Wigderson. Hardness vs randomness. Journal of computer
     and System Sciences, 49(2):149–167, 1994.

[66] Igor C Oliveira and Rahul Santhanam. Pseudodeterministic constructions in
     subexponential time. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.01817, 2016.

[67] Bryan Parno, Jon Howell, Craig Gentry, and Mariana Raykova. Pinocchio:
     Nearly practical verifiable computation. In 2013 IEEE Symposium on Security
     and Privacy, pages 238–252. IEEE, 2013.

[68] Mihai Pătraşcu and Ryan Williams. On the possibility of faster sat algorithms.
     In Proceedings of the twenty-first annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete
     Algorithms, pages 1065–1075. SIAM, 2010.

[69] Sandu Popescu and Daniel Rohrlich. Quantum nonlocality as an axiom. Foun-
     dations of Physics, 24(3):379–385, 1994.

[70] Peter Rastall. Locality, Bell’s theorem, and quantum mechanics. Foundations of
     Physics, 15(9):963–972, 1985.

                                          102
[71] Omer Reingold, Guy N Rothblum, and Ron D Rothblum. Constant-round in-
     teractive proofs for delegating computation. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual
     ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 49–62. ACM, 2016.

[72] Eli Ben Sasson, Alessandro Chiesa, Christina Garman, Matthew Green, Ian
     Miers, Eran Tromer, and Madars Virza. Zerocash: Decentralized anonymous
     payments from bitcoin. In 2014 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy,
     pages 459–474. IEEE, 2014.

[73] Maria J. Serna. Approximating linear programming is log-space complete for P.
     Inf. Process. Lett., 37(4):233–236, 1991.

[74] Srinath Setty, Benjamin Braun, Victor Vu, Andrew J Blumberg, Bryan Parno,
     and Michael Walfish. Resolving the conflict between generality and plausibility
     in verified computation. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM European Conference on
     Computer Systems, pages 71–84. ACM, 2013.

[75] Srinath Setty, Victor Vu, Nikhil Panpalia, Benjamin Braun, Andrew J Blumberg,
     and Michael Walfish. Taking proof-based verified computation a few steps closer
     to practicality. In Presented as part of the 21st {USENIX} Security Symposium
     ({USENIX} Security 12), pages 253–268, 2012.

[76] Srinath TV Setty, Richard McPherson, Andrew J Blumberg, and Michael Wal-
     fish. Making argument systems for outsourced computation practical (some-
     times). In NDSS, volume 1, page 17, 2012.

[77] Adi Shamir. IP=PSPACE. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 39(4):869–877, 1992.

[78] Róbert Szelepcsényi. The method of forced enumeration for nondeterministic
     automata. Acta Informatica, 26(3):279–284, 1988.

[79] Justin Thaler. Time-optimal interactive proofs for circuit evaluation.      In
     CRYPTO (2), pages 71–89, 2013.

[80] Justin Thaler, Mike Roberts, Michael Mitzenmacher, and Hanspeter Pfister.
     Verifiable computation with massively parallel interactive proofs. In HotCloud,
     2012.

[81] Pravin Vaidya. Speeding-up linear programming using fast matrix multiplication.
     In FOCS, 1989.

[82] Virginia Vassilevska Williams. Hardness of easy problems: Basing hardness
     on popular conjectures such as the strong exponential time hypothesis (invited
     talk). In 10th International Symposium on Parameterized and Exact Computa-
     tion (IPEC 2015). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2015.

[83] Victor Vu, Srinath Setty, Andrew J Blumberg, and Michael Walfish. A hybrid
     architecture for interactive verifiable computation. In 2013 IEEE Symposium on
     Security and Privacy, pages 223–237. IEEE, 2013.

                                        103
[84] Riad S Wahby, Srinath TV Setty, Zuocheng Ren, Andrew J Blumberg, and
     Michael Walfish. Efficient ram and control flow in verifiable outsourced compu-
     tation. In NDSS, 2015.

[85] Michael Walfish and Andrew J. Blumberg. Verifying computations without re-
     executing them. Commun. ACM, 58(2):74–84, 2015.

[86] Ryan Williams. Faster decision of first-order graph properties. In Proceedings of
     the Joint Meeting of the Twenty-Third EACSL Annual Conference on Computer
     Science Logic (CSL) and the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on
     Logic in Computer Science (LICS), page 80. ACM, 2014.

[87] Virginia Vassilevska Williams and Ryan Williams. Subcubic equivalences be-
     tween path, matrix and triangle problems. In 2010 IEEE 51st Annual Symposium
     on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 645–654. IEEE, 2010.

[88] Virginia Vassilevska Williams and Ryan Williams. Finding, minimizing, and
     counting weighted subgraphs. SIAM Journal on Computing, 42(3):831–854, 2013.

[89] Neal E Young. Sequential and parallel algorithms for mixed packing and covering.
     In Proceedings 42nd IEEE symposium on foundations of computer science, pages
     538–546. IEEE, 2001.




                                         104
