Proceedings of Machine Learning Research vol 336:1–68, 2026               39th Annual Conference on Learning Theory




                Estimating Ising Models in Total Variation Distance

Constantinos Daskalakis                                                              COSTIS @ CSAIL . MIT. EDU
CSAIL, MIT

Vardis Kandiros                                                                    AK 5484@ COLUMBIA . EDU
Data Science Institute, Columbia University

Rui Yao                                                                                     RAYYAO @ MIT. EDU
CSAIL, MIT


Editors: Steve Hanneke and Tor Lattimore


                                                        Abstract
     We consider the problem of estimating Ising models over n variables in Total Variation (TV) dis-
     tance, given l independent samples from the model. While the statistical complexity of the prob-
     lem is well-understood Devroye et al. (2020), identifying computationally and statistically efficient
     algorithms has been challenging. In particular, remarkable progress has occurred in several set-
     tings, such as when the underlying graph is a tree Daskalakis and Pan (2021); Bhattacharyya et al.
     (2021), when the entries of the interaction matrix follow a Gaussian distribution Gaitonde and Mos-
     sel (2024); Chandrasekaran and Klivans (2024), or when the bulk of its eigenvalues lie in a small
     interval Anari et al. (2024a); Koehler et al. (2024), but no unified framework for polynomial-time
     estimation in TV exists so far.
          Our main contribution is a unified analysis of the Maximum Pseudo-Likelihood Estimator
     (MPLE) for two general classes of Ising models. The first class includes models whose interac-
     tion matrix has a bounded operator norm. In particular, we focus on the subclass of models that
     satisfy the Modified Log-Sobolev Inequality (MLSI), a functional inequality that was introduced
     to study the convergence of the associated Glauber dynamics to stationarity. In the second class
     of models, the interaction matrix has bounded infinity norm (or bounded width), which is the most
     common assumption in the literature for structure learning of Ising models. We show how our gen-
     eral results for these classes yield polynomial-time algorithms and optimal or near-optimal sample
     complexity guarantees in a variety of settings. Our proofs employ a variety of tools from tensoriza-
     tion inequalities to measure decompositions and concentration bounds.
     Keywords: Total Variation Distance, Graphical models, Ising model


1. Introduction
Undirected graphical models are a widely used framework for capturing conditional independence
structure in a high-dimensional distribution. One of the earliest and most prominent instances of
these models are Ising models, a family of distributions over n binary variables specified by a
symmetric interaction matrix J ∗ ∈ Rn×n , with zero diagonal, and a vector of external fields h ∈ Rn .
In terms of these parameters, a probability distribution is defined over {−1, 1}n , assigning to each
vector x ∈ {−1, 1}n probability
                                                                     
                                        1             1 ⊤ ∗        ⊤
                           Pr [x] =           · exp     x J x+h x ,                               (1)
                          J ∗ ,h      ZJ ∗ ,h         2

© 2026 C. Daskalakis, V. Kandiros & R. Yao.
                                         DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




where the normalizing constant
                                                                                    
                                                X                   1 ⊤ ∗
                            Z   J ∗ ,h   :=               exp         x J x + h⊤ x
                                                                    2
                                              x∈{−1,1}n

is called the partition function of the model. We will focus on the case h = 0, so we drop the
dependence on h whenever that happens. The matrix J ∗ can also be thought of as the weighted
adjacency matrix of a graph with n nodes. This gives rise to the interpretation of an Ising model as
a Markov Random Field (MRF) Koller and Friedman (2009); Wainwright et al. (2008), where con-
ditional independence relations between variables are encoded as connectivity properties between
nodes in the graph defined by J ∗ . Since its introduction in statistical physics Lenz (1920), the Ising
model has been studied intensely in probability theory, and has found profound applications in a
variety of fields, including computer vision, economics, computational biology, and the social sci-
ences; see e.g. Geman and Graffigne (1986); Ellison (1993); Felsenstein (2004); Daskalakis et al.
(2006); Montanari and Saberi (2010). Motivated in part by these applications, a common challenge
is estimating an Ising model given a number of observations that are assumed to be distributed ac-
cording to some Ising model, e.g. capturing opinions of individuals in a social network, or traits of
species in some phylogenetic tree.
     The problem of learning the structure of the underlying graph, i.e. the non-zero entries of J ∗ ,
given access to l independent samples from an Ising model has received significant attention, due to
its importance in capturing conditional independence properties. Under the assumption that the de-
gree of the graph is bounded by d and the non-zero entries of J ∗ are both upper and lower bounded
in absolute value, a breakthrough result by Bresler Bresler (2015) provided a polynomial-time algo-
rithm for identifying the graph topology, albeit with doubly exponential dependence of the sample-
size requirements in the degree d. A flurry of subsequent works Hamilton et al. (2017); Vuffray
et al. (2016); Lokhov et al. (2018); Klivans and Meka (2017); Wu et al. (2019); Zhang et al. (2020)
have culminated in polynomial-time algorithms that estimate every entry of J ∗ up to error ϵ, given
l = Θ(eΘ(d) log n/ϵ4 ) samples from the model, under the assumption that each row of J ∗ has infin-
ity norm that is upper-bounded. This matches the information-theoretic lower bound of Santhanam
and Wainwright (2012). Thus, the problem of estimating the graph structure of an Ising model is by
now well understood under relatively general assumptions.
     However, often the purpose of estimation is to make predictions of events for various down-
stream uses of the model Bresler and Karzand (2020); Daskalakis and Pan (2021); Bhattacharyya
et al. (2021). It is clear that the right metric to capture this property is not graph similarity, but
the total variation (TV) distance (formal definition in Section 2) between the true and the estimated
distribution. Information-theoretically, Devroye et al. Devroye et al. (2020) show that Õ(n2 /ϵ2 )
samples from some Ising model are both necessary and sufficient for estimating an Ising model that
is ϵ-close in TV. The algorithm proposed in Devroye et al. (2020) involves exhaustive search over
all models and is thus computationally infeasible. This motivates the following natural question.

      Is there a polynomial-time algorithm that uses independent samples from an Ising
      model and outputs some Ising model that is close to the one providing samples in TV
      distance?

While for the problem of structure recovery, there has been significant progress towards computa-
tionally efficient and statistically optimal algorithms under fairly general settings, attaining similar

                                                           2
guarantees for the TV estimation problem has been challenging. Remarkable progress has occurred
across several different directions, such as when the graph is a tree Daskalakis and Pan (2021); Bhat-
tacharyya et al. (2021), when the interaction matrix is sampled from a Gaussian ensemble Gaitonde
and Mossel (2024); Chandrasekaran and Klivans (2024), or when most of the spectrum of the matrix
lies in a small interval Anari et al. (2024a); Koehler et al. (2024), but no unified framework exists
for statistically and computationally efficient procedures for this task. The main contribution of this
work is to provide a refined understanding of a natural, polynomial-time algorithm for Ising model
estimation, under broad conditions, and derive from our understanding near-optimal (and in some
cases optimal) sample-complexity guarantees in a variety of important, specific settings. In particu-
lar, we focus on the so-called Maximum Pseudo-Likelihood Estimator (MPLE) (formally defined in
Section 4), which was introduced in Besag (1974) and is often employed for statistical estimation
of autoregressive models. We study the performance of this polynomial-time computable estimator
for two general classes of Ising models, which we review in the next couple of paragraphs.
     (i) Bounded Operator Norm Condition: A variety of interesting models from statistical physics,
such as the SK model Panchenko (2012), involve interaction matrices whose operator norm is upper
bounded by a constant. Since these models exhibit complex behavior and undergo phase transi-
tions, we need to incorporate more information about the distribution. One common way of doing
that is by studying the properties of an associated Markov Chain, called Glauber dynamics, that
has this model as its stationary distribution. In particular, we focus on Ising models that satisfy
the so-called Modified Log-Sobolev Inequality (MLSI), which guarantees fast convergence of the
Glauber dynamics to the stationary distributionBobkov and Tetali (2006)(for formal definitions, see
Section A). This condition has been shown to hold for a variety of Ising models under different
assumptions Anari et al. (2021, 2024b); Caputo et al. (2015); Chen and Eldan (2022); Blanca et al.
(2022); Chen et al. (2021). It is also known to imply many structural properties for the Ising model
distribution, such as fast mixing Caputo (2023) and concentration of measure Marton (2015); Sam-
bale and Sinulis (2019); Götze et al. (2021). We prove a general result about the performance of
MPLE for estimating Ising Models with bounded operator norm that satisfy MLSI, which implies
optimal or near-optimal sample complexity for learning a variety of Ising models, improving results
from prior work.
     (ii) Bounded Width Condition: The second class of models we study are bounded-width models,
where ∥J ∗ ∥∞ = O(1). This has been the canonical class of models considered in most studies of
the structure learning problem Santhanam and Wainwright (2012); Bresler (2015); Hamilton et al.
(2017); Vuffray et al. (2016); Klivans and Meka (2017); Wu et al. (2019). For this class of models,
Klivans and Meka (2017) give a polynomial-time algorithm that uses O(n8 /ϵ4 ) samples and learns
an ϵ-multiplicative approximation of PrJ ∗ , which implies ϵ-closeness in TV. We provide a refined
analysis of MPLE, which involves a convex objective that can be optimized efficiently. As a conse-
quence, we show how one could obtain sample complexity guarantees within a single O(n) factor
from optimal, assuming the model satisfies a suitable regularity condition that we appropriately
define.
     Our improved general bounds can be applied in a variety of models, yielding comparable or
superior sample complexity to that of prior work. For simplicity, we only discuss examples of
models where we get improved complexity guarantees. Table 1 contains a detailed comparison.
     At a technical level, our improvements are made possible by using a connection to the problem
of single-sample estimation of Ising models, which was formulated in Dagan et al. (2021) and im-
plicitly studied elsewhere before; for some references see e.g. Chatterjee (2007); Bhattacharya and

                                                  3
                                    DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




Mukherjee (2018); Daskalakis et al. (2019); Dagan et al. (2021); Mukherjee et al. (2021); Kandiros
et al. (2021). This line of work assumes that we are only given a single sample from an Ising model
whose interaction matrix lies in some low-dimensional subspace, and our goal is to estimate this
matrix. These works manage to extract a useful signal from a single sample from the model, even in
the presence of strong dependencies within the sample. In contrast, algorithms that rely on multiple
samples make strong use of the independence across different samples to employ generalization
bounds from learning theory within the estimation procedure. In Dagan et al. (2021), the authors
show how to leverage their single-sample estimation methods to obtain a polynomial-time algo-
rithm for learning the structure of an Ising model in the multiple-sample regime. However, their
sample complexity is far from optimal. In this paper, we improve upon this single-sample-based
approach to obtain various state-of-the-art results in the multiple-sample regime. It is crucial for
our development to establish tight upper and lower bounds for the first and second derivatives of the
pseudolikelihood function, which we do by using a variety of tools from high-dimensional proba-
bility and statistics, such as tensorization inequalities, measure decompositions, and concentration
of measure. Along the way, we provide refined guarantees for pseudolikelihood estimation, which
could be of independent interest. We believe the connection between single-sample and multiple-
sample learning could be more broadly applicable to a variety of estimation problems for Markov
Random Fields. Thus, our work serves as a first step towards obtaining efficient and sample-optimal
algorithms for TV learning of high-dimensional distributions with complex dependencies.

2. Results
Let S0n denote the set of all symmetric matrices A ∈ Rn×n with zeroes on the diagonal.PWe will
make use of the infinity norm of a matrix A ∈ S0n , which is defined as ∥A∥∞ := maxi∈[n] j |Aij |,
as well as the operator norm of A, defined as ∥A∥2 := supx̸=0 ∥Ax∥2 /∥x∥2 . We will occasionally
denote this operator norm by ∥A∥op . Also, the Frobenius norm is defined as ∥A∥F := i j A2ij .
                                                                                           P P
For A ∈ S0n , we denote by Ai the i-th row of A. For a vector x ∈ Rn and i ∈ [n], we denote by x−i
the sub-vector obtained by removing the value of coordinate i from the vector. In general, we will
use lowercase letters for deterministic quantities and uppercase letters for random quantities. When
we refer to an Ising model with interaction matrix J and the external field h is the zero vector, we
will write PrJ for convenience and simply omit the external field. If we sample X ∼ PrJ , we refer
to Xi ∈ {−1, 1} as the spin of node i. For two probability measures P, Q supported on {−1, 1}n ,
their Total Variation (TV) Distance is defined to be TV(P, Q) := supA⊆{−1,1}n |P(A) − Q(A)| ,
where A ranges over all subsets of {−1, 1}n .
    In this work, we are given l independent samples from an Ising model PrJ ∗ as in (1). Our goal
will be to properly learn the model in distribution, i.e., to estimate some matrix Jˆ ∈ S0n so that
PrJ ∗ and PrJˆ are close in TV. Additionally, we would like an algorithm that runs in polynomial
time. We now state the results of this investigation for the two different classes of Ising models that
we consider.

2.1. Estimating Ising Models with Bounded Operator Norm
A considerable amount of work has focused on identifying classes of Ising models where sampling
and inference from the model are computationally tractable. When interactions are strong, it is
known that in general these tasks become intractable Sly (2010); Sly and Sun (2012); Galanis et al.
(2015). Therefore, a natural direction would be to place limits on the interactions between nodes.

                                                  4
    General Class of
                                    Applications                     Our Work                    Prior Work
       Models
                                                                                                  O(n3 /ϵ4 )
                                Spectrally-bounded                 Õ(n2 /ϵ2 )
                                                                                                 [AJK+24a]
                                      models                  (Corollary 2, optimal)
                                                                                                  [Lee23]
    Bounded 2-norm
                               SK/diluted SK model                  Õ(n4 /ϵ2 )                   Õ(n9 /ϵ8 )
                                  (β < 0.295...)               (Corollaries 3 and 4)               [CK24]
                                 Antiferromagnetic                 Õ(n2 /ϵ2 )                    Õ(n5 /ϵ4 )
                                     expanders                (Corollary 5, optimal)              [Koe+24]
                                    √
                                 (1/ n, 1)-regular                   Õ(n3 /ϵ2 )                 Õ(n8 /ϵ4 )
                                      models                       (Corollary 10)                 [KM17]
     Bounded-width                                                    e 4 /ϵ2 )                  e 8 /ϵ4 )†
                                                                     O(n                         O(n
                                       General
                                                                    (Corollary 8)                 [KM17]

Table 1: This table contains the sample complexity bound implied by our work, as well as the best
         known bound from prior work, for the problem of estimating an Ising model to within
         ϵ > 0 in TV. The best-known prior bound is discussed, where these results are stated.


     One of the weakest such constraints would be to assume that the operator norm of the interaction
matrix of the model is bounded by some constant. This is satisfied by virtually all examples of Ising
models that have been studied in the literature, including the SK model Panchenko (2012) and its
diluted variants Talagrand (2010), as well as the Ising model on regular graphs Sly and Sun (2012).
     These models often undergo complex phase transition, necessitating additional structural con-
straints. One natural restriction is to assume that the Glauber dynamics associated with the model
converge quickly to the stationary distribution. It has been shown that the Glauber dynamics con-
verge exponentially fast to the stationary distribution in KL divergence if the model satisfies a Mod-
ified Log-Sobolev Inequality (MLSI), a functional inequality that is weaker than the usual Log-
Sobolev inequality in discrete spaces Bobkov and Tetali (2006). The MLSI has been established for
a variety of Ising models under different constraints Marton (2015); Anari et al. (2021); Chen and
Eldan (2022); Blanca et al. (2022); Anari et al. (2024b).
     Our first main Theorem establishes estimation guarantees for Ising models of bounded operator
norm that satisfy MLSI, when running the MPLE over some set of interaction matrices. Crucially,
the only properties that this set needs to satisfy are that J ∗ belongs to a set of matrices of bounded
operator norm. This flexibility with respect to the optimizing set enables us to obtain polynomial-
time algorithms in various cases, particularly when the set is convex and admits efficient projections
(see Section 2.1.2 for more discussion). The estimation guarantees are phrased in terms of Frobenius
norm closeness to the matrix J ∗ , but we will see in Sections 2.1 and 2.1.2 how these can be easily
translated to bounds on the TV distance. Also, in the formal version of the theorem, we have
included the case of a non-zero external field, which doesn’t change the analysis in any significant
way and is omitted here for simplicity.
        e 8 /ϵ4 ) sample complexity can be explicitly derived from Theorem 7.3 of Klivans and Meka (2017). However,
 †. The O(n
    by combining the Frobenius-norm learning result of Dagan et al. (2021) with arguments similar to those in Klivans
                                    e 4 /ϵ2 ) sample complexity for MPLE, similar to our result.
    and Meka (2017), one can derive O(n


                                                         5
                                    DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




Theorem 1 (informal, see Theorem 28) Suppose we are given l independent samples X (1) , . . . , X (l) ∼
PrJ ∗ and PrJ ∗ satisfies MLSI. Let R ⊆ S0n be a subset of matrices such that supA∈R ∥A∥2 = O(1)
and J ∗ ∈ R. Then, running MPLE with optimizing set R produces an estimate Jˆ ∈ R, such that
                                                         ˆ F ≤ ϵ, as long as l = Ω̃(n2 /ϵ2 ).
with high probability over the choice of samples ∥J ∗ − J∥

     As far as we know, a result of this generality has not appeared in the literature. The most related
prior result is Theorem 5.2 from Anari et al. (2024a), where they obtain an elegant result for TV
estimation using MPLE for Ising models satisfying Approximate Tensorization of Entropy (ATE),
which is a stronger functional inequality than MLSI. Moreover, they require that every matrix in
the optimizing set of MPLE satisfies ATE, which places strong constraints on the choice of this
set. Finally, they require the matrices to be of bounded-width, which is a stronger assumption than
bounded operator norm and results in the loss of additional polynomial factors. We remark that
the sample complexity in Theorem 1 has an exponential dependence on the MLSI constant and this
is reflected in the applications of this result, while the prior result is free of such dependence (see
Theorem 28 for the precise dependence). We next present a variety of applications of the main result
for TV learning in classes of Ising models of bounded operator norm.

2.1.1. A PPLICATION : E STIMATING S PECTRALLY-B OUNDED I SING M ODELS IN TV
Perhaps the most widely-studied condition that enables computationally efficient sampling and in-
ference in Ising models is Dobrushin’s
                              P          Uniqueness Condition Dobruschin (1968), which asserts that
∥J∥∞ < 1, or equivalently j |Jij | < 1 for all rows i. This condition has been shown to imply a
variety of structural properties for the Ising measure, such as fast mixing Levin and Peres (2017),
correlation decay Künsch (1982), and concentration inequalities Götze et al. (2021); Adamczak
et al. (2019); Marton (2015).
     Unfortunately, this condition is sometimes too strict and does not capture the tractable regime
of an Ising model. A notable example is the celebrated Sherrington-Kirkpatric (SK) model, where
J ∗ is a random matrix with each Jij∗ sampled independently from N (0, β 2 /n), where β > 0 is a
parameter called the inverse temperature of the model. Standard random matrix theory arguments
Anderson et al. (2010) can be used to show that the operator norm is bounded if β is bounded. In
                                                                                             √
contrast, it is straightforward to observe that the expected l1 -norm of each column is Θ(β n), thus
                                                        √
Dobrushin’s condition is only satisfied if β = O(1/ n). However, it is expected that the model
exhibits weak interactions for all sufficiently small constant β.
     Motivated by this gap, Eldan et al. (2022) introduced an alternative condition for fast mixing.
In particular, we say that an Ising model as in (1) is spectrally bounded if λmax (J ∗ ) − λmin (J ∗ ) <
1(note that J ∗ is symmetric, hence diagonalizable). In Anari et al. (2021), they prove that if a model
is spectrally bounded, then MLSI holds and the Glauber dynamics mix in polynomial time. Thus,
we can apply Theorem 1 for this class of Ising models, which results in information-theoretically
optimal sample complexity Õ(n2 /ϵ2 ) for estimating spectrally bounded Ising models in TV.

Corollary 2 (informal, see Corollary 44) Suppose we are given l independent samples X (1) , . . . , X (l) ∼
PrJ ∗ , where λmax (J ∗ ) − λmin (J ∗ ) < 1 − α and J ∗ has zero-diagonal. Then, there is a polynomial
time algorithm (MPLE) that produces an estimate Jˆ ∈ S0n , such that with high probability over the
choice of samples we have TV(PrJˆ, PrJ ∗ ) ≤ ϵ, as long as l = Ω̃(exp(1/α5/4 ) · n2 /ϵ2 ).

    The implicit
          √       constant in the sample complexity contains additional sub-polynomial factors of
the form e log n . As far as we know, the most relevant prior work is Anari et al. (2024a), where

                                                   6
they prove that MPLE succeeds in finding a model that is ϵ-close to the true Ising model PrJ ∗ using
O(n3+C /ϵ4 ) samples for some C < 1, by establishing ATE with an inverse polynomial constant.
Subsequent work Lee (2023) has shown that, in fact, ATE holds with a Θ(1) constant in this setting,
which can be used to remove the C from the exponent, yielding O(n3 /ϵ4 ) sample complexity. Our
result thus improves over this bound in terms of the dependence on n, ϵ, by showing that the MPLE
actually achieves the information theoretically optimal sample complexity O(n2 /ϵ2 ) for estimating
Ising models in TV Devroye et al. (2020). We should remark, though, that the implicit constant in
the sample complexity of Corollary 2 contains a factor that is exponential in 1/α2 , while the bound
in Anari et al. (2021) is free of such dependence. As noted above, spectrally bounded models do not
necessarily have bounded width (see Section 2.2 for definition) e.g. for the SK model, ∥J∥∞ could
       √
be Θ( n), so the prior work Klivans and Meka (2017) would give exponential sample complexity.

2.1.2. A PPLICATION : E STIMATING THE SK- MODEL IN TV
As mentioned in Section 2.1, the SK model is one of the canonical examples of a mean-field model
in statistical physics, exhibiting fascinating phase transition phenomena that have been the subject of
extensive study in probability theory Panchenko (2012); Talagrand (2010). The relevant parameter
is the inverse temperature β > 0. Standard results from random matrix theory imply that if β < 1/4,
then with high probability the interaction matrix has spectrum inside an interval of size < 1, which
means the model is spectrally bounded. Thus, in this regime, Corollary 2 can be used to learn the
model optimally with Õ(n2 /ϵ2 ) samples.
     However, it turns out that efficiently learning the model in TV distance is possible for much
larger values of β. In particular, in Gaitonde and Mossel (2024), the authors remarkably prove that
a polynomial time algorithm introduced in Wu et al. (2019) actually estimates the SK model in TV
as long as β < 1. In a subsequent work, Chandrasekaran and Klivans (2024) shows that the same
                                          √
algorithm succeeds even when β = O( n), which extends well into the low-temperature region of
the model.
     While these works greatly push the frontiers of efficient learnability, the sample complexity
arising from these results is of the order of Õ(n9 /ϵ8 ). In the next Corollary, we use Theorem 1
and recently established MLSI in Anari et al. (2024b) to obtain Õ(n4 /ϵ2 ) sample complexity for
learning the SK-model up to β ≈ 0.295, which is beyond the threshold of spectrally-bounded
models.

Corollary 3 (informal, see Corollary 42) Suppose we are given l independent samples X (1) , . . . , X (l) ∼
PrJ ∗ , where J ∗ is sampled according to the SK-model with β < C, where C ≈ 0.295. Then, there
is a polynomial time algorithm (MPLE) that produces an estimate Jˆ ∈ S0n , such that with high
probability over the choice of samples and the choice of matrix J ∗ we have TV(PrJˆ, PrJ ∗ ) ≤ ϵ,
as long as l = Ω̃(n4 /ϵ2 ).

    While our result can only accommodate
                               √             a short range of values of β beyond high temperature,
compared to the range β = O( log n) of Chandrasekaran and Klivans (2024), it greatly improves
the sample complexity. An interesting avenue for future work would be to determine whether
this could be further improved to match the optimal sample complexity O(n2 /ϵ2 ) or whether a
computational-statistical gap exists beyond high temperature.
    Closely related to the SK-model are diluted versions, where the matrix is supported on a sparse
graph. One such version, which we call for simplicity the diluted SK-model, arises from sampling

                                                  7
                                    DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




a random d-regular graph G, where the matrix J ∗ will be supported.
                                                                √      √ Every non-zero entry of
J ∗ is then sampled independently and uniformly from {−β/ d, β/ d}. Standard results from
random matrix theory again imply that if β < 0.25, then the model is spectrally bounded with high
probability and Õ(n2 /ϵ2 ) samples suffice by Corollary 2. Chandrasekaran
                                                             √             and Klivans (2024) show
that TV learning in polynomial time is possible if β = O( log n), with Õ(n8 d/ϵ8 ) samples. We
use the recently established MLSI for diluted SK up to β ≈ 0.295 Anari et al. (2024b) to establish
that Õ(n4 /ϵ2 ) samples suffice in that regime if we run MPLE.

Corollary 4 (informal, see Corollary 43) Suppose we are given l independent samples X (1) , . . . , X (l) ∼
PrJ ∗ , where J ∗ is sampled according to the diluted SK-model with β < C, where C ≈ 0.295. Then,
there is a polynomial time algorithm (MPLE) that produces an estimate Jˆ ∈ S0n , such that with high
probability over the choice of samples and the choice of matrix J ∗ we have TV(PrJˆ, PrJ ∗ ) ≤ ϵ,
as long as l = Ω̃(n4 /ϵ2 ).
                                              √
    Note that in this setting ∥J ∗ ∥∞ = O( d), so one could use the result of Dagan et al. (2021)
about learning in √
                  Frobenius norm together with Lemma 39 that connects TV and Frobenius norms to
prove that O(e Θ(   d) n4 ) samples suffice for TV learning using MPLE. However, notice that even if

the degree grows mildly with the number of nodes, i.e., d = ω(log n), the sample complexity suffers
from additional polynomial factors (or  √ worse). In contrast, the sample complexity in Corollary 43
only contains a sub-polynomial exp( log n) factor, regardless of the value of d.

2.1.3. A PPLICATION : A NTIFERROMAGNETIC E XPANDERS
Another prominent class of models is the ones where there is a gap between the largest and second-
largest eigenvalue of the adjacency matrix. When the model is antiferromagnetic, then the spectrum
essentially consists of a very negative eigenvalue and a bulk that is concentrated on a small interval.
Prior work Anari et al. (2024b); Koehler et al. (2022b) has shown that one can “ignore” this very
negative eigenvalue and establish MLSI in this case. Thus, if we can efficiently project on this set
of matrices, then MPLE runs in polynomial time and has the optimal sample complexity. We show
that this is indeed possible, which gives rise to the following Corollary.

Corollary 5 (informal, see Corollary 45) Let α ∈ (0, 1), c > 0 be constants and 1 the all-ones
vector. Define the set R ⊆ S0n of matrices that have 1 as an eigenvector with eigenvalue −c and
the rest of the spectrum is on an interval of size α around 0. Suppose J ∗ ∈ R. Then, given l
independent samples from PrJ ∗ , the MPLE over R can be implemented in polynomial time and
returns Jˆ such that TV(PrJˆ, PrJ ∗ ) ≤ ϵ with high probability, as long as l = Ω̃(n2 /ϵ2 ).

    For a canonical example in this set, consider the adjacency matrix AG of a random d-regular
graph G and take J ∗ = −βA√ G . Then, from Friedman (2003)
                                                                               ∗
                                                            √ if follows that J belongs in the set R
with c = βd and α = 4β d − 1 when we take β < 1/(4 d − 1). Thus, we can learn this model
in TV distance optimally and efficiently. The most relevant prior work in this case is Koehler et al.
(2024), which covers this class of models since it allows some eigenvalues to be very negative. Yet,
                                                                                                √
the sample complexity is Õ(n4 R2 /ϵ4 ), where R is the width of the model, which could be Θ( n)
                                                                √
in that case (see Remark 46 for an example). Since R = Θ( n) in the worst case, the bounded
width result of Dagan et al. (2021) does not apply.

                                                  8
2.2. Estimating Bounded-Width Ising Models in TV
We say that an Ising model has bounded width, if the interaction matrix is assumed to have infinity
norm bounded by some constant M > 0, i.e. ∥A∥∞ ≤ M . We know that if ∥A∥∞ ≤ M , then
∥A∥2 ≤ M and thus A ∈ R. Hence, this set of matrices is a subset of R that was considered in
Theorem 1. However, note that M could be an arbitrary constant, which means the model could
exhibit long-range correlations, Glauber dynamics might mix exponentially slowly (see e.g. Mossel
et al. (2009)), and concentration of measure in general fails to hold. Our first contribution involves
an improved analysis of the MPLE estimator, which results in the following guarantee for estimating
the model PrJ ∗ .

Theorem 6 (informal, see Theorem 37) Suppose we are given l independent samples X (1) , . . . , X (l) ∼
PrJ ∗ , where ∥J ∗ ∥∞ ≤ M . Then, if Jˆ is the MPLE estimator, with high probability over the choice
of samples we have, as long as l = Ω̃(n2 /ϵ),

                                        E     [∥(Jˆ − J ∗ )X∥22 ] ≤ ϵ.                               (2)
                                    X∼PrJ ∗

The implicit constant in the bound above contains a factor exp(M ). The guarantee provided by
Theorem 6 might seem non-standard, but we will see that it is well-suited for estimation in TV
distance in the following section.

2.2.1. A PPLICATIONS
First, as a direct corollary of Theorem 6 (proved in Section F), we can obtain the following.
Corollary 7 (informal) Suppose we are in the setting of Theorem 6. Then, with high probability
over the choice of samples, we have, as long as l = Ω̃(n2 /ϵ),

                                            ∥Jˆ − J ∗ ∥2F ≤ ϵ.                                       (3)

    Corollary 7 also appears as Corollary 6 in Dagan et al. (2021), hence we recover the previously
established guarantees for learning in the Frobenius norm. Note that in general, if J ∗ is in low
temperature, EJ ∗ [∥(Jˆ − J ∗ )X∥22 ] could be significantly larger than ∥Jˆ − J ∗ ∥2F (we also give such
examples in Section F), so Theorem 6 is a strict improvement over the result of Dagan et al. (2021).
    Now we are ready to state the implications of our results for learning in TV. First, we note that
without imposing any additional assumptions, we can obtain a sample complexity of Õ(n4 ) from
the Frobenius norm approximation. The reason is that one can show that an O(ϵ) approximation in
Frobenius norm implies an O(nϵ) approximation in TV, using similar arguments to Theorem 7.3 in
Klivans and Meka (2017). For completeness, we give a self-contained proof of this fact in Section E.
Thus, the following result follows from this connection together with Corollary 7.
Corollary 8 (informal) Suppose we are in the setting of Theorem 6. Then, if l = Ω(n4 /ϵ2 ), with
high probability over the choice of sample, TV(PrJˆ, PrJ ∗ ) ≤ ϵ.
    We now show how we can improve on the O(n4 ) sample complexity of Corollary 8 using the
refined analysis of Theorem 6. To do that, we will assume that the second moments of the true model
are “robust” to small perturbations of the matrix. Intuitively, we expect this to happen whenever J ∗
is away from the critical temperature where a phase transition occurs. Formally, let us introduce the
following regularity assumption.

                                                     9
                                    DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




Definition 9 We say an Ising Model PrJ ∗ satisfies (γ, C)-regularity for some γ, C > 0 if the
following holds: for any J ∈ S0n such that EJ ∗ [∥(J − J ∗ )X∥22 ] ≤ γ, we have EJ [∥(J − J ∗ )X∥22 ] ≤
C · EJ ∗ [∥(J − J ∗ )X∥22 ].

    Of course, the crucial part of this definition is the scaling relation between γ and C > 0. We
show as a Corollary of Theorem 6 that if a model is (1/n, 1)-regular, then O(n3 ) samples suffice
for TV learning.

Corollary 10 (informal, see Corollary 38) Suppose we are in the setting of Theorem 6. Addition-
ally, assume there exist constants γ, C > 0 such that PrJ ∗ satisfies (γ/n, C)-regularity. Then, for
any ϵ > 0, if l = Ω(n3 /ϵ2 ), with high probability over the choice of samples TV(PrJˆ, PrJ ∗ ) ≤ ϵ.

Note that the sample complexity of Corollary 10 is only a factor O(n) away from the optimal sample
complexity of Devroye et al. (2020). This regularity condition covers a wide range of models that
do not necessarily need to be in high temperature. In particular, in Section G, we prove that the
Curie-Weiss model in low temperature satisfies the condition. Of course, we can also show that
models satisfying more familiar conditions such as Dobrushin’s condition and spectrally-bounded
models also satisfy this regularity condition (see Section G).


3. Related Work
 Learning MRFs from multiple samples. The problem of estimating a Markov Random Field
(MRF) from multiple independent samples from the model has a rich history, starting from the
seminal work Chow and Liu (1968) from the 1960s, showing that for the Ising model, if the graph
structure of the model is a tree, then Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) can be solved in
polynomial time. Information theoretically, Devroye et al. (2020) establishes the minimax rate for
estimating Ising models in TV as Θ(|E|/ϵ2 ), where |E| is the number of non-zero entries of the
interaction matrix (see also Brustle et al. (2020) for an alternative argument using linear program-
ming). For the task of estimating the structure of Ising models with arbitrary graph topology and
bounded degree d, the breakthrough work of Bresler (2015) provided the first polynomial time
algorithm, where the sample complexity is doubly exponential in d. Subsequent works Hamil-
ton et al. (2017); Vuffray et al. (2016); Klivans and Meka (2017); Wu et al. (2019) proposed new
algorithms with improved guarantees. In particular, Klivans and Meka (2017) obtains the first poly-
nomial time algorithm for learning the structure of bounded-width models, while only requiring
O(ed log n) independent samples using l2 -regularized per-node logistic regression. This matched
the information-theoretic lower bound from Santhanam and Wainwright (2012). In the case of la-
tent variables, Bresler et al. (2019) gives a polynomial-time algorithm for learning ferromagnetic
Restricted Boltzmann Machines. Beyond bounded width, a recent line of work studies Ising models
under spectral constraints on the interaction matrix. Anari et al. (2024a) shows that for spectally
bounded models, MPLE succeeds in TV learning with O(n3+C ) samples for some constant C. For
the SK model, this implies efficient learning for all β < 1/4. Gaitonde and Mossel (2024) is the first
work to obtain a polynomial time algorithm for learning the SK-model all the way up to β√< 1, and
Chandrasekaran and Klivans (2024) extends the range of efficient learning for all β = o( log n).
    A related line of work studies the problem of learning the structure of MRFs using samples from
the trajectory of Glauber dynamics Bresler et al. (2017); Gaitonde and Mossel (2024); Gaitonde
et al. (2025). The recent work of Gaitonde et al. (2024) provides a near-linear time algorithm that

                                                  10
learns the structure of a t-th order MRF using O(n log n) updates of Glauber dynamics, bypassing
fundamental barriers for efficient higher order MRF estimation from independent samples. The
work Jayakumar et al. (2024), which studies learning from independent samples of a metastable
state of the Glauber dynamics, is also close in spirit.
     The particular case of MRFs with tree structure has also received attention, starting with Chow
and Liu (1968). Bhattacharyya et al. (2021); Daskalakis and Pan (2021) establish that the Chow-
Liu algorithm is information-theoretically optimal for finite samples. For the related problem of
estimating the low-dimensional marginals of the model, Bresler and Karzand (2020); Boix-Adsera
et al. (2022) give polynomial-time and sample-optimal algorithms, and Nikolakakis et al. (2021)
studies the setting where noisy labels of the nodes are observed. Finally, Kandiros et al. (2023)
provides guarantees for polynomial-time estimation of latent tree Ising models in TV.
     Finally, a recent line of work aims at estimating Ising models using score matching Koehler
et al. (2022a); Koehler and Vuong (2023); Koehler et al. (2024). In particular, as noted in Koehler
et al. (2024), they focus on a class of low-complexity Ising models. Remarkably, they obtain sample
complexity bounds that scale polynomially with the width of the model, in contrast to the exponen-
tial dependence in most prior work on MRF estimation.

Learning MRFs from a single sample. In this line of work, it is usually assumed that the true
model belongs in a class of “low-dimensional” models and the task is to estimate it given a single
n-dimensional observation from the model. In the case of an Ising model whose interaction matrix
                                                                                       √
is known up to a scalar parameter β, Chatterjee (2007) initially showed that MPLE is n-consistent
for β using the technique of exchangeable pairs. Bhattacharya and Mukherjee (2018) extended these
results under general conditions on the log-partition function. Ghosal and Mukherjee (2020) studied
the problem when, in addition to β, there is also an unknown scalar parameter in the external field,
and Daskalakis et al. (2019) generalized the result for logistic regression with dependencies. Dagan
et al. (2021) provided estimation guarantees when the interaction matrix lies in a low-dimensional
subspace. Several variations of these settings have been studied, including optimal joint estimation
of parameters for logistic regression with dependencies Kandiros et al. (2021); Mukherjee et al.
(2021), estimation of tensor Ising models Daskalakis et al. (2020); Mukherjee et al. (2022), estima-
tion of hard-constrained models Bhattacharya and Ramanan (2021); Galanis et al. (2024a), inference
on dense graphs Xu and Mukherjee (2023).

Sampling Ising models. There is a vast literature in probability theory that focuses on proving
fast sampling of Ising models under different constraints. Here, we focus on reviewing the results
that are most relevant to the classes of Ising models that we study. Modified Log-Sobolev inequali-
ties were introduced in Bobkov and Tetali (2006) to prove fast mixing of Markov Chains in discrete
spaces. The classical Dobrushin’s condition has been known to imply MLSI Levin and Peres (2017)
and is tight in the case of the Curie-Weiss model. The class of spectrally bounded models, where
λmax (J) − λmin (J) < 1, was introduced in Eldan et al. (2022) to capture relevant models from
statistical physics, such as the SK-model. They established the Poincaré inequality when β < 1/4,
complementing the result of Bauerschmidt and Bodineau (2019) that proved a version of the log-
Sobolev inequality in the same regime. Subsequently, Anari et al. (2021) established the MLSI for
spectrally bounded models, which implies optimal mixing of the Glauber dynamics. A different
proof using localization schemes was given in Chen and Eldan (2022). In the work Lee (2023), they
establish the stronger ATE property for these models. The condition of spectrally bounded models

                                                11
                                     DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




was shown to be tight for polynomial time sampling in Kunisky (2024); Galanis et al. (2024b). A
polynomial time algorithm for sampling from the SK model in Wasserstein distance using algorith-
mic stochastic localization was given for β < 1/2 in El Alaoui et al. (2022) and extended to all
β < 1 in Celentano (2024). The recent work of Anari et al. (2024b) established an MLSI for the
SK-model for β < 0.295. Finally, the class of bounded-width Ising models includes many exam-
ples where sampling from the model is NP-hard. Indeed, for d-regular graphs with β > βc , where
βc is the Kesten-Stigum threshold, Sly (2010); Sly and Sun (2012); Galanis et al. (2015) show that
approximate sampling from the distribution is NP-hard.

4. Technical Contributions
We first describe the algorithm that is employed for all results. The most common approach for
obtaining an estimate Jˆ is to compute the Maximum Likelihood Estimator (MLE) given the samples.
In the case of Ising models, to compute the MLE, one has to calculate the probability of the observed
samples under different models. However, this involves computing the partition function of the
model ZJ , which is NP-hard even to approximate in many interesting regimes Sly (2010); Sly and
Sun (2012); Galanis et al. (2015, 2024b).
    An attractive alternative, first proposed in Besag (1974), is the so-called Maximum Pseudo-
Likelihood Estimator (MPLE). Computing the Pseudo-Likelihood of a given model involves com-
puting the conditional probability of the spin of a node i conditioned on the spins of all the other
nodes. Formally, suppose we get independent samples X (1) , . . . , X (l) ∼ PrJ ∗ . Then, the MPLE
over a set of matrices R ⊆ S0n is defined as
                                                                       l Y
                                                                         n
                                                                                     (k)   (k)
                                                                       Y
             Jˆ := arg max P L(J; X (1) , . . . , X (l) ) := arg max             Pr[Xi |X−i ]         (4)
                        J∈R                                    J∈R               J
                                                                       k=1 i=1

The set R will be chosen depending on the particular class of Ising models we are trying to estimate.
One useful property of this objective function is that it is a concave function of J, which makes it
easy to optimize using first-order methods whenever R is a convex set that admits efficient projec-
tions. To make calculations more convenient, we will consider instead minimizing the negative log
pseudolikelihood, which we call ϕ. The advantage is that the objective in MPLE has a simple closed
form that does not involve the partition function, which is why it is preferred over MLE. Since the
optimization takes place in a high-dimensional space, we will be interested in computing the first
and second derivatives of ϕ at a point J ∈ S0n and at direction A ∈ S0n . These are given by the
formulas (see also Section(A))
             l   n                                                         l     n
∂ϕ(J ∗ ) X X                             (k)               ∂ 2 ϕ(J) X X
        =   (Ai X (k) )(tanh(Ji X (k) )−Xi ),                      =          (Ai X (k) )2 sech(Ji X (k) )2
 ϕA                                                          ∂A2
             k=1 i=1                                                  k=1 i=1
                                                                                                      (5)
    The standard way of analyzing the MPLE in the single sample literature Chatterjee (2007);
Bhattacharya and Mukherjee (2018); Daskalakis et al. (2019); Dagan et al. (2021) is to upper bound
the first derivative at J ∗ for all directions A and to lower bound the second derivative for all J and
for all directions A. This, combined with a union bound argument, suffices for obtaining estimation
guarantees for J. ˆ Since these derivatives are random quantities that depend on the samples, to
bound them, we introduce a number of technical novelties and combine a variety of tools from
high-dimensional probability. We now highlight these contributions in the two settings we study.

                                                   12
4.1. Bounded Operator Norm Models
The work that is closest in spirit to the level of generality we are aiming for is Dagan et al. (2021),
where they analyze the MPLE when the infinity norm of the matrix is O(1)(bounded-width). In
our case, we only know that the operator norm is bounded, which allows for potentially unbounded
infinity norm (as is often in applications, e.g. the SK model). As we shall see, establishing tight
upper and lower bounds for the first and second derivatives of the pseudolikelihood function ϕ when
the infinity norm is unbounded poses additional challenges, which we now describe.
     The first step towards that goal is to establish upper bounds for the first derivative of the pseudo-
likelihood function ∂ϕ(J ∗ )/∂A for all directions A ∈ R, where R is the optimizing set. In Dagan
et al. (2021), the authors rely on concentration bounds which hold assuming the Approximate Ten-
sorization of Entropy (ATE) inequality holds, which is a stronger functional inequality than MLSI.
Instead, we show that MLSI suffices by using a general result about two-level concentration from
Sambale and Sinulis (2019). In the proof, we show that even if we only know that the operator
norm of the matrix A is bounded, the concentration radius from Sambale and Sinulis (2019) can be
bounded by O(l · ∥A∥2F ). Since the expectation of the first derivative is 0 when evaluated by J ∗ ,
this implies that with high probability O|∂ϕ(J ∗ )/∂A| = O(l · ∥A∥2F ).
     The second and most crucial step in the analysis of MPLE is to lower bound the second deriva-
tive ∂ 2 ϕ(J)/∂A2 of the pseudolikelihood function for all J and all directions A. Ignoring the term
involving sech momentarily, which comes with additional challenges, the second derivative in (5)
is a second-degree polynomial of the Ising model. Using again the machinery from Sambale and
Sinulis (2019), we can show that this polynomial concentrates at an O(l · ∥A∥2F ) radius with high
probability. To conclude that the second derivative is large, we need to establish that, on expectation,
this polynomial is Ω(l · ∥A∥2F ). This lower bound would certainly hold if we had a product distri-
bution instead of an Ising model. Motivated by that, we use the well-known Hubbard-Stratonovich
transform to decompose the model into a mixture of product distributions with external fields. The
distribution of the external fields in this mixture is well known, and we use it to lower bound the
expectation of this polynomial for the majority of these product measures, which suffices to obtain
the desired lower bound on the expectation.
     Finally, if we wish to lower bound the second derivative, we have to lower bound the term
involving sech in (5). If the infinity norm of the matrices was bounded, as in Dagan et al. (2021),
then this step is trivial, as |Ji X (k) | = O(1) always. In contrast, with an operator norm bound,
                                     √
this term could be as large as Θ( n), which would result in an exponentially small lower bound
for the second derivative in the worst case. Our solution is to write Ji X (k) = Ji∗ X (k) + (Ji −
Ji∗ )X (k) . Since J ∗ is fixed, we can use the previous concentration results to bound Ji∗ X (k) with
high probability. For (Ji − Ji∗ )X (k) , we can also use the preceding concentration results to bound
it by ∥J − J ∗ ∥F with high probability. However, since we are considering an arbitrary matrix J,
we cannot know a priori that ∥J − J ∗ ∥F will be small. Intuitively, J is any matrix we wish to show
satisfies ϕ(J) > ϕ(J ∗ ). To address this issue, we instead focus the analysis of the second derivative
only on a ring of matrices

                               Rϵ := {J ∈ R : ϵ ≤ ∥J − J ∗ ∥F ≤ 2ϵ}

    The reason we take a ring is that on the one hand we would like ∥J − J ∗ ∥F to be upper bounded
in order to lower bound the sech term, but on the other hand we would like ∥J − J ∗ ∥F to be lower
bounded, so that we are guaranteed that with high probability the second derivative dominates the

                                                   13
                                    DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




first. Indeed, using all the previous observations and some careful union bound arguments over
a suitable discrete net of points, we can establish that with high probability ∀J ∈ Rϵ we have
ϕ(J) > ϕ(J ∗ ). It turns out that this also implies that ϕ(J) > ϕ(J ∗ ) for all J with ∥J − J ∗ ∥F > 2ϵ,
by using the convexity of ϕ. Thus, we can conclude that ∥Jˆ − J ∗ ∥F will be small.


4.2. Bounded Width Models

In Klivans and Meka (2017), they obtain TV learning guarantees by using the guarantees for struc-
ture learning, which ensures that maxij |Jij − Jij∗ | ≤ ϵ using O(log n/ϵ4 ) samples. They subse-
quently set the accuracy to ϵ/n2 , so that it guarantees closeness in TV. However, requiring accuracy
for each entry of J ∗ is a very strict condition, which results in sample complexity O(n8 ). In this
work, we instead obtain guarantees of closeness to J ∗ through different metrics, which, while coun-
terintuitive at first, are more suitable for implying closeness in TV.
    We first discuss how to get the improved guarantee of Theorem 6. Since bounded-width models
could be in low temperature, we cannot, in general, rely on concentration bounds for the original
distribution PrJ ∗ . We follow the strategy presented in Dagan et al. (2021), which involves finding
a small (O(log n)) collection of subsets Ij ⊆ [n], such that conditioned on each subset the model
satisfies Dobrushin’s condition, and every node i ∈ [n] is contained in a constant fraction of the
subsets. For the second derivative, we notice that it can be lower bounded by a larger quantity than
that in Dagan et al. (2021), without breaking it into parts, by simply conditioning on one of the
subsets Ij . Indeed, using (5) and the bounded-width property, we can lower bound the conditional
expectation of the second derivative by the variance of a linear function of the model as follows.

       2                       l X n                     
       ∂ ϕ(J)                 2
                                X
                                               (k)
                                                   2
                                                        (k)
    E         X−Ij ≥ sech(M )           E Ai X         X−Ij
        ∂A2
                                k=1 i=1
                                 l X n                                 i 
                                                                     (k) 2
                                                             h
                                                         (k)
                                X
                              2                    (k)           (k)
                    = sech(M )           Var Ai X X−Ij + E Ai X X−Ij
                                        k=1 i=1


In the above, we have used the definition of the conditional variance. We can show that the con-
ditional variance summed over all nodes is of the order Θ(∥AIj ∥2F ), since the conditional model
satisfies Dobrushin’s condition. For the variance of the conditional expectation, there is no general
formula, so we would like to approximate it by its expectation E[∥E[AX|X−Ij ]∥22 ]. Simply using
the Chernoff bound for the independent samples does not suffice, because we would like this lower
bound to hold uniformly for all directions A, and the union bound will incur additional polyno-
mial factors. We avoid this union bounding argument by a careful application of matrix Bernstein’s
inequality. This enables us to approximate the second term in the sum by E[∥E[AX|X−Ij ]∥22 ] uni-
formly over all matrices. These insights result in a lower bound of Ω(l·EJ ∗ [∥AX∥22 ]) for the second
derivative.
     For the first derivative, we can upper bound it by O(l · EJ ∗ [∥AX∥22 ]) uniformly for all matrices
A by using the technique of splitting it into parts and a similar application of matrix Bernstein’s
inequality. Since both the first and second derivatives are upper and lower bounded by the same
quantity, we can proceed as previously using a Taylor expansion for ϕ and establish that EJ ∗ [∥(Jˆ −
J ∗ )X∥22 ] ≤ ϵ with high probability.

                                                  14
Acknowledgement
Constantinos Daskalakis and Rui Yao were supported by a Simons Investigator Award, a Simons
Collaboration on Algorithmic Fairness, ONR MURI grant N00014-25-1-2116, ONR grant N00014-
25-1-2296. Vardis Kandiros was supported by a Postdoctoral Fellowship of the Data Science Insti-
tute at Columbia University.

References
Radosław Adamczak, Michał Kotowski, Bartłomiej Polaczyk, and Michał Strzelecki. A note on
  concentration for polynomials in the ising model. 2019.

Nima Anari, Vishesh Jain, Frederic Koehler, Huy Tuan Pham, and Thuy-Duong Vuong. Entropic
  independence i: Modified log-sobolev inequalities for fractionally log-concave distributions and
  high-temperature ising models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.04105, 2021.

Nima Anari, Vishesh Jain, Frederic Koehler, Huy Tuan Pham, and Thuy-Duong Vuong. Universality
  of spectral independence with applications to fast mixing in spin glasses. In Proceedings of the
  2024 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 5029–5056. SIAM,
  2024a.

Nima Anari, Frederic Koehler, and Thuy-Duong Vuong. Trickle-down in localization schemes and
  applications. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages
  1094–1105, 2024b.

Greg W Anderson, Alice Guionnet, and Ofer Zeitouni. An introduction to random matrices. Number
  118. Cambridge university press, 2010.

Shiri Artstein-Avidan, Apostolos Giannopoulos, and Vitali D Milman. Asymptotic geometric anal-
  ysis, Part II, volume 261. American Mathematical Society, 2021.

Roland Bauerschmidt and Thierry Bodineau. A very simple proof of the lsi for high temperature
  spin systems. Journal of Functional Analysis, 276(8):2582–2588, 2019.

Julian Besag. Spatial interaction and the statistical analysis of lattice systems. Journal of the Royal
  Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 36(2):192–225, 1974.

Bhaswar B Bhattacharya and Sumit Mukherjee. Inference in ising models. 2018.

Bhaswar B Bhattacharya and Kavita Ramanan. Parameter estimation for undirected graphical mod-
  els with hard constraints. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 67(10):6790–6809, 2021.

Arnab Bhattacharyya, Sutanu Gayen, Eric Price, and NV Vinodchandran. Near-optimal learning
  of tree-structured distributions by chow-liu. In Proceedings of the 53rd annual acm SIGACT
  symposium on theory of computing, 2021.

Antonio Blanca, Pietro Caputo, Zongchen Chen, Daniel Parisi, Daniel Štefankovič, and Eric
  Vigoda. On mixing of markov chains: Coupling, spectral independence, and entropy factoriza-
  tion. In Proceedings of the 2022 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA),
  pages 3670–3692. SIAM, 2022.

                                                  15
                                   DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




Sergej G Bobkov and Friedrich Götze. Exponential integrability and transportation cost related to
  logarithmic sobolev inequalities. Journal of Functional Analysis, 163(1):1–28, 1999.

Sergey G Bobkov and Prasad Tetali. Modified logarithmic sobolev inequalities in discrete settings.
  Journal of Theoretical Probability, 19(2):289–336, 2006.

Enric Boix-Adsera, Guy Bresler, and Frederic Koehler. Chow-liu++: Optimal prediction-centric
  learning of tree ising models. In 2021 IEEE 62nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
  Science (FOCS), pages 417–426. IEEE, 2022.

Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge university press, 2004.

Guy Bresler. Efficiently learning ising models on arbitrary graphs. In Proceedings of the forty-
  seventh annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 771–782, 2015.

Guy Bresler and Mina Karzand. Learning a tree-structured ising model in order to make predictions.
  The Annals of Statistics, 48(2):713–737, 2020.

Guy Bresler, David Gamarnik, and Devavrat Shah. Learning graphical models from the glauber
  dynamics. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 64(6):4072–4080, 2017.

Guy Bresler, Frederic Koehler, and Ankur Moitra. Learning restricted boltzmann machines via
  influence maximization. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory
  of Computing, pages 828–839, 2019.

Johannes Brustle, Yang Cai, and Constantinos Daskalakis. Multi-item mechanisms without item-
  independence: Learnability via robustness. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM Conference on Eco-
  nomics and Computation, pages 715–761, 2020.

Sébastien Bubeck et al. Convex optimization: Algorithms and complexity. Foundations and
   Trends® in Machine Learning, 8(3-4):231–357, 2015.

Pietro Caputo. Lecture notes on entropy and markov chains. Preprint, available from: http://www.
  mat. uniroma3. it/users/caputo/entropy. pdf, 2023.

Pietro Caputo, Georg Menz, and Prasad Tetali. Approximate tensorization of entropy at high tem-
  perature. In Annales de la Faculté des sciences de Toulouse: Mathématiques, volume 24, pages
  691–716, 2015.

Michael Celentano. Sudakov–fernique post-amp, and a new proof of the local convexity of the tap
 free energy. The Annals of Probability, 52(3):923–954, 2024.

Gautam Chandrasekaran and Adam Klivans. Learning the sherrington-kirkpatrick model even at
  low temperature. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.11174, 2024.

Sourav Chatterjee. Estimation in spin glasses: A first step. 2007.

Yuansi Chen and Ronen Eldan. Localization schemes: A framework for proving mixing bounds
  for markov chains. In 2022 IEEE 63rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
  (FOCS), pages 110–122. IEEE, 2022.

                                                 16
Zongchen Chen, Kuikui Liu, and Eric Vigoda. Optimal mixing of glauber dynamics: Entropy
  factorization via high-dimensional expansion. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT
  Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 1537–1550, 2021.
CKCN Chow and Cong Liu. Approximating discrete probability distributions with dependence
 trees. IEEE transactions on Information Theory, 14(3):462–467, 1968.
Mary Cryan, Heng Guo, and Giorgos Mousa. Modified log-sobolev inequalities for strongly log-
 concave distributions. In 2019 IEEE 60th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Sci-
 ence (FOCS), pages 1358–1370. IEEE, 2019.
Yuval Dagan, Constantinos Daskalakis, Nishanth Dikkala, and Anthimos Vardis Kandiros. Learning
  ising models from one or multiple samples. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT
  Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 161–168, 2021.
Constantinos Daskalakis and Qinxuan Pan. Sample-optimal and efficient learning of tree ising
  models. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing,
  pages 133–146, 2021.
Constantinos Daskalakis, Elchanan Mossel, and Sébastien Roch. Optimal phylogenetic reconstruc-
  tion. In Proceedings of the thirty-eighth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages
  159–168, 2006.
Constantinos Daskalakis, Nishanth Dikkala, and Ioannis Panageas. Regression from dependent ob-
  servations. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing,
  pages 881–889, 2019.
Constantinos Daskalakis, Nishanth Dikkala, and Ioannis Panageas. Logistic regression with peer-
  group effects via inference in higher-order ising models. In International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, pages 3653–3663. PMLR, 2020.
Nabarun Deb and Sumit Mukherjee. Fluctuations in mean-field ising models. The Annals of Applied
  Probability, 33(3):1961–2003, 2023.
Luc Devroye, Abbas Mehrabian, and Tommy Reddad. The minimax learning rates of normal and
  ising undirected graphical models. 2020.
PL Dobruschin. The description of a random field by means of conditional probabilities and condi-
  tions of its regularity. Theory of Probability & Its Applications, 13(2):197–224, 1968.
Ahmed El Alaoui, Andrea Montanari, and Mark Sellke. Sampling from the sherrington-kirkpatrick
  gibbs measure via algorithmic stochastic localization. In 2022 IEEE 63rd Annual Symposium on
  Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 323–334. IEEE, 2022.
Ronen Eldan, Frederic Koehler, and Ofer Zeitouni. A spectral condition for spectral gap: fast mixing
  in high-temperature ising models. Probability theory and related fields, 182(3):1035–1051, 2022.
Richard S Ellis. Entropy, large deviations, and statistical mechanics. Springer, 2007.
Glenn Ellison. Learning, local interaction, and coordination. Econometrica: Journal of the Econo-
  metric Society, pages 1047–1071, 1993.

                                                 17
                                  DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




Joseph Felsenstein. Inferring phylogenies. Sunderland; Sinauer Associates, 2004.

Joel Friedman. A proof of alon’s second eigenvalue conjecture. In Proceedings of the thirty-fifth
  annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 720–724, 2003.

Jason Gaitonde and Elchanan Mossel. A unified approach to learning ising models: Beyond inde-
  pendence and bounded width. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
  Computing, pages 503–514, 2024.

Jason Gaitonde, Ankur Moitra, and Elchanan Mossel. Bypassing the noisy parity barrier: Learning
  higher-order markov random fields from dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.05284, 2024.

Jason Gaitonde, Ankur Moitra, and Elchanan Mossel. Better models and algorithms for learning
  ising models from dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15173, 2025.

Andreas Galanis, Daniel Štefankovič, and Eric Vigoda. Inapproximability for antiferromagnetic
  spin systems in the tree nonuniqueness region. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 62(6):1–60, 2015.

Andreas Galanis, Alkis Kalavasis, and Anthimos Vardis Kandiros. Learning hard-constrained mod-
  els with one sample. In Proceedings of the 2024 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
  Algorithms (SODA), pages 3184–3196. SIAM, 2024a.

Andreas Galanis, Alkis Kalavasis, and Anthimos Vardis Kandiros. On sampling from ising models
  with spectral constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07645, 2024b.

Stuart Geman and Christine Graffigne. Markov random field image models and their applications
  to computer vision. In Proceedings of the international congress of mathematicians, volume 1,
  page 2. Berkeley, CA, 1986.

Promit Ghosal and Sumit Mukherjee. Joint estimation of parameters in ising model. 2020.

Friedrich Götze, Holger Sambale, and Arthur Sinulis. Concentration inequalities for bounded func-
  tionals via log-sobolev-type inequalities. Journal of Theoretical Probability, 34:1623–1652,
  2021.

Linus Hamilton, Frederic Koehler, and Ankur Moitra. Information theoretic properties of markov
  random fields, and their algorithmic applications. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 30, 2017.

Abhijith Jayakumar, Andrey Y Lokhov, Sidhant Misra, and Marc Vuffray. Discrete distributions are
  learnable from metastable samples. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13800, 2024.

Haotian Jiang, Tarun Kathuria, Yin Tat Lee, Swati Padmanabhan, and Zhao Song. A faster interior
  point method for semidefinite programming. In 2020 IEEE 61st annual symposium on founda-
  tions of computer science (FOCS), pages 910–918. IEEE, 2020.

Vardis Kandiros, Yuval Dagan, Nishanth Dikkala, Surbhi Goel, and Constantinos Daskalakis. Sta-
  tistical estimation from dependent data. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
  5269–5278. PMLR, 2021.

                                               18
Vardis Kandiros, Constantinos Daskalakis, Yuval Dagan, and Davin Choo. Learning and testing
  latent-tree ising models efficiently. In The Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on Learning Theory,
  pages 1666–1729. PMLR, 2023.

Adam Klivans and Raghu Meka. Learning graphical models using multiplicative weights. In 2017
  IEEE 58th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 343–354.
  IEEE, 2017.

Frederic Koehler and Thuy-Duong Vuong. Sampling multimodal distributions with the vanilla
  score: Benefits of data-based initialization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01762, 2023.

Frederic Koehler, Alexander Heckett, and Andrej Risteski. Statistical efficiency of score matching:
  The view from isoperimetry. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00726, 2022a.

Frederic Koehler, Holden Lee, and Andrej Risteski. Sampling approximately low-rank ising models:
  Mcmc meets variational methods. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 4945–4988. PMLR,
  2022b.

Frederic Koehler, Holden Lee, and Thuy-Duong Vuong. Efficiently learning and sampling multi-
  modal distributions with data-based initialization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.09117, 2024.

Daphne Koller and Nir Friedman. Probabilistic graphical models: principles and techniques. MIT
  press, 2009.

Dmitriy Kunisky. Optimality of glauber dynamics for general-purpose ising model sampling and
 free energy approximation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Dis-
 crete Algorithms (SODA), pages 5013–5028. SIAM, 2024.

H Künsch. Decay of correlations under dobrushin’s uniqueness condition and its applications.
  Communications in Mathematical Physics, 84:207–222, 1982.

Holden Lee. Parallelising glauber dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07131, 2023.

Yin Tat Lee, Aaron Sidford, and Santosh S Vempala. Efficient convex optimization with member-
  ship oracles. In Conference On Learning Theory, pages 1292–1294. PMLR, 2018.

Wilhelm Lenz. Beitršge zum verstšndnis der magnetischen eigenschaften in festen kšrpern.
 Physikalische Z, 21(613-615):1, 1920.

David A Levin and Yuval Peres. Markov chains and mixing times, volume 107. American Mathe-
  matical Soc., 2017.

Kuikui Liu, Sidhanth Mohanty, Amit Rajaraman, and David X Wu. Fast mixing in sparse ran-
  dom ising models. In 2024 IEEE 65th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
  (FOCS), pages 120–128. IEEE, 2024.

Andrey Y Lokhov, Marc Vuffray, Sidhant Misra, and Michael Chertkov. Optimal structure and
  parameter learning of ising models. Science advances, 4(3):e1700791, 2018.

Katalin Marton. Logarithmic sobolev inequalities in discrete product spaces: a proof by a trans-
  portation cost distance. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.02803, 2015.

                                                19
                                  DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




Andrea Montanari and Amin Saberi. The spread of innovations in social networks. Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences, 107(47):20196–20201, 2010.

Elchanan Mossel, Dror Weitz, and Nicholas Wormald. On the hardness of sampling independent
  sets beyond the tree threshold. Probability Theory and Related Fields, 143(3):401–439, 2009.

Somabha Mukherjee, Ziang Niu, Sagnik Halder, Bhaswar B Bhattacharya, and George Michai-
  lidis. High dimensional logistic regression under network dependence. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.03200, 2021.

Somabha Mukherjee, Jaesung Son, and Bhaswar B Bhattacharya. Estimation in tensor ising models.
  Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA, 11(4):1457–1500, 2022.

Konstantinos E Nikolakakis, Dionysios S Kalogerias, and Anand D Sarwate. Predictive learning on
  hidden tree-structured ising models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(59):1–82, 2021.

Dmitry Panchenko. The sherrington-kirkpatrick model: an overview. Journal of Statistical Physics,
 149(2):362–383, 2012.

Holger Sambale and Arthur Sinulis. Modified log-sobolev inequalities and two-level concentration.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.06137, 2019.

Narayana P Santhanam and Martin J Wainwright. Information-theoretic limits of selecting binary
  graphical models in high dimensions. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 58(7):4117–
  4134, 2012.

Allan Sly. Computational transition at the uniqueness threshold. In 2010 IEEE 51st Annual Sympo-
  sium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 287–296. IEEE, 2010.

Allan Sly and Nike Sun. The computational hardness of counting in two-spin models on d-regular
  graphs. In 2012 IEEE 53rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages
  361–369. IEEE, 2012.

Michel Talagrand. Mean field models for spin glasses: Volume I: Basic examples, volume 54.
 Springer Science & Business Media, 2010.

Joel A Tropp et al. An introduction to matrix concentration inequalities. Foundations and Trends®
  in Machine Learning, 8(1-2):1–230, 2015.

Ramon Van Handel. Probability in high dimension. Lecture Notes (Princeton University), 2(3):2–3,
  2014.

Marc Vuffray, Sidhant Misra, Andrey Lokhov, and Michael Chertkov. Interaction screening: Effi-
 cient and sample-optimal learning of ising models. Advances in neural information processing
 systems, 29, 2016.

Martin J Wainwright, Michael I Jordan, et al. Graphical models, exponential families, and varia-
 tional inference. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 1(1–2):1–305, 2008.

                                               20
Shanshan Wu, Sujay Sanghavi, and Alexandros G Dimakis. Sparse logistic regression learns all
  discrete pairwise graphical models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.

Yuanzhe Xu and Sumit Mukherjee. Inference in ising models on dense regular graphs. The Annals
  of Statistics, 51(3):1183–1206, 2023.

Huanyu Zhang, Gautam Kamath, Janardhan Kulkarni, and Steven Wu. Privately learning markov
  random fields. In International conference on machine learning, pages 11129–11140. PMLR,
  2020.




                                             21
                                      DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




Appendix A. Preliminaries
In this Section, we collect useful definitions, notations, and facts. Throughout the proofs, we will
use generic constant notations such as C, C ′ , K, K ′ . These refer to absolute constants that could
be different from place to place, unless it is specified that some constant depends on some other
quantity. For some matrix A ∈ S0n , we denote by A(l) ∈ Rln×ln the corresponding block diagonal
matrix with each block equal to A and a total of l blocks. Similarly, for some set of matrices
R ⊆ Rn×n , we denote R(l) := {J (l) : J ∈ R}. For a symmetric matrix J ∈ S0n and a subset
I ⊆ [n], we denote by JI ∈ R|I|×n the matrix consisting only of the rows of J that are indexed by
elements in I. We also denote JII ∈ R|I|×|I| the submatrix with rows and columns indexed by I.
    We start by reviewing properties of the negative log-pseudolikelihood function ϕ, which is de-
fined as
                                                  l X
                                                    n                                                 
                                                                                     (k)
                                                  X
 ϕ(J) := − log P L(J; X (1) , . . . , X (l) ) =               log cosh(Ji X (k) ) − Xi Ji X (k) + log 2 (6)
                                                  k=1 i=1

   We define the first and second derivatives of ϕ at a matrix J ∈ S0n in the direction of a matrix
A ∈ S0n as in Dagan et al. (2021)
                                                     n
                          dϕ(J + tA)       1X
                                         =    (Ai x)(tanh(Ji x + hi ) − xi )                            (7)
                              dt     t=0   2
                                                   i=1
                                                  n
                      d2 ϕ(J + tA)       1        X
                            2
                                       =                 (Ai X + hi )2 sech(Ji X + hi )2                (8)
                           d t     t=0   2
                                                   i=1

    Since the second derivative is always non-negative, we conclude that ϕ is a convex function.
We have included a known external field h ∈ Rn in the expression, since the general result does not
require 0 external field.
    We now introduce some important functional inequalities that will be used in this work. The
definitions below are standard and can be found, e.g., in Van Handel (2014). For a measure µ in
the hypercube {−1, 1}n , we write Eµ , Varµ for the expectation and variance with respect to this
measure µ. The Dirichlet form associated with the Glauber dynamics for a measure µ can be defined
as the following operator on two arbitrary functions f, g : {−1, 1}n 7→ R
                            " n                                                  #
                        1    X
            E(f, g) := E          E[f (X)|X−i ] − f (X) · E[g(X)|X−i ] − g(X)                   (9)
                        n µ       µ                            µ
                               i=1

   We define the entropy of a positive function f : {−1, 1}n 7→ R+ as

                      Entµ (f ) := E[f (X) log f (X)] − E[f (X)] · log E[f (X)]                       (10)
                                     µ                          µ              µ

    We will need two notions of a modified log-Sobolev inequality. To define the first one, let G be
the set of all functions {−1, 1}n 7→ R and G ′ the subset of all positive functions. Let Γ : G 7→ G ′
be a so-called difference operator. We say a measure µ supported on the hypercube satisfies a
Γ-MLSI(ρ), for some ρ > 0, if and only if for all f ∈ G
                                         ρ h                 i
                                   Entµ ef ≤ E Γ(f )2 ef ,
                                                 2 µ

                                                         22
This notation is a classical notion of the Modified Log-Sobolev inequality and has been used in prior
work for proving concentration inequalities Bobkov and Götze (1999); Sambale and Sinulis (2019).
   There is a related notion of MLSI based on the Glauber dynamics. We say µ satisfies the
modified log-Sobolev inequality for the Glauber dynamics with constant C > 0 and write Glauber-
MLSI(C), if for every function f : {−1, 1}n 7→ R
                                            
                                     Entµ ef ≤ C · n · E(ef , f )

    This version of the Modified Log-Sobolev inequality arises naturally when considering the rate
of contraction of the KL-divergence between the distribution of a Markov Chain at a given time and
the stationary distribution of the chain Bobkov and Tetali (2006).
    Also, we say a measure µ satisfies a Poincare inequality with constant ρ > 0 and write Po(ρ), if
for every function f : {−1, 1}n 7→ R

                                     Var(f ) ≤ ρ · n · E(f, f )                                 (11)
                                       µ

     Both the Poincaré inequality and Glauber-MLSI have been established in prior work for spec-
trally bounded Ising models.

Lemma 11 (Eldan et al. (2022)) If λmax (J ∗ ) − λmin (J ∗ ) < 1 − α, then PrJ ∗ satisfies Po(1/α).

Lemma 12 (Anari et al. (2021); Chen and Eldan (2022)) If λmax (J ∗ ) − λmin (J ∗ ) < 1 − α, then
PrJ ∗ satisfies Glauber-MLSI(1/α).

    Furthermore, it is a well-known identity (for example, Bobkov and Tetali (2006)) that, in gen-
eral, the Glauber MLSI implies the Poincaré inequality with a slightly worse constant. For com-
pleteness, we give a proof below.

Lemma 13 If for some µ, Glauber-MLSI(C) satisfies, then it also satisfies Po(2C).

Proof Consider F (t) = CnE(etf , tf )−Entµ etf . We know that F (0) = 0. Since we have F ≥ 0,
                                                     

if we have F ′ (0) = 0, we must have F ′′ (0) ≥ 0. Taking the derivative, we have
                                        " n                                               #!
          d2                   2
                                                                      
                             d             X
              nE(etf , tf ) = 2 C E               E[etf |X−i ] − etf      E[tf |X−i ] − tf
         dt2                 dt      µ             µ                      µ
                                           i=1
                                      " n                                                
                                d       X
                                                       tf            tf
                            =C     E            E[f e |X−i ] − f e         E[tf |X−i ] − tf
                               dt µ              µ                          µ
                                        i=1
                                                                               
                                               tf          tf
                                   + E[e |X−i ] − e               E[f |X−i ] − f
                                           µ                       µ
                                   " n                                                   
                                    X
                                                  2 tf           2 tf
                            =C E             E[f e |X−i ] − f e            E[tf |X−i ] − tf
                                 µ             µ                          µ
                                     i=1
                                                                                  
                                                    tf           tf
                                     +2        E[f e |X−i ] − f e     E[f |X−i ] − f
                                               µ                      µ



                                                    23
                                     DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




    When we set t = 0, we have

         d2
                                                                      
             E(etf , tf )     = 2E         E[f |X−i ] − f   E[f |X−i ] − f     = 2nE(f, f )
         dt2              t=0
                                 µ         µ                   µ


    Also, we have

   d2             d2
                                                 
             tf             tf         tf       tf
       Entµ e   = 2 E[e · tf ] − E[e ] log E[e ]
   dt2            dt    µ            µ      µ
                                                                      
                  d        tf     tf    2        tf       tf        tf
                =     E[e · f + e · tf ] − E[f e ] log E[e ] − E[f e ]
                  dt µ                     µ           µ       µ

                                                               Eµ [f etf ]2
                                                                                     
                        tf     2 tf    3      2 tf        tf                     2 tf
                = E[2e · f + e · tf ] − E[f e ] log E[e ] −                 − E[f e ]
                    µ                     µ            µ        Eµ [etf ]2    µ


    Therefore, we have

                   d2                                               
                       Ent µ  etf     =            2       2 2       2
                                              2 E[f ] − E[f ] − E[f ] = Var(f )
                   dt2            t=0
                                                µ        µ          µ             µ


    Therefore, we have F ′′ (0) = 2CnE(f, f ) − Varµ (f ) ≥ 0, which means that Po(2C) holds.

    The reason Γ-MLSI is useful is that concentration results for second-order polynomials are
proven in Sambale and Sinulis (2019) when the distribution µ satisfies this property. On the other
hand, Glauber-MLSI is usually the property that follows from results about fast mixing Eldan et al.
(2022); Chen and Eldan (2022); Anari et al. (2021). It would thus be desirable to connect the two
notions of MLSI in order to establish concentration results for the Ising model. To facilitate that
connection, following Sambale and Sinulis (2019) we define the operator d+ as follows
                                v
                                u n
                                uX h                                      i
                      +
                     d f (X) = t       E ((f (X) − f (Xi′ , X−i ))2+ X−i .                    (12)
                                       i=1


In the above, we use (Xi′ , X−i ) be a shortened random vector (X1′ , X2′ , . . . , Xn′ ) that has all other
coordinate j, Xj′ = Xj , and Xi′ is sampled independently of everything else according to the distri-
bution conditioning on X−i ′ = X . Also, we have used the shorthand notation x := max(0, x).
                                   −i                                                     +
                +
The quantity d f (x) can be thought of as the l2 -norm of a discrete derivative of f at x. It is therefore
capturing the Lipschitzness of f in some appropriate sense and will thus be important for proving
that f (X) concentrates. The connection between the two definitions is that Glauber-MLSI(ρ) im-
plies d+ -MLSI(2ρ), since by direct calculation we can get that Eµ [d+ f · ef ] ≥ nE(f, ef ) Sambale
and Sinulis (2019). Indeed, in the following lemma, we use this fact and derive a generic concen-
tration result involving d+ .

Lemma 14 Suppose that µ satisfy Glauber-MLSI(ρ). Then, for any functions f, g : {−1, 1}n 7→ R
and constant b > 0 such that d+ f ≤ g and d+ g ≤ b, we have for any t > 0
                                                                 2          
                                               8         1            t     t
               Pr [|f (X) − E[f (X)]| > t] ≤ exp −           min          ,      .
                                               3        16ρ         E[g]2 b

                                                    24
Proof By Proposition 2.18 in Sambale and Sinulis (2019), if µ satisfies Glauber-MLSI(1/α), it
follows that the same Ising model also satisfies d+ −MLSI(2/α). Thus, we can apply Corollary 1.2
from Sambale and Sinulis (2019) and the result immediately follows.

    We now state a useful lemma for upper-bounding second moments of the model.

Lemma 15 Let A be any matrix, and x ∼ µ be an Ising model satisfying Po(ρ). We have the
following:                        
                         E ∥Ax∥2 ≤ ∥ E[Ax]∥2 + ρ∥A∥2F

Proof By the Poincaré Inequality, we have that
                                                          n
                                                          X                                  n
                                                                                             X
       E[(Ai x)2 ] − (E[Ai x])2 = Var(Ai x) ≤ ρ E               (E[Ai x|x−j ] − Ai x)2 ≤ ρ         A2ij .
                                                      µ
                                                          j=1                                j=1

    Therefore, we have in total
                          n
                          X               n X
                                          X n
                        2
               E(∥Ax∥ ) ≤            2
                            (E[Ai x]) + ρ     A2ij = ∥ E[Ax]∥2 + ρ∥A∥2F .
                               i=1                 i=1 j=1




    Another useful consequence of MLSI is the simpler concentration of Lipschitz functions, which
is well known. Below is one version of this implication from Cryan et al. (2019).

Lemma 16 (Lemma 15 in Cryan et al. (2019)) Let P be the transition matrix of a reversible
Markov Chain with stationary distribution π on a finite set Ω, and f : Ω → R be some observ-
able function. Then,
                                                              a2
                        Pr (f (x) − E f ≥ a) ≤ exp(−                    )
                        x∼π          π                   2n · ρ · v(f )
where a ≥ 0 and                                                            
                                           X                               
                            v(f ) := max        P (x, y)(f (x) − f (y))2        ,
                                     x∈Ω                                   
                                          y∈Ω

if π satisfies Glauber-MLSI(ρ(P )).

    Finally, we also require the Hubbard-Stratonovich transform, which is a way to decompose any
Ising model distribution into a mixture of product distributions. Formally, suppose X ∼ PrJ ∗ and
G ∼ N (0, In ). Let us consider the random variable

                                           Y = X + J −1/2 G                                                 (13)

An easy calculation now shows that the distribution of X conditioned on Y is an Ising model with
zero interaction matrix and external field J ∗ Y (for details see e.g. Theorem 3.12 in Liu et al. (2024)).
Thus, if πy is the distribution of Y , we can decompose any Ising measure as
                                               Z
                                    Pr ∗
                                         [x] =        π(y) Pr∗ [x]dy                                 (14)
                                     J         y∈Rn          0,J y


                                                   25
                                   DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




Appendix B. Learning Ising Models with Bounded Operator Norm
In this Section, we study Ising models of the form (1) with a known and bounded external field h
whose interaction matrix has bounded operator norm and satisfy the modified log-Sobolev Inequal-
ity. In particular, throughout the section, we will make the following assumption.

Assumption 17 The set of all candidate matrices, R ⊆ S0n , contains J ∗ . The Ising model, as in
(1) with h a known external field, satisfies ∥J ∗ ∥op ≤ λ for some constant λ > 0. Also, it satisfies
Glauber-MLSI(ρ). Finally, max1≤i≤n |hi | ≤ hmax .

    Without loss of generality, we assume ρ, λ ≥ 1.

B.1. Concentration of the first derivative
The first derivative of the pseudolikelihood is given by the formula in (7). Even though this function
is not a polynomial, intuitively it behaves similarly to a second-degree polynomial if we linearize
the tanh function. Indeed, our goal in this section will be to prove that it concentrates similarly
to a second-degree polynomial. This was shown to hold in Dagan et al. (2021) in the case where
∥J ∗ ∥∞ < 1, using the Approximate Tensorization of Entropy (ATE) and the bound on the infin-
ity norm. Here, we will show that it still holds under MLSI and bounded operator norm, using
Lemma 14.

Theorem 18 Suppose X ∈ {−1, 1}n is sampled from an Ising model with interaction matrix J ∗
satisfying Assumption 17. For a fixed vector b ∈ Rn and fixed symmetric matrix A ∈ Rn×n with
zero diagonal, let us define the function
                                  n
                                  X
                        f (X) =         (Ai X + bi )(tanh(Ji∗ X + hi ) − Xi ) .
                                  i=1

Then, we can take C = 221 λ14 ρ2 > 0, such that for all t > 0
                                                                                     !!
                            8                                 t2              t
          Pr [|f (X)| > t] ≤ exp −C min                  2              2 , ∥A∥           .
                            3                         ∥A∥F + ∥E[AX + b]∥2       op


Proof Let us define for a vector X ∈ {−1, 1}n the vector X (i) ∈ {−1, 1}n , where the i-th coor-
                                                               (k+)    (k−)
dinate is flipped. Also, define vectors X (k+) , X (k−) which Xj    = Xj    = Xj holds for all
                                               (k+)          (k−)
coordinates j = 1, . . . , n, j ̸= k, while Xk = 1, Xk    = −1. Moreover, let us define the
matrix W = W (X) ∈ Rn×n , where the element in the jth row, kth column is equal to

                   Wjk = tanh(Jj∗ X (k+) + h) − tanh(Jj∗ X (k−) + h) − 2Jjk
                                                                         ∗
                                                                            ,

In the sequel, we might omit the dependence of W on X for brevity. Note that W is not necessarily
symmetric. We denote bypWk the kth column and W k the k-th row of W . First, Let us bound
∥W ∥op , where ∥W ∥op = ∥W W ⊤ ∥op Note the well-knownn fact that for all a, b ∈ R

                                                           1
                           | tanh(a) − tanh(b) − (a − b)| ≤ (a − b)2                             (15)
                                                           2

                                                   26
Then using (15), we can bound each entry Wjk of the matrix as
                                          1   ∗ 2       ∗ 2
                                |Wjk | ≤ (2Jjk  ) = 2(Jjk ) ,
                                          2
Thus, the l1 norm of every column j of W (X) can be bounded as follows
                                        n
                                        X               n
                                                        X
                                                                ∗ 2
                         ∥Wj ∥1 =             Wjk ≤ 2         (Jjk ) = 2∥Jj∗ ∥22 ≤ 2λ2 .
                                        k=1             k=1

    The last inequality follows from the fact that the l2 norm of every row of J ∗ is bounded by
∥J ∗ ∥op . Thus ∥W ∥∞ ≤ 2λ2 . Similarly, we can get that ∥W ∥1 ≤ 2λ2 , which implies that
                         q                q               p
               ∥W ∥op = ∥W W ⊤ ∥op ≤ ∥W W ⊤ ∥1 ≤ ∥W ∥∞ · ∥W ∥1 ≤ 2λ2 .

    We start by bounding d+ f . We first notice that for any given X (again, E in the following
expression is same as Equation (12): Xi′ is sampled according to the conditional distribution with
fixed X−i ),
                             n    h                               i
                             X                            2
               (d+ f (X))2 =    E (f (X) − f (Xi′ , X−i ) + X−i
                                  i=1
                                  n
                                  X
                              =         Pr[Xi′ = 1 − Xi |X−i ](f (X) − f (X−i , 1 − Xi ))2+
                                  i=1
                                  n 
                                  X                        2
                              ≤          f (X) − f (X (i) )
                                  i=1
We also define the vector functions
                         g(x) := Ax + b           ,   h(x) := tanh(J ∗ x + b) − x ,
which allows us to write f (x) = g(x)⊤ h(x). Here, we write h(x) as a vector, with h(x)i =
tanh(Ji∗ x + b) − xi . Therefore, we can calculate that
                h(x)j − h(x(i) )j = tanh(Jj∗ x + b) − tanh(Jj∗ x(i) + b) − 2xi 1(i = j).
     So, we have
h(x)−h(x(i) ) = tanh(J ∗ x+b)−tanh(J ∗ x(i) +b)−2xi ei = xi Wi +2xi Ji∗ −2xi ei = xi (Wi +2Ji∗ −2ei ),
    where ei is the standard basis vector with all coordinates 0 except for the i-th that is 1. With
that, we can further bound the discrete derivative as follows. For all x ∈ {−1, 1}n , we have
 (d+ f (x))2
  Xn                            2
            ⊤          (i) ⊤ (i)
≤       g(x) h(x) − g(x ) h(x )
    i=1
    n 
    X                     ⊤                                  ⊤                                                           2
                                                                                                     ⊤
=           g(x) − g(x(i) )    h(x) +         g(x(i) ) − g(x)         h(x) − h(x(i) )       + g(x)           h(x) − h(x(i) )
    i=1
    Xn                                                                                 2
=          2xi A⊤             ⊤         ∗                        ⊤        ∗
                i h(x) + 2xi Ai · xi (2Ji + Wi − 2ei ) + (Ax + b) · xi (2Ji + Wi − 2ei )   .
    i=1


                                                         27
                                      DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




   By Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, (x + y + z)2 ≤ 3(x2 + y 2 + z 2 ), and we know that xi = ±1,
we have the above expression is no larger than
     Xn             2                        2                                   2 
               ⊤                 ⊤     ∗                           ⊤     ∗
   3       4 Ai h(x) + 4 Ai (2Ji + Wi − 2ei ) + (Ax + b) (2Ji + Wi − 2ei )
       i=1
                                                                  2
     First, we deal with the middle term A⊤       ∗
                                            i (2Ji + Wi − 2ei ) . Using Cauchy-Schwartz inequal-
ity for vectors (x⊤ y ≤ ∥x∥ · ∥y∥), for the middle term, we have
                                              2
                         A⊤     ∗
                           i (2Ji + Wi − 2ei )    ≤ ∥Ai ∥22 · ∥2Ji∗ + Wi − 2ei ∥22
                      ≤∥Ai ∥22 · (2∥Ji∗ ∥2 + ∥Wi ∥2 + 2)2 ≤ (2 + 2λ + 2λ2 )2 ∥Ai ∥2 .

   Here, the last inequality is because ∥Ji ∥2 ≤ λ and ∥Wi ∥2 ≤ 2λ2 . Therefore, summing over i,
we have
     n
     X                         2     n
                                       X
 3     4 A⊤
          i (2J ∗
                i + W i − 2ei )    ≤ 3   4 · (2 + 2λ + 2λ2 )2 ∥Ai ∥2 = 48(1 + λ + λ2 )2 ∥A∥2F .
     i=1                                    i=1
                                                                        2
   Now, we deal with the last term. (Ax + b)⊤ (2Ji∗ + Wi − 2ei ) By Cauchy-Schwartz in-
equality again, for the last term, we have
                                                    2
                      (Ax + b)⊤ (2Ji∗ + Wi − 2ei )
                                    2                   2                     2
                 ≤12 A⊤    i x + b i    + 12   (Ax + b)⊤ ∗
                                                        Ji    + 3   (Ax +  b)⊤
                                                                               W i


   Again, after summing over i, then using the fact that ∥J ∗ ∥op ≤ λ and ∥W ∥op ≤ 2λ2 , we can
deduce that
                  n
                  X                 2                  2               2
                        12 A⊤
                            i x + bi    + 12 (Ax + b)⊤ Ji∗ + 3 (Ax + b)⊤ Wi
                  i=1
               =12∥(Ax + b)⊤ Ji∗ ∥2 + 3∥(Ax + b)⊤ W ∥2 + 12∥Ax + b∥22
               ≤12λ2 ∥Ax + b∥22 + 12λ4 ∥Ax + b∥22 + 12∥Ax + b∥22
                                                            Xn
                        2    4           2            2
               =12(1 + λ + λ )∥Ax + b∥ = 12(1 + λ + λ )   4
                                                                 (A⊤
                                                                   i x + bi )
                                                                             2

                                                                          i=1

    Combining them together, we have
             X n            2                   2                           2 
  +      2             ⊤               ⊤ ∗                     ⊤   ∗
(d f (x)) ≤3      4 Ai h(x) + 4 Ai (2Ji + Wi − 2ei ) + (Ax + b) (2Ji + Wi − 2ei )
                i=1
                                                                    n
                                                                    X                        n
                                                                                             X          2
             ≤48(1 + λ + λ ) ∥A∥2F + (3 · 12)(1 + λ2 + λ4 )
                              2 2
                                                                          (A⊤         2
                                                                            i x + bi ) + 3     4 A⊤
                                                                                                  i h(x)
                                                                    i=1                      i=1
                                                            n
                                                            X                           2
             ≤48(1 + λ + λ2 )2 ∥A∥2F + 36(1 + λ2 + λ4 )            (A⊤         2   ⊤
                                                                     i x + bi ) + Ai h(x)
                                                             i=1


                                                    28
   Let
           v
           u                                          n
           u                                          X                       2
    q(x) = t48(1 + λ + λ2 )2 ∥A∥2F + 36(1 + λ2 + λ4 )   (A⊤         2   ⊤
                                                          i x + bi ) + Ai h(x) .                       (16)
                                                                   i=1

We thus have d+ f (x) ≤ q(x) for all x ∈ {−1, 1}n . Let us first bound E [q(X)]2 ≤ E[q(x)2 ]. First,
notice that
                          E[h(X)] = E[X − tanh(J ∗ X + h)] = 0 .
This enables us to write.
                                   E[(A⊤      2         ⊤
                                       i h(X)) ] = Var[Ai h(X)]

We can now use the Poincaré inequality to bound the above variance. Note that by Lemma 13, if µ
satisfies Glauber MLSI(ρ), then it also satisfies Po(2ρ). So we get
                                             n
                                             X      h   h            ii
                    Var[A⊤
                         i h(X)] ≤ 2ρ              E Var A⊤
                                                          i h(X)|X−k
                                             k=1
                                             n
                                             X                                 2 
                                      ≤ 2ρ         E        A⊤
                                                             i (h(Xk+ ) − h(Xk− ))
                                             k=1

We have that

         A⊤                        ⊤        ∗                 ∗
          i (h(Xk+ ) − h(Xk− )) = Ai (tanh(J Xk+ + h) − tanh(J Xk− + h) − 2ek )
                                    = −2Aik + A⊤    ∗        ⊤
                                               i (2J ek ) + Ai Wk
                                    = −2Aik + 2A⊤  ∗    ⊤
                                                i Jk + Ai Wk

Applying the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality now yields
                                     2                                 
                A⊤
                 i (h(Xk+ ) − h(Xk− ))   ≤ 3 4A2ik + 4(A⊤  ∗ 2     ⊤  k 2
                                                        i Jk ) + (Ai W )




Summing over all k now gives
      n 
      X                           2     n 
                                         X                                 
            A⊤
             i (h(Xk+ ) − h(Xk− ))   ≤ 3     4A 2
                                                ik + 4(A ⊤ ∗ 2
                                                          J
                                                         i k ) + (A⊤
                                                                   i W k 2
                                                                        )
      k=1                                      k=1
                                          = 12∥Ai ∥22 + 12∥J ∗ Ai ∥22 + 3∥W ⊤ Ai ∥22
                                          ≤ 12∥Ai ∥22 + 12∥J ∗ ⊤ ∥2op ∥Ai ∥22 + 3∥W ⊤ ∥2op ∥Ai ∥22 .

   Using the fact that ∥J ∗ ∥op < λ and ∥W ∥op ≤ 2λ2 , we have
                   n 
                   X                              2
                            A⊤
                             i (h(Xk+ ) − h(Xk− ))   ≤ 12(1 + λ2 + λ4 )∥Ai ∥22 .
                    k=1

   Therefore, we have

                             E[(A⊤      2             2   4      2
                                 i h(X)) ] ≤ 24ρ(1 + λ + λ )∥Ai ∥ .


                                                       29
                                      DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




   For the second term, the analysis follows along similar lines if we apply a suitable centering to
make the variance appear. In particular, we can write

                                     h           i2
               E[(A⊤
                   i X + bi )2
                               ] − E  A ⊤
                                        i X + bi    = Var[A⊤
                                                           i X]
                                                                 n
                                                                 X      h              i
                                                          ≤ 2ρ         E Var[A⊤
                                                                              i X|X−i ]
                                                                 k=1
                                                                 n
                                                                 X
                                                          ≤ 2ρ         A2ik
                                                                 k=1
                                                          = 2ρ∥Ai ∥22

Summing over all i and using (16) gives

                                                                   n
                                                                   X                               2
    E[q(X)]2 ≤ 48(1 + λ + λ2 )2 ∥A∥2F + 36(1 + λ2 + λ4 )                 (A⊤
                                                                           i x + bi )2
                                                                                       +   A ⊤
                                                                                             i h(x)
                                                                   i=1
               ≤ 48(1 + λ + λ ) ∥A∥2F
                                2 2

                                Xn
                         2    4
               + 36(1 + λ + λ )             24ρ(1 + λ2 + λ4 )∥Ai ∥2 + 2ρ(∥Ai ∥2 + E[A⊤       2
                                                                                     i X + b] )
                                      i=1
                                                       
               ≤ 2 (1 + λ )(1 + ρ) ∥A∥2F + ∥E[Ax + b]∥22 .
                   11       4
                                                                                                         (17)


   We will now focus on bounding d+ q(x). We have
             v
             u                                          n
             u                                          X                        2
       q(x) =t48(1 + λ + λ2 )2 ∥A∥2F + 36(1 + λ2 + λ4 )   (A⊤         2   ⊤
                                                            i x + bi ) + Ai h(x)
                                                                  i=1
                                                 v
                                                 u n
              √            2
                                     p           uX                      2
             ≤ 48(1 + λ + λ )∥A∥F + 6 1 + λ + λ t (A⊤
                                           2   4               2   ⊤
                                                     i x + bi ) + Ai h(x) .
                                                                  i=1

             qP                                2
               n       ⊤
Let r(x) =                       2
                 i=1 (Ai x + bi ) +     A⊤
                                         i h(x) . Then we define


                            K (i) (x) = A⊤
                                         i h(x);         L(i) (x) = A⊤
                                                                     i x + b.

                                     √
                          + q(x) ≤ 6 1 + λ2 + λ4 · d+ r(x). This is because for all positive a, b, c,
   We first
         √ notice that√  d        √     √
we have | a + b − a + c| ≤ | b − c|. We define the vector function s = s(x) ∈ R2n , with
s(x)i = K (i) (x) if i ≤ n and s(x)i = L(i−n) (x) if i > n. We then have that

                                r(x) = ∥s(x)∥2 =         sup ⟨s(x), v⟩ .
                                                      v∈S 2n−1


                                                    30
Let us denote ṽ = (ṽ1 , ṽ2 ) := argmaxv∈S 2n−1 ⟨s(x), v⟩ the unit vector (in R2n , where ṽ1 , ṽ2 ∈ Rn )
that is in the direction of s(x). Then, we can write
                                          n 
                                          X                            2
                      (d+ ∥r(x)∥)2 ≤             ∥s(x)∥ − ∥s(x(k) )∥
                                                                           +
                                          k=1
                                          Xn                                      2
                                      =          ⟨s(x), ṽ⟩ −     sup ⟨s(x(k) ), v⟩
                                          k=1                   v∈S 2n−1            +
                                          Xn                                  2
                                      ≤          ⟨s(x), ṽ⟩ − ⟨s(x(k) ), ṽ⟩
                                                                                +
                                          k=1
                                      ≤ ∥S · ṽ∥2 ,

where S ∈ Rn×2n is the matrix with k-th row equal to s(x) − s(x(k) ). We can write in block form
S = (S 1 |S 2 ), where S 1 , S 2 ∈ Rn×n . Let us bound ∥S 1 ∥op , ∥S 2 ∥op . We have that
                                           (i)         (i)
                              (S 1 )ki = s1 (x) − s1 (x(k) )
                                      = A⊤            (k)
                                         i (h(x) − h(x ))
                                      = x k A⊤    ∗
                                             i (2Jk + Wk − 2ek )
                                      = xk (2(J ∗ A)ki + (W A)ki − 2Aki )

For a vector x ∈ Rn , we denote diag(x) the diagonal matrix with diagonal entries equal to x. Then,
we can write in matrix form

                       ∥S 1 ∥op = ∥diag(x)(2J ∗ A + W A − 2A)∥op
                                ≤ ∥diag(x)∥op · ∥2J ∗ A + W A − 2A∥op
                                ≤ 2∥A∥op + ∥J ∗ ∥op · ∥A∥op + ∥W ∥op · ∥A∥op
                                ≤ (2 + λ + 2λ2 )∥A∥op .

For S 2 the situation is similar and we can write

                                          (S 2 )ki = A⊤       (k)
                                                      i (x − x )
                                                   = 2xk Aki .

Thus
                                 ∥S 2 ∥op = 2 ∥diag(x)A∥op ≤ 2∥A∥op
We can now conclude

                   ∥S · ṽ∥2 = ∥S 1 ṽ1 + S 2 ṽ2 ∥2
                             ≤ 2∥S 1 ṽ1 ∥2 + 2∥S 2 ṽ2 ∥2
                             ≤ 2∥S 1 ∥2op ∥∥ṽ1 ∥2 + 2∥S 2 ∥2op ∥ṽ2 ∥2
                             ≤ 2 max(∥S 1 ∥2op , ∥S 1 ∥2op ) ≤ (2 + λ + 2λ2 )2 ∥A∥2op ,

where we used the fact that ∥ṽ1 ∥2 + ∥ṽ2 ∥2 ≤ 1.

                                                       31
                                      DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




       To summarize, we have shown that d+ f (x) ≤ q(x) for all x. Furthermore, by (17) we proved
that
                                                 
E[q]2 ≤ 211 (1 + λ4 )(1 + ρ) ∥A∥2F + ∥E[Ax + b]∥22 ∥A∥2F        ,   d+ q(x) ≤ (2 + λ + 2λ2 )2 ∥A∥op

We also know that
                                            ∂ϕ(J ∗ )
                                                    
                                          E            =0
                                             ∂A
                                   1         1
Thus, applying Lemma 14, take C = 16ρ 215 (1+λ4 )(1+ρ)
                                                       ≥ 221 λ14 ρ2 we obtain that for every t > 0

                             ∂ϕ(J ∗ )
                                                     2          
                                           8             t      t
                    Pr                > t ≤ exp −C min       ,         .
                              ∂A           3            ∥A∥2F ∥A∥op



  We are now ready to establish the concentration of the first derivative for Ising models satisfying
MLSI. This basically follows as a direct Corollary of Theorem 18

Lemma 19 Suppose X ∈ {−1, 1}n is sampled from an Ising model satisfying Assumption 17.
Then, if ϕ is the pseudolikelihood function evaluated at X and A ∈ S0n , then there is a constant
C ′ = 221 λ14 ρ2 such that for any t > 0:

                                          ∂ϕ(J ∗ )
                                                   ≤ t∥A∥F
                                           ∂A

with probability at least                                     
                                      8                   t∥A∥F
                                 1−     exp −C ′ min t2 ,
                                      3                   ∥A∥op

Proof We apply Theorem 18 and substitute t∥A∥F for t, completing the proof.


B.2. Anti-Concentration of the Second Derivative
We want to show that the second derivative is lower bounded with high probability. First, we present
the lemma, as the second form of Corollary 1.2 in Sambale and Sinulis (2019) (the inequality right
after Corollary 1.2 in Sambale and Sinulis (2019), which does not have a specific number)

Lemma 20 (Corollary 1.2 in Sambale and Sinulis (2019)) Assume that µ satisfies a Γ-MLSI(ρ)
for some difference operator Γ and ρ > 0. Let f, g be two measurable functions such that Γ(f ) ≤ g
and Γ(g) ≤ b. Then there is a universal constant c such that for all t ≥ 0 we have

                                                             t2
                                                                              
                                                                            t
                Pr[f − E[f ] ≥ t] ≤ exp −c min                          ,√         .           (18)
                        µ                            ρ(Eµ g)2 + 2b2 ρ2      2ρb
    From (8), it is clear that the second derivative is almost equal to a second-degree polynomial,
up to a factor that involves the sech function. We thus start by stating a concentration bound for
second-degree polynomials that essentially follows from Sambale and Sinulis (2019).

                                                 32
Lemma 21 Suppose X ∈ {−1, 1}n is sampled from an Ising model with interaction matrix J ∗
satisfying Glauber-MLSI(ρ) and external field h ∈ Rn . Also, let S ∈ S0n . Then, there exists an
absolute constant c > 0, such that for any t > 0,

                                                                t2
                                                                                
              ⊤           ⊤                       c                           t
          Pr[x Sx − E[x Sx] ≥ t] ≤ exp − 2 min                             ,          .
                                                ρ      ∥S∥2F + ∥ E[Sx]∥2 ∥S∥op

   For the other side, it is analogous.

Proof As remarked in the proof of Lemma 14, combining Theorem 12 from Anari et al. (2021) and
Proposition 2.18 from Sambale and Sinulis (2019) yields that our model satisfies Glauber-MLSI(ρ),
d+ -MLSI(2ρ) and Po(2ρ). Thus, we can use the second form of Corollary 1.2 in Sambale and
Sinulis (2019):
    Let f (x) = x⊤ Sx. By the proof of Lemma 2.17 in Sambale and Sinulis (2019), we know that
we can take Γ = d+ , g(x) = 4∥Sx∥, and b = 8∥S∥op . It now remains to upper bound E[∥SX∥])2 .
To do that, we can again use the Poincaré inequality (Lemma 11).

                          E[∥SX∥]2 ≤ E ∥SX∥2 )
                                                    

                                         X n
                                      =       E[(Si⊤ X)2 ]
                                              i=1
                                              Xn                          
                                          =          E[Si⊤ X]2 + Var[Si⊤ X]
                                              i=1
                                                            n
                                                            X
                                          = ∥ E[SX]∥22 +          Var[Si⊤ X]
                                                            i=1
                                                               n
                                                               X
                                          ≤ ∥ E[SX]∥22 + 2ρ          ∥Si ∥22
                                                               i=1
                                          = ∥ E[SX]∥22 + 2ρ∥S∥2F

By substituting this upper bound into (18), and notice that ∥S∥op ≤ ∥S∥F and ρ ≥ 1 by assumption,
we obtain the desired inequality.

   Having obtained this concentration result, showing that the second derivative is large with high
probability boils down to the following two tasks.

  (a) First, we need to establish that the second derivative is lower bounded by a degree 2 polyno-
      mial. To do this, we need to show that the terms sech(Ji X)2 are lower bounded by a constant
      with high probability.

  (b) Second, we need to show that the degree 2 polynomial that lower bounds the second derivative
      is large enough on expectation.

We next show how to establish each of these two properties. We start by addressing (b), namely
establishing a lower bound for the expectation of the second moment part of the second derivative,
which will prove useful later. The proof involves using the Hubbard-Stratonovich transform to

                                                      33
                                      DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




decompose the Ising model into a mixture of product measures. For each product measure, lower-
bounding the second moment is a much simpler problem. However, some product measures in
the decomposition will have large external fields, giving weak lower bounds. We use properties
of this decomposition to establish that with at least a constant probability, the external field in the
decomposition will be bounded.

Lemma 22 Let x ∼ µ be an Ising model satisfying Assumption 17. Let A be any matrix. Then, we
have the following anti-concentration bound:
                                                        1              √ 
                    E(x⊤ A⊤ Ax) − ∥ E[Ax]∥2 ≥             1 − tanh2 (4λ ρ) ∥A∥2F .
                                                        2
Proof We use the decomposition described in (14) and (13). In particular, let π be the distribution
of vector y and Pr0,J ∗ x (x) ∼ exp(⟨J ∗ y, x⟩) the corresponding product measure. We can have that

                               n
                               X                      n
                                                      X                        n X
                                                                               X n
E(x⊤ A⊤ Ax)−∥ E[Ax]∥2 =               Var(Ai x) ≥           E Var (Ai x) =               E A2ij (sech2 ((J ∗ y)j ))
                                                            y∼π x∼ν(y)                   y∼π
                                i=1                   i=1                      i=1 j=1

    We know that (J ∗ y) = (J ∗ x) + ((J ∗ )1/2 g) is a multivariate Gaussian distribution with means
J ∗ x and covariance matrix J ∗ . So for each (J ∗ y), we have mean Ji∗ x and variance is Jii∗ . Therefore,
our plan is to prove that Ji∗ x and N (0, Jii∗ ) are small with high probability.
     Consider P to be the Glauber Dynamics of the Ising model. Consider f (x) = nj=1 Jij∗ xj . So,
                                                                                       P
because of the distribution, we know that Ji∗ x has zero mean. Also, we can calculate that
                                                  n
                                              1X             4λ2
                                      v(f ) ≤    4(Jij∗ )2 ≤     .
                                              n               n
                                                 i=1

    We know that µ satisfies Glauber-MLSI(ρ). Therefore, by Lemma 16, we can bound the prob-
ability that yj is large:
                       P((J ∗ y)j > a) ≤ P(f (x) > a/2) + P(N (0, Jii ) > a/2)
                            a2            a              a2
                     ≤ exp(−    ) + exp(−   ) ≤ 2 exp(−       ).
                           8ρλ2           8             8ρλ2
                            √                                                    √
   Therefore, we take a = 4 ρλ, we can get that the probability that (J ∗ y)j ≤ 4 ρλ is at least
1 − 2/e2 > 1/2. Therefore, we have
      n                   n X
                            n
      X                   X                                              1              √ 
            Var(Ai x) =             E a2ij (1 − tanh2 ((J ∗ y)j )) ≥       1 − tanh2 (4λ ρ) ∥A∥2F .
                                    y∼π                                  2
      i=1                 i=1 j=1




    We are now ready to prove our main Lemma about lower-bounding the second derivative of the
pseudolikelihood. The proof essentially involves addressing (a), i.e., showing that sech(Ji X)2 is
lower bounded by a constant with high probability. Since we only know a bound on ∥J∥2 , in general,
this quantity could be very small. We use concentration results for second-degree polynomials to
relate sech(Ji X) with sech(Ji∗ X), which does not depend on the matrix direction J. The result is
stated for one sample for simplicity, but we’ll see how to apply it for multiple samples in the sequel.

                                                       34
Lemma 23 Suppose X ∈ {−1, 1}n is a sample q
                                          drawn from an Ising model satisfying Assump-
tion 17. Let A ∈ S0n be a symmetric matrix with ∥A∥2F + ∥ E[Ax]∥2 ≤ M for some constant
M > 0. Let us also denote J ′ = J ∗ + A. Then, for any J that lies in the line segment connecting
J ∗ and J ′ , we have

             ∂ 2 ϕ(J)
                      ≥ K2 · (∥A∥2F + ∥ E[Ax]∥2 ) · min sech2 (|Ji∗ X (k) | + hi + K1 M )
               ∂A2                                  i∈[n]

with probability at least
                                c                           c
                      1 − exp(− 2 · min(t21 , t1 )) − exp(− 2 · min(t22 , t2 )),
                               ρ                           ρ

where c is an absolute constant as in Lemma 21, and the expression K1 , K2 are as follows:
                                              p
                                         K1 = t1 + 2ρ

                                            1              √ 
                                  K2 =        1 − tanh2 (4λ ρ) − t2
                                            2

Proof We have that
                                     n
                       ∂ 2 ϕ(J) X
                               =  (Ai X)2 sech2 (Ji X)
                         ∂A2
                                     i=1
                                     n
                                     X
                                 ≥         (Ai X)2 sech2 (|Ji∗ X| + |(Ji − Ji∗ )X|)
                                     i=1
                                     n
                                     X
                                 ≥         (Ai X)2 sech2 (|Ji∗ X| + |Ai X|)
                                     i=1

The last inequality follows since |(Ji − Ji∗ )X| ≤ |((J ′ )i − Ji )X| = |Ai X|, since J lies in the
segment connecting J ′ , J ∗ . Now, let us use Lemma 21 for the quadratic form x⊤ A⊤ Ax. When
substituting t ← t(∥A∥2F + ∥ E[AX]∥2 ), this gives
                                      n
                                      X
     ⊤   ⊤             ⊤    ⊤
  X A AX − E[X A AX] =                      (Ai X)2 − E[X ⊤ A⊤ AX] ≤ t(∥A∥2F + ∥ E[AX]∥2 ).   (19)
                                      i=1

    This bound of X means in particular that
                      n
                      X
                            (Ai X)2 ≤ E[X ⊤ A⊤ AX] + t(∥A∥2F + ∥ E[AX]∥2 ).
                      i=1

    By Lemma 21, this happens with probability at least

                                   t2 (∥A∥2F + ∥ E[AX]∥2 )2 t(∥A∥2F + ∥ E[AX]∥2 )
             1 − exp(−c/ρ2 min(                            ,                      )).
                                  ∥A⊤ A∥2F + ∥ E[A⊤ AX]∥2         ∥A⊤ A∥op

                                                      35
                                   DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




   Using the well known properties ∥A⊤ A∥op = ∥A∥2op , ∥ E[A⊤ AX]∥2 = ∥A⊤ E[AX]∥2 ≤
∥A∥op ∥ E[AX]∥2 and ∥A⊤ A∥F ≤ ∥A∥F ∥A∥op , we can lower bound the probability by

                                   t2 (∥A∥2F + ∥ E[AX]∥2 )2 t(∥A∥2F + ∥ E[AX]∥2 )
             1 − exp(−c/ρ2 min(                            ,                      ))
                                  ∥A⊤ A∥2F + ∥ E[A⊤ AX]∥2         ∥A⊤ A∥op
                                   t2 (∥A∥2F + ∥ E[AX]∥2 )2 t(∥A∥2F + ∥ E[AX]∥2 )
         ≥1 − exp(−c/ρ2 min(                                  ,                   ))
                                  ∥A∥2op (∥A∥2F + ∥ E[AX]∥2 )       ∥A∥2op
                           ∥A∥2F + ∥ E[AX]∥2
         =1 − exp(−c/ρ2                      min(t, t2 )).
                                 ∥A∥2op

   Now, to finally deal with upper bound of E[X ⊤ A⊤ AX], we use lemma 15 (since µ satisfy
Glauber-MLSI(ρ), hence also Po(2ρ)) to decude that, if (19) holds, then.
      n
      X
            (Ai X)2 ≤ E[X ⊤ A⊤ AX] + t(∥A∥2F + ∥ E[AX]∥2 )
      i=1
    ≤(1 + t)(∥ E[AX]∥2 ) + (t + 2ρ) ∥A∥2F ≤ (t + 2ρ)(∥ E[AX]∥2 + ∥A∥2F ) ≤ (t + 2ρ)M 2 .

                                                                 c(∥A∥2F +∥ E[AX]∥2 )
We know that (19) holds with probability at least 1 − exp(−            ρ2 ∥A∥2op
                                                                                      · min(t2 , t)), thus
                                                                             √
the same probability that the above chain of probability holds. Denote K1 = t + 2ρ. It follows
that with the same probability we have |Ai X| ≤ K1 M for all i. Thus, we have that
                                     n
                        ∂ 2 ϕ(J) X
                                ≥  (Ai X)2 sech2 (|Ji∗ X| + |Ai X|)
                          ∂A2
                                    i=1
                                    n
                                    X
                                ≥         (Ai X)2 sech2 (|Ji∗ X| + K1 M )
                                    i=1
                                                                  n
                                                                  X
                                ≥ min sech2 (|Ji∗ X| + K1 M )       (Ai X)2
                                    i∈[n]
                                                                  i=1

                                         ⊤   ⊤
                to lower bound E[X A AX] in order to get a high probability lower bound for
PnWe now need
           2
 i=1 (Ai X) . Using Lemma 21 we have

                      X ⊤ A⊤ AX ≥ E[X ⊤ A⊤ AX] − t(∥A∥2F + ∥ E[AX]∥2 )

                            c(∥A∥2 +∥ E[AX]∥2 )
holds for at least 1 − exp(−     F
                                 ρ2 ∥A∥2op
                                                  · min(t2 , t)) probability. Thus, by Lemma 22, if the
above inequality holds, we can deduce that

                 X ⊤ A⊤ AX ≥ E[X ⊤ A⊤ AX] − t(∥A∥2F + ∥ E[AX]∥2 )
                                 1             √
                             ≥ ( (1 − tanh2 (4λ ρ)) − t)(∥A∥2F + ∥ E[AX]∥2 )
                                 2
                                 √ 
Denote K2 = 21 1 − tanh2 4λ ρ − t2 . Using the union bounds, and noticing that ∥A∥F >
∥A∥op , we can finish the proof.

                                                   36
    We now use Lemma 23 to lower-bound the second derivative when we have multiple inde-
pendent samples. The main issue is that we need to choose the parameters t1 , t2 to ensure K2 is
bounded away from 0, while at the same time obtaining a probability of failure that decays expo-
nentially with the number of samples l. As we see, the particular block structure of the matrix in
that case is crucial for the argument to go through.

Theorem 24 Suppose X (1) , . . . , X (l) ∈ {−1, 1}n are independentqsamples from an Ising model
satisfying Assumption 17. Let A ∈ Rn×n be a symmetric matrix with ∥A∥2F + ∥ E[Ax]∥2 ≤ M ≤
1 for some constant 0 < M < 1. Let us also denote J1 = J ∗ + A. Then, for any J that lies in the
line segment connecting J ∗ and J1 , we have

   ∂ 2 ϕ(J (l) )                                                         (k)
         (l) 2
                 ≥ r(λ, ρ) · l · (∥A∥2F + ∥ E[Ax]∥2 ) · min sech2 (|Ji∗ Xi | + K(λ, ρ)M + hi )
   ∂(A )                                               k∈[l],i∈[n]

with probability at least 1 − exp(−C(λ, ρ) · l), where r(λ, ρ), C(λ, ρ) are constants that depend
only on λ, ρ. More specifically,

                                                                            √
                          2               c           √ 4             10ρ5/4 λ
        r(λ, ρ) = C(λ, ρ) /4; C(λ, ρ) =      · sech(4λ ρ) ; K(λ, ρ) =
                                        48ρ2                              c

   where c is the constant defined in Lemma 21.

Proof Using the block structure of the matrix, we can write
                                       l    n
                       ∂ 2 ϕ(J (l) ) X X
                                    =         (Ai X (k) )2 sech2 (Ji X (k) + hi )
                       ∂(A(l) )2      k=1 i=1
                                          |                 {z                 }
                                                            Gk

The random variables G1 , . . . , Gk are independent and identically distributed. We use Lemma 23
with the substitution
                                                                  2
                                             √            log( 2ρ   )ρ2
                                     sech(4λ ρ)2               ct22
                               t2 =               , t1 =                .
                                           4                    c
We can clearly see that t2 < 1/4 and t1 > 1 (we, without loss of generality, take the absolute
constant c in Lemma 21 smaller than 1). Therefore, we have


                     1 − exp(−c/ρ2 · min(t21 , t1 )) − exp(−c/ρ2 min(t22 , t2 ))
                    =1 − exp(−c/ρ2 · t1 ) − exp(−c/ρ2 · t22 )
                                                2
                                         log( 2ρ
                                              ct2
                                                  )ρ2
                                     2
                    =1 − exp(−c/ρ ·            2
                                                 ) − exp(−c/ρ2 · t22 )
                                             c
                    =1 − c/ρ2 · t22 /2 − exp(−c/ρ2 · t22 )

   We know that for small x < 1/4, 1 − e−x − x/2 ≥ x/3. So, for all k, with probability at least

                                                    37
                                        DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




                                                       √
                       2                     sech(4λ ρ)4 1                √
             p := c/ρ      · t22 /3 = c/ρ2 ·            · ≥ c/ρ2 · sech(4λ ρ)4 /48,
                                                  16     3
the following holds
                                                                               
             Gk ≥ K2 · (∥A∥2F + ∥ E[Ax]∥2 ) · min sech2 |Ji∗ X (k) | + K1 M + hi ,
                                                    i∈[n]


   where K1 , K2 are defined in Lemma 23. We have

                                    1          √                   √
                            K2 =      sech2 (4λ ρ) − t2 ≥ sech2 (4λ ρ)/4,
                                    2

   and
                                     s                 r                                        √
    p           √     2ρ                     2ρ2    2ρ       32ρ2                  √      10ρ5/4 λ
K1 = t1 + 2ρ ≤ 2 t1 = √ ·                log( 2 ) = √ · log(      ) + 4 log(cosh(4λ ρ)) ≤          .
                       c                     ct2     c         c                              c

    We will now use the independence of the different samples. Let’s call the above event Ek , then
1{Ek } is a Bernoulli random variable with probability at least p. By the standard Chernoff bound
for Bernoulli random variables, we have that for all δ ∈ (0, 1)
                                " l                          #
                                 X
                           Pr           1{Ek } ≤ (1 − δ)lp ≤ exp(−δ 2 lp/2),
                                  k=1

Choosing δ = 1/2 yields that with probability at least 1 − exp(−lp/8) at least an lp/4 fraction of
the events Ek will be satisfied. We conclude that with the same probability

             ∂ 2 ϕ(J (l) )        X
                           ≥                Gk
             ∂(A(l) )2
                               k:1{Ek }=1
                                                                                           
                                                                            (k)
           ≥p /4 · l · (∥A∥2F + ∥ E[Ax]∥2 ) ·
              2
                                                       min      sech2 |Ji∗ Xi | + K1 M + hi
                                                  k∈[l],i∈[n]


   Plugging in p, K1 , M yields the result.



B.3. Learning in Frobenius norm
After establishing the concentration of the first derivative and anti-concentration of the second
derivative, we now combine them to show that we can learn in the Frobenius norm.
    The precise statement is given in the following lemma. Its purpose is to show that if for some
matrix J1 the norm ∥J ∗ − J1 ∥F is large, then with high probability J1 will have a lower pseudo-
likelihood value than J ∗ , which means that it will not be selected as the maximizer of the pseu-
dolikelihood. The proof essentially combines the concentration and anticoncentration properties of
the two derivatives for a single matrix J1 .

                                                       38
Lemma 25 Let X be a sample drawn from an Ising model with interaction matrix
                                                                      q      J ∗ satisfying As-
sumption 17 and let J1 ∈ R be a different matrix, with A = J1 −J ∗ . Assume ∥A∥2F + ∥ E[Ax]∥2 ≤
M < 1, for some M > 0. Then, there exist constants C, C ′ , r, K that depend only on ρ, λ, such
that for any t > 0, with probability at least

                      1 − exp(−C · l) − 8/3 exp −C ′ · l · min(t2 , t) · M 2 ,
                                                                            


holds
                                                                        (k)
         ϕ(J1 ) ≥ ϕ(J ∗ )+r · l · M 2 ·     min         sech2 (|Ji∗ Xi | + KM + hi ) − t · l · M 2 .
                                          k∈[l],i∈[n]

    Here, C, r, K are the constants C(ρ, λ), r(ρ, λ), K(ρ, λ) defined in Theorem 24, and C ′ =
    1
221 ρ2 λ4
          is the constant defined in Theorem 18.

Proof [Proof of Lemma 25] We begin as in Lemma 1 in Dagan et al. (2021) by defining the function
J : [0, 1] 7→ Rn×n as J(t) = (1 − t)J ∗ + tJ1 . Let A = J1 − J ∗ . By definition, then we have

                 dϕ(J(t))   ∂ϕ(J)                                d2 ϕ(J(t))   ∂ 2 ϕ(J)
                          =                             ,                   =              .
                    dt       ∂A J=J(t)                               dt2        ∂A2 J=J(t)

Now define
                                        d2 ϕ(J(t))                      dϕ(J(t))
                           α = min                           ,     γ=
                                t∈[0,1]     dt2                            dt    t=0
By Taylor’s theorem, we have that
                                                                              α
                                    ϕ(J(1)) ≥ ϕ(J(0)) + γ +
                                                                              2
By the definition of J(t), this is equivalent to
                                                                        α
                                      ϕ(J1 ) ≥ ϕ(J ∗ ) + γ +              .
                                                                        2
Now, using Theorem 24 immediately gives
                                                                              (k)
                        α ≥ r · l · ∥A∥2F ·      min             sech2 (|Ji∗ Xi | + KM )
                                              k∈[l],i∈[n]

with probability at least 1 − exp(−C · l), where r, C, K are constants that depend only on ρ, λ, as
in Theorem 24. At the same time, we can apply Lemma 18, where A is now A(l) and so instead
of t ← t(∥A∥2F + ∥ E[Ax]∥2 ) we have t ← tlM 2 . After replacing t with t∥A∥F and notice that
∥A∥op ≤ ∥A∥F ≤ 1 we obtain

                                                8
                        Pr[|γ| > tlM 2 ] ≤        exp −C ′ · l · min(t, t2 ) · M 2
                                                                                   
                                                3
    Where C ′ is the constant in Lemma 19. Thus, with probability at least

                       1 − exp(−C · l) − 8/3 exp −C ′ · l · min(t, t2 ) · M 2
                                                                                           


                                                            39
                                    DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




we have that
                                                                                   (k)
                        ϕ(J1 ) ≥ ϕ(J ∗ )+r · l · M 2 ·      min        sech2 (|Ji∗ Xi |
                                                         k∈[l],i∈[n]

                                        +KM ) − t · l · M 2 .

And the proof is complete.

    We now have to establish a similar property as in Lemma 25 but across all directions J1 with
high probability. If we had this property, we could conclude that whatever matrix is returned from
maximizing the pseudolikelihood function, it needs to be close to the true matrix J ∗ in Frobenius
norm. To do this, we utilize the fact that ϕ is Lipschitz with respect to the spectral norm.

Lemma 26 (Lemma 10, Dagan et al. (2021)) For any symmetric matrices J1 , J2 ∈ Rn×n , and for
l samples,
                        |ϕ(J1 ) − ϕ(J2 )| ≤ n · l · ∥J1 − J2 ∥op

We next define the important notion of an ε-net.

Definition 27 Given a metric space (U, d) and ε > 0, we say that a subset N ⊆ U is an ε-net for
U if for every u ∈ U there exists a v ∈ N such that d(u, v) ≤ ε. The cardinality of the smallest
possible ε-net is denoted by N (U, d, ε). We also refer to N (U, d, ε) as the ε-covering number of
the set J .

    The strategy now will be to show that all matrices that are far from J ∗ in Frobenius norm will
have a higher pseudolikelihood value with high probability. Arguing simultaneously over all such
matrices is a daunting task, since this is an infinite set. The strategy that was employed in Dagan
et al. (2021) was the following: first, we construct an ε-net to cover the entire space of matrices.
By choosing ε sufficiently small and using the Lipschitzness property, we can show that any point
in the space has a pseudolikelihood value close to some point in the net. Consequently, if we can
guarantee that with high probability all points in the net have pseudolikelihood value smaller than
that of J ∗ , then the same should be true for all points in the set as well.
    However, this approach cannot work in our case, because by Lemma 25 we can only argue about
the value of ϕ for points that are close to J ∗ in Frobenius norm. Thus, our goal will be to show that
there is a shell of matrices of the form {J : ε ≤ ∥J ∗ − J∥F ≤ M }, such that all points in this shell
have a higher pseudolikelihood value than J ∗ . It will then follow from the convexity of ϕ that the
same is true for points outside of this shell as well. It would then follow that the true minimizer Jˆ
should satisfy ∥Jˆ − J ∗ ∥F ≤ ε, which is our final estimation bound. The challenge is to show that
for ε taking a relatively small value, this property will hold, as this will result in a small estimation
error. To argue about that, we are aided by the fact that we can choose l large enough to make ε
smaller than M , so this shell is not empty. The details are given below.

Theorem 28 Let X1 , . . . , Xl be independent samples drawn from an Ising model with interaction
matrix J ∗ satisfying Assumption 17. Let Jˆ ∈ Rn×n be the estimate of J ∗ that is obtained by
maximizing the pseudo-likelihood function (6), i.e.

                                      Jˆ(l) := argmax ϕ(J; X) .
                                              J (l) ∈R(l)


                                                    40
Then, for any ε, δ ∈ (0, 1), if
                                √ p                  √          n2
               l ≥ exp C0 λ2 ρ + λ ρ log(n/(δε)) + ρ5/4 λε + hmax · 2 ,
                                                                    ε
with probability at least 1 − δ,
                              q
                                 ∥J − J ∗ ∥2F + ∥ E[(J − J ∗ )X]∥2 ≤ ε

holds. Here, C0 is a universal constant.

    Before we go to the proof, we should clarify that Jˆ may not satisfy MLSI(ρ). We only need the
fact that at the ground truth J ∗ , the MLSI satisfies. If Jˆ satisfies MLSI(ρ) (and moreover for all
                          ˆ if it satisfies MLSI(ρ)), the bound of TV distance from KL divergence
t ∈ [0, 1], tJ ∗ + (1 − t)J,
may be better (see Lemmas 39 and 40.)
Proof Let ε ∈ (0, 1/2) and set M = 2ε. Let us define the shell
                                          q
                   Rε := {J ∈ R : ε ≤ ∥J − J ∗ ∥2F + ∥ E[(J − J ∗ )X]∥2 ≤ 2ε}

Our goal will be to choose l such that with high probability Jˆ ∈  / Rε . First of all, since Rε ⊆ R, we
have that for any θ > 0
                               N (Rε , ∥ · ∥op , θ) ≤ N (R′ε , ∥ · ∥op , θ)
Here, we have defined the set R′ε := {J ∈ R : ∥J − J ∗ ∥F ≤ 2ε}.
     Thus, it suffices to bound N (R, ∥ · ∥op , θ). To that end, we can view R as a subset of n2 -
dimensional Euclidean space, where the basis vectors are matrices {Eij }ni,j=1 , where Eij has the
i, j entry 1 and the rest 0. Thus, we seek to cover the ball of matrices with spectral radius at most
1 with balls of radius θ. Notice that the ball with spectral radius θ is contained inside the ball with
Frobenius radius θ. Since the ball of spectral radius 1 is a centrally symmetric convex body, we
can apply Corollary 4.1.15 from Artstein-Avidan et al. (2021), which is based on a standard volume
argument, to obtain
                                                                                            2
                                                                                         2ε n
                                                                                     
             N (Rε , ∥ · ∥op , θ) ≤ N (R′ε , ∥ · ∥op , θ) ≤ N (R′ε , ∥ · ∥F , θ) ≤    1+             (20)
                                                                                         θ
Let U ⊆ R be an θ/n-net of Rε of cardinality N (Rε , ∥ · ∥op , θ/n), where θ will be chosen in the
sequel. Then, applying Lemma 25 and a union bound gives that for all t > 0, with probability at
least
          1 − N (R′ε , ∥ · ∥op , θ/n) exp(−C · l) + 8/3 exp −C ′ · l · min(t2 , t) · ε2 ) .
                                                                                         

We have that the following event occurs.
                                                             (k)
 E := {ϕ(J) ≥ ϕ(J ∗ ) + l · (r ·      min        sech2 (|Ji∗ Xi | + 2Kε + hi ) − 4t) · M 2   , ∀J ∈ U} .
                                   k∈[l],i∈[n]

Here, C, r, K are defined in Theorem 24, and C ′ is defined in Theorem 18. Now let us assume E
happens. We now upper bound |Ji∗ X (k) |. Indeed, using Lemma 16 we have that for each k
                                                                 
                                   ∗ (k)                     1 2
                             Pr[|Ji X | ≥ a] ≤ exp −            a
                                                           8ρλ2

                                                       41
                                     DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




By union bound over all i ∈ [n], k ∈ [l], we have
                                                                                    
                                                                                1 2
                       Pr[ max           |Ji∗ X (k) | ≥ a] ≤ l · n · exp    −      a
                           i∈[n],k∈[l]                                        8ρλ2

Thus, by choosing a = C ′′ λ ρ log((nl)/δ) for some suitable absolute constant C ′′ , we get that
                               p

with probability at least 1 − δ/2 (we remind the readers that hmax is the maximum value of |hi |)
                                                                                
                          (k)
     min sech2 (|Ji∗ Xi | + 2Kε) ≥ sech2 C ′′ λ ρ log(nl/δ) + 2Kε + hmax := ξ(n)−1 .
                                                    p
  k∈[l],i∈[n]

   We notice that ξ(n) grows sub-polynomially, i.e. ξ(n) = o(nr ) for any r > 0. Thus, we
conclude that with probability at least
                                                                                        δ
        1 − N (R′ε , ∥ · ∥op , θ/n) exp(−C · l) + 8/3 exp −C ′ · l · min(t2 , t) · ε2 ) − ,
                                                                                          2
we have that
                    ϕ(J) ≥ ϕ(J ∗ ) + r · l · ε2 · ξ(n)−1 − 4t · l · ε2         , ∀J ∈ U .
Now, choosing t ≤ rξ(n)−1 /8. Notice
                                    that r is really small compare   to C and C ′ , we have exp(−C·
               ′          2      2               ′      2   2
                                                               
l) ≤ exp −C · l · min(t , t) · ε ) = exp −C · l · t · ε ) and we have that with probability at
least
                    11                                                           δ
                 1 − N (R′ε , ∥ · ∥op , θ/n) exp −C ′ · r2 · ξ(n)−2 · l · ε2 /64 − ,
                     3                                                               2
the following event holds
                                                                              
                     ′                    ∗    1      2        −1
                    E := ϕ(J) ≥ ϕ(J ) + r · l · ε · ξ(n)           , ∀J ∈ U      .
                                               2

Let us now see how we should choose l so that
                                                                               δ
                   N (R′ε , ∥ · ∥op , θ/n) exp −C ′ · r2 · ξ(n)−2 · l · ε2 /64 < .
                                                                                2
Using the covering number bound (20), it suffices to pick

                               64ξ(n) n2 log(1 + 2εn/θ) + log(10/δ)
                                                                   
                            l≥                                                                       (21)
                                              C ′ r 2 ε2
Finally, let us see how to choose θ. We would like to show that, if event E ′ holds, then for an arbitrary
element J ∈ Rε we have ϕ(J) > ϕ(J ∗ ). By definition, there exists J ∈ U with ∥J − J∥op ≤
θ/(2n). This, combinined with Lemma 26, implies that

                                           θ            1                     θ
                      ϕ(J) ≥ ϕ(J) −          ≥ ϕ(J ∗ ) + r · l · ε2 · ξ(n)−1 − · l
                                           2            2                     2
The last quantity is > ϕ(J ∗ ) if we pick θ = 21 r · ε2 · ξ(n)−1 . Thus, (21) becomes

                             ξ(n) n2 log(1 + 2n · ξ(n)/(rε)) + log(10/δ)
                                                                               
                        l≥                                                                           (22)
                                                    C ′ r 2 ε2

                                                       42
Thus, with this choice of l, we know that with probability at least 1 − δ/2

                                     ϕ(J) > ϕ(J ∗ )    , ∀J ∈ Rε .

    We now prove that if we select
                                √ p                  √          n2
               l ≥ exp C0 λ2 ρ + λ ρ log(n/(δε)) + ρ5/4 λε + hmax · 2 ,
                                                                    ε
    for some absolute constant C0 > 1, the√inequality (22) holds. First, we
                                                                          √ know that, for any
positive number A, B, D, if X ≥ 64(A2 + A B + D), we have X/2 ≥ 4(A X + B + D). This
is because
                              √              √          √                  √
    X/2 ≥ X/4 + 16(A2 + A B + D) ≥ 4A X + 16A B + 16D ≥ 4(A X + B + D).

    Consider
           √                                                log(1 + 2n/(rε)) + log(10/δ)
 A = C ′′ λ ρ, B = log(n3 /(δε2 )), D = 2Kε + hmax + log(                                ).
                                                                        C ′ r2
                      √                                                        √            2
   Let X = 64(A2 + A B + D). So, we can deduce that, if l ≥ exp(64(A2 + A B + D)) · nε2 ,
we have

           ξ(n) = sech2 (C ′′ λ ρ log(nl/δ) + 2Kε + hmax )
                               p
                               √ p
                ≤ exp(2C ′′ λ ρ log(lε2 /n2 ) + log(n3 /(δε2 )) + 2(2Kε + hmax ))
                          p
                ≤ exp(2A log(lε2 /n2 ) + B + 2D)
                          √
                ≤ exp(2A X + B + 2D) ≤ exp(X/4).

    Therefore, we have
           n2              2
                                 √                 n2             n2
       l≥     · exp(64(A     + A   B  +   D))    ≥    · exp(X)  =       · exp(X/4)2 · exp(X/2)
           ε2                                      ε2              ε2
           n2                      n2               log(1 + 2n/(rε)) + log(10/δ)
         ≥ 2 · ξ(n)2 · exp(D) ≥ 2 · ξ(n)2 · (                                       )
           ε                        ε                            C ′ r2
           n2            log(1 + 2nξ(n)/(rε)) + log(10/δ)
         ≥ 2 · ξ(n) · (                                        )
           ε                              C ′ r2
                    n2 log(1 + 2nξ(n)/(rε)) + log(10/δ)
         ≥ ξ(n) · (                                          )
                                   C ′ r 2 ε2
     A, B can be seen directly in the bound √ of l, now we estimate the5/4 D.
                                                                            √ We know that D contains
2Kε + hmax , which correspond to ρ      5/4  λε + hmax in l (K = O(ρ          λ), according to Theorem
                                    log(1+2n/(rε))+log(10/δ)
24). The rest of the terms for log(           C ′ r2
                                                             ) is upper bounded by a linear combination
of log log(n), log log(1/δ), log log(1/ε) and log(1/C ′ ), log(1/r), where log(1/C ′ ) = O(log(ρ) +
                                √
log(λ)) is log(1/r) = O(λ ρ · log ρ) according to Theorem 24. The previous three terms are
                √ p
absorbed by λ ρ log(n/(δε)), and the last two is absorbed by λ2 ρ. Hence, we can prove that this
l satisfies the condition of the inequality (22).
     We now go back to the main part. We call the event ϕ(J) > ϕ(J ∗ ), ∀J ∈ Rε as E ′′ . We argue
that if E ′′ holds, then for all J with ∥J − J ∗ ∥F > 2ε we have ϕ(J) > ϕ(J ∗ ). Indeed, for any

                                                  43
                                    DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




Figure 1: The set Rϵ naturally partitions the whole space into three regions, I, II, and III. We know
          that all J in region II satisfy ϕ(J) > ϕ(J ∗ ). If we consider an arbitrary J in region III,
          then by appropriate scaling, we can find J ′ in region II that lies on the line connecting J
          and J ∗ . The assumption about J ∗ combined with the convexity of the pseudolikelihood
          ϕ allows us to conclude that ϕ(J) > ϕ(J ∗ ). Thus, Jˆ lies in region I.



such J, the line segment connecting J to J ∗ intersects Rε in at least one point, call it J ′ . This is
because the inequalities defining Rε scale by a constant as we move from J to J ∗ (see Figure 1 for
an illustration).
    Thus, for some t ∈ (0, 1) we can write J ′ = (1 − t)J ∗ + tJ. Now, since ϕ is a convex function,
it holds
                     ϕ(J ′ ) ≤ (1 − t)ϕ(J ∗ ) + tϕ(J) < (1 − t)ϕ(J ′ ) + tϕ(J)
The last inequality holds by definition of event E ′′ . By rearranging we get ϕ(J) > ϕ(J ∗ ). Thus, Jˆ
can only lie inside the Frobenius norm sphere of radius ε around J ∗ , which concludes the proof.



Appendix C. Learning Ising Models with Bounded Width
In this section, our goal will be to establish sample complexity guarantees for learning Ising Models
of bounded width in TV distance. We say an Ising Model has width bounded by M > 0, if and only
if ∥J ∗ ∥∞ ≤ M . This enables us to handle the second derivative more easily since the sech terms
are always lower bounded by a constant that depends on M .

Assumption 29 In this section, we assume h = 0 and R = {J ∗ ∈ S0n : ∥J ∗ ∥∞ ≤ M } for some
M > 0.

    For this Section, R ⊆ S0n will denote the set of matrices with ∥A∥∞ ≤ M . In Dagan et al.
(2021), it was established that we can learn the interaction matrix in the Frobenius norm. Here,
we will need a more refined analysis, which will result in stronger guarantees that will enable us to
bound the total variation distance between the estimated and the true model.
    For the reader’s convenience, we remind some important notation that will be used in this sec-
tion. For a symmetric matrix J ∈ Rn×n and a subset I ⊆ [n], we denote by JI ∈ R|I|×n the matrix
consisting only of the rows of J that are indexed by elements in I. We also denote JII ∈ R|I|×|I|

                                                  44
the submatrix with rows and columns indexed by I. For non-square matrices, the Frobenius norm
extends in the usual fashion
                                              XX  n
                                    ∥JI ∥2F =        Jij2 .
                                                             i∈I j=1

    We start by briefly highlighting some of the technical tools used in Dagan et al. (2021), as they
will prove useful in our case as well. An important observation is that we can select O(log n)
subsets of nodes, such that each submatrix of J ∗ satisfies Dobrushin’s condition. Furthermore, we
require that each node belongs to a constant fraction of these subsets. Formally, the following result
was proven in Dagan et al. (2021).

Lemma 30 (Lemma 2 from Dagan et al. (2021)) Let J ∗ ∈ Rn×n be a symmetric matrix with
∥J ∗ ∥∞ ≤ M and let η ∈ (0, M ). Then, there exist subsets I1 , . . . , Ir with r ≤ CM 2 log n/η 2 ,
such that the following properties hold.

   1. For all i ∈ [n]                                                   l ηr m
                                              |j ∈ [r] : i ∈ Ij | =              .
                                                                         8M


   2. For all j ∈ [r], ∥JI∗j Ij ∥∞ ≤ η.

    This Lemma will allow us to split the first derivative sum into terms, where each term is a sum
over the nodes of each subset. Then, for each subset Ij , by property 2, conditioned on the values
X−Ij , the model is in high temperature, so we can apply concentration bounds that are valid in that
case. For simplicity, for j ∈ [r] we use the notations
                                   l X                                                 
                                                                      (k)
                                   X
                        ϕj (J) =                  log cosh(Ji X (k) )Xi Ji X (k) + log 2
                                   k=1 i∈Ij
                                              l
                          ∂ϕj (J ∗ )    XX                                 (k)
                                     :=    (Ai X (k) )(tanh(Ji∗ X (k) ) − Xi )
                            ∂A
                                          k=1 i∈Ij
                                                         l
                                     ∂ 2 ϕj (J)    XX
                                                :=    sech2 (Ji X (k) )(Ai X (k) )2
                                        ∂A2
                                                       k=1 i∈Ij

The above are random variables, but we omit the dependence on X for simplicity. We will argue
about each component ϕj separately, conditioned on the variables X−Ij . By property 1, we have
that
                                                  r
                                            8M X
                                    ϕ(J) =          ϕj (J)                                (23)
                                             ηr
                                                                  j=1

    Our goal will be to show that this bound of the first derivative is of the same order as l·E[∥AX∥2 ]
with high probability, which is a quantity independent of the conditioning. To do that, we will bound
                                                                                       (k)
the deviation between the empirical and true mean of the variable ∥ E[AX (k) |X−I ]∥2 , uniformly
over all matrices A with small Frobenius norm. The challenge here is that X−Ij comes from a
model at low temperature, so we do not have information about its concentration properties. If

                                                             45
                                  DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO



                                                                                      (k)
we naively use the Chernoff bound, then the large magnitude of ∥ E[AX (k) |X−I ]∥2 will incur a
large concentration radius, which, combined with a union bound over a high-dimensional subset
of matrices, will result in high sample complexity. Instead, we notice that because of the special
structure of the random variable, it is enough to upper bound the deviation of the random matrix
        (k)         (k)
E[X|X−Ij ] E[X|X−Ij ]⊤ from its mean, which can be done using matrix concentration results. This
avoids the costly union bound over the set of matrices and results in a polynomial reduction in the
number of samples required. Let us introduce the set of matrices of small Frobenius norm
                                 Aϵ := {J ∈ Rn×n : ∥A∥F ≤ ϵ},
The details are given in the following Lemma.

Lemma 31 Suppose X (1) , . . . , X (l) ∈ {−1, 1}n are independent samples from an Ising model
with interaction matrix J ∗ satisfying ∥J ∗ ∥∞ ≤ M and zero external field. Then, for any t > 0 we
have that with probability at least
                                                    lt2 /2
                                                             
                                   1 − 2n exp − 2               ,
                                                 4n + 2nt/3
the following holds
                  l
                1X               (k)
                    ∥ E[AX (k) |X−I ]∥2 − E ∥ E[AX|X−I ]∥2 ≤ t∥A∥2F , ∀A
                                                         
                l
                  k=1

Proof We first notice that we can write
                                                                             
   ∥ E[AX|X−I ]∥2 = E[X|X−I ]⊤ A⊤ A E[JX|X−I ] = Tr E[X|X−I ]⊤ A⊤ A E[JX|X−I ]
                      = Tr(A E[X|X−I ] E[X|X−I ]⊤ A⊤ ) .
                                                                                             (k)     (k)
Let S = E[X|X−I ] E[X|X−I ]⊤ be this random matrix and denote by S (k) := E[X|X−I ] E[X|X−I ]⊤
and S = E E[X|X−I ] E[X|X−I ]⊤ the l independent samples from the distribution of S. Then,
                                   

we can write the difference between the empirical and the true mean as follows
       l                                                                l
                                                                                      !   !
    1X                  (k)                                         1 X
         ∥ E[AX (k) |X−I ]∥2 − E ∥ E[AX|X−I ]∥2 = Tr A                    S (k) − E[S] A⊤
                                                   
    l                                                               l
      k=1                                                                   k=1

Assume momentarily that we somehow know that
                                           l
                                     1 X (k)
                                        S − E[S]                 ≤t                                (24)
                                     l
                                          k=1                2

Then, by the previous calculation and the definition of A ∈ Aϵ , we would have
                        l                            n            l
                                       !     !                                 !
                    1 X (k)                ⊤
                                                    X
                                                          ⊤   1 X (k)
           Tr A           S − E[S] A             ≤       Ai         M − E[M ] Ai
                    l                                         l
                        k=1                          i=1              k=1
                                                       n
                                                       X
                                                ≤t·          ∥Ai ∥22 = t · ∥Jˆ − J ∗ ∥2F .
                                                       i=1


                                                46
In the above, we have used Ai to denote the i-th row of matrix A, together with the fact that A is
symmetric. Thus, to prove the claim, it suffices to establish (24) with high probability. We turn our
attention to that task now.
    First of all, we notice that S (k) are sampled independently from the same distribution of matri-
ces. Since X is a binary vector, each entry of the random vector E[AX|X−Ij ] lies within [−1, 1].
Thus, so each S (k) is a symmetric rank-1 matrix with all its entries bounded by 1 in absolute value.
Therefore we know that ∥S (k) − E[S]∥2 ≤ 2n. And finally, ∥ E[(S (k) − E[S])2 ]∥2 ≤ 4n2 . There-
fore, if we use the matrix Bernstein concentration inequality (see Theorem 1.6.2 in Tropp et al.
(2015)), we can have
                                                    
                              l                                         2 /2
                                                                                
                          1 X
                                  (k)                                 −lt
                   Pr          S − E[S]         > t = 2n exp                     .
                          l                                        4n2 + 2nt/3
                            k=1               op

This concludes the proof.

     The next step will be to use this concentration property to obtain a uniform upper bound for the
first derivative of the pseudo-likelihood. We start by proving such a bound for a single direction.
                                                                       (k)
Let us define the following event, which depends on the values of X−Ij for k = 1, . . . , l.

                l
          (                                                                                          )
              1X       ˆ    ∗  (k) (k) 2
                                            h
                                                  ˆ    ∗           2
                                                                     i
Ej,u :=           ∥ E[(J − J )X |X−Ij ]∥ − E ∥ E[(J − J )X|X−Ij ]∥     ≤ u · ∥A∥2F , ∀A
              l
               k=1

Lemma 32 Suppose X (1) , . . . , X (l) ∈ {−1, 1}n are independent samples from an Ising model
with interaction matrix J ∗ satisfying Assumption 29. Let A ∈ Rn×n be a symmetric matrix with
                                                         (k)
∥A∥∞ ≤ M . Suppose we condition on the values of X−Ij for all k and that these values are such
that Ej,u holds. Then we have that with probability at least

                            1 − exp −c min(t, t2 ) l · E[∥AX∥22 ]
                                                                  
                                                                      ,

we have that
                                   ∂ϕj (J ∗ )
                                              ≤ Ct · l · E[∥AX∥22 ] .
                                                                   
                                     ∂A

Proof We know that if we choose η = 1/3 the distribution XIj |X−Ij satisfy ∥AIj ∥op ≤ 1, satisfy
Glauber-MLSI(6) and Po(6). First, we use Theorem 18. Consider a large Ising model, with diagonal
                                                        (k)
matrix blocks AIj , and also external fields A−Ij ,−Ij X−Ij . This large Ising model is a tensor product
                                  (k)
of i.i.d. Ising models of XIj |X−Ij . Therefore, we have, with at least

                                                                 l
                    8                                  X                 (k)
                 1 − exp(−C min(t, t2 )(l · ∥AIj ∥2F +   ∥ E[AIj X (k) |Xij ]∥2 ))
                    3
                                                               i=1

probability, we have
                                                         l
                                                                                        !
                     ∂ϕj (J ∗ )                          X                     (k)
                                ≤t·     l · ∥AIj ∥2F +         ∥ E[AIj X (k) |Xij ]∥2       .
                       ∂A
                                                         i=1


                                                   47
                                     DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




   If Ej,u holds, we have, with at least probability

           1 − exp −c min(t, t2 ) l · ∥AIj ∥2F + E[∥ E[AX|X−Ij ]∥]2 − u · ∥A∥2F
                                                                                     
                                                                                           ,

   we have that
                  ∂ϕj (J ∗ )
                             ≤ t · l · ∥AIj ∥2F + E[∥ E[AX|X−Ij ]∥]2 + u · ∥A∥2F
                                                                                 
                    ∂A

    We now use the following Lemma, which connects the variance of linear functions of Ising
models in high temperature with the Frobenius norm and has been repeatedly used in our analysis
so far.
    Thus, we can write
                            n
                            X
            E[∥AX∥22 ] =          E[(A⊤   2
                                      i X) ]
                            i=1
                            n
                            X      h                i
                        =         E E[(A⊤   2
                                        i X) |X−Ij ]
                            i=1
                          n  h
                          X                      i                2 
                                     ⊤   2               ⊤
                        =    E Var[(Ai X) |X−Ij ] + E E[Ai X|X−Ij ]
                            i=1
                          n  h                     i     h               i
                                                                         2
                          X
                        =    E Var[(A⊤
                                     i X) 2
                                            |X−I j ]   + E   E[AX|X−Ij ] 2
                            i=1

    Now, we can apply Lemma 22 and Poincaré Inequality to the conditional Ising model condi-
tioned on the values of X−Ij , there are absolute constants cM , CM such that
                                   n  h
                                   X                       i
                  cM ∥AIj ∥2F ≤       E Var[(A⊤
                                              i X)2
                                                    |X−Ij ]   ≤ CM ∥AIj ∥2F .
                                    i=1

   Thus, the preceding bound implies

                            E[∥AX∥22 ] = Θ ∥AIj ∥2F + ∥ E[AX|X−Ij ]∥2
                                                                         

   Thus, by adjusting the constants, we know that for any A ∈ Rn×n , with probability at least

                     1 − exp −c min(t, t2 ) l · E[∥AX∥22 ] − u · ∥A∥2F
                                                                        


we have that
                            ∂ϕj (J ∗ )
                                       ≤ t · l · E[∥AX∥22 ] + u · ∥A∥2F .
                                                                       
                              ∂A
   Notice also that by Lemma 22, we can absorb the term ∥A∥2F inside E[∥AX∥2 ] in the upper
bound, with the possibility of incurring an extra constant factor. Also, by choosing u to be a small
enough constant, again by Lemma 22 we can write
                                                          1
                                  E[∥AX∥22 ] − u∥A∥2F ≥     E[∥AX∥22 ]
                                                          2

                                                 48
Thus, under even Ej,u for this choice of constant u, we have that with probability at least

                                  8
                                    exp −c min(t, t2 ) l · E[∥AX∥22 ]
                                                                      
                             1−
                                  3
we have that
                                  ∂ϕj (J ∗ )
                                             ≤ Ct · l · E[∥AX∥22 ] .
                                                                  
                                    ∂A



    We would like to prove that the bound of Lemma 32 holds uniformly for all matrices A in a
given set. To do that, we first establish a Lipschitzness property of the first derivative of the pseudo-
likelihood, similar to the one that was established for the pseudolikelihood itself in Dagan et al.
(2021).

Lemma 33 Let A, B be two symmetric matrices with ∥A∥∞ , ∥B∥∞ ≤ M . Then

                              ∂ϕj (J ∗ ) ∂ϕj (J ∗ )
                                        −           ≤ 2 · l · n · ∥A − B∥2
                                ∂A         ∂B

Proof We have that

                                         l
           ∂ϕj (J ∗ ) ∂ϕj (J ∗ )   XX                 
                                                                             (k)
                     −           =     (Ai − Bi ) X (k) (tanh(Ji∗ X (k) ) − Xi )
             ∂A         ∂B
                                        k=1 i∈Ij
                                         l X
                                         X n
                                    ≤2             (Ai − Bi )X (k)
                                         k=1 i=1
                                           v
                                         l uX
                                      √  X u n                 2
                                    ≤2 n   t   (Ai − Bi )X (k)
                                             k=1    i=1

                                    ≤ 2 · l · n · ∥A − B∥2 .
                                                          √
In the last step, we used the fact that ∥X (k) ∥2 ≤           n for all k and the definition of the operator
norm.

    Our method of bounding the first derivative uniformly is similar to the one employed in Dagan
et al. (2021). In particular, we construct a net over the set of matrices and then take a union bound
over all the elements of the set to bound the first derivative for all these points. If the radius is chosen
small enough, then the upper bound of the first derivative extends to all elements in our set.
    Since the probability of failure is governed by E[∥AX∥2 ], we need to choose a set of matrices
for which this quantity is large, if we wish to prove high probability bounds. Thus, we define the
following set of matrices.
                                      Rs := {A : E[∥AX∥2 ] ≥ s}



                                                    49
                                     DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




Lemma 34 Suppose X (1) , . . . , X (l) ∈ {−1, 1}n are independent samples from an Ising model
with interaction matrix J ∗ satisfying Assumption 29. Let A ∈ Rn×n be a symmetric matrix with
∥A∥∞ ≤ M . Consider the net Us := N (Rs , ∥ · ∥2 , θ). Then,
                    ∂ϕ(J ∗ )   8CM
                             ≤     · t · l · E[∥AX∥22 ] + 2 · l · n · θ , ∀A ∈ Rs
                     ∂A          η
with probability at least
                                                                            l · u2 /2
                                                                                      
         8                                 2
                                                     
      1 − (log n) · |Us | · exp −c min(t, t ) · l · s − 2n(log n) · exp − 2
         3                                                               4n + 2u · n/3
Proof
   By taking a union bound over the elements of Us , by definition of the set Rs we know that
                            ∂ϕj (J ∗ )
                                       ≤ C · t · l · E[∥AX∥22 ] , ∀A ∈ Us
                                                               
                              ∂A
with probability at least
                                 1 − |Us | · exp −c min(t, t2 ) · l · s .
                                                                       

   Using the Lipschitzness of the first derivative, this implies that with the same probability, we
have
                   ∂ϕj (J ∗ )
                              ≤ C · t · l · E[∥AX∥22 ] + 2 · l · n · θ , ∀A ∈ Rs
                      ∂A
    This bound holds conditional on X (1) , . . . , X (l) , assuming they have values that satisfy the event
Ej,u . But we have already bounded the probability that this event occurs in Lemma 31. Thus, for
the choice of constant u that we have made, we have established that with probability at least
                                                                            l · u2 /2
                                                                                       
                                            2
                                                       
               1 − |Us | · exp −c min(t, t ) · l · s − 2n exp − 2                          ,
                                                                        4n + 2u · n/3
it holds
                    ∂ϕj (J ∗ )
                               ≤ C · t · l · E[∥AX∥22 ] + 2 · l · n · θ , ∀A ∈ Rs .
                       ∂A
   We will see in the sequel what the optimal way is to adjust these parameters. Finally, by taking
another union bound with respect to all different subsets Ij and using (23), we have that

                    ∂ϕ(J ∗ )    8CM
                              ≤       · t · l · E[∥AX∥22 ] + 2 · l · n · θ , ∀A ∈ Rs ,
                      ∂A          η
with probability at least
                                                                                  l · u2 /2
                                                                                            
                                            2
                                                     
      1 − (log n) · |Us | · exp −c min(t, t ) · l · s − 2n(log n) · exp − 2                    .
                                                                               4n + 2u · n/3


    This is the uniform bound on the first derivative that we were aiming for. We will see how to
pick the value of s later.
    We now focus on the second derivative. We start with a Lipschitzness property for the second
moment in the second derivative.

                                                    50
Lemma 35 Let A, B be two symmetric matrices with ∥A∥∞ , ∥B∥∞ ≤ M . Then
                       l 
                       X                                      
                             ∥AX (k) ∥22 − ∥BX (k) ∥22              ≤ M · l · n · ∥A − B∥2
                       k=1

Proof We have that
     l 
     X                                        l X
                                               X n                                         
           ∥AX (k) ∥22 − ∥BX (k) ∥22       =                (Ai X    (k) 2
                                                                        ) − (Bi X   (k) 2
                                                                                       )
     k=1                                       k=1 i=1
                                               Xl Xn
                                           ≤             |(Ai − Bi )X (k) | · |(Ai + Bi )X (k) |
                                               k=1 i=1
                                               v                     v
                                             l uX
                                               u n
                                                                     u n
                                             X                       uX
                                           ≤   t               (k) 2
                                                   |(Ai − Bi )X | · t    |(Ai + Bi )X (k) |2
                                               k=1   i=1                               i=1

                                           ≤ M · l · n · ∥A − B∥2



We are now ready to state the uniform guarantee for the second derivative. The proof will again be
based on Lemma 31 to avoid unnecessary union bounds.

Lemma 36 Suppose X (1) , . . . , X (l) ∈ {−1, 1}n are independent samples from an Ising model
with interaction matrix J ∗ satisfying Assumption 29. Let A ∈ Rn×n be a symmetric matrix with
∥A∥∞ ≤ M . Consider the net Us := N (Rs , ∥ · ∥2 , θ). Then, with probability at least

                                                               l · u2 /2
                                                                           
                    1 − |Us | exp (−c · l · s) − 2n · exp − 2
                                                           4n + 2u · n/3

we have
                       ∂ 2 ϕ(J)
                                ≥ C · l · E[∥AX∥2 ] − M · l · n · θ , ∀A ∈ Rs
                         ∂A2
Proof
    We use the same argument as the first derivative. If we take η = 1/3, take any j, the distribution
of each XIj |X−Ij is Glauber MLSI(6) and Po(6). When we do the tensor product of all the samples,
the same Glauber MLSI and Poincaré inequality holds. By Lemma 23, we have that there exists
absolute constants c, C such that
                                                     l
                                                                             !
                       ∂ 2 ϕ(J)                    X                 (k)
                                ≥ C l∥AIj ∥2F +         ∥ E[AX (k) |X−Ij ]∥2
                         ∂A2
                                                           k=1

with probability at least
                                                              l
                                                                                            !!
                                                                                 (k)
                                                              X
                     1 − exp −c ·          l · ∥AIj ∥2F +           ∥ E[AX (k) |X−Ij ]∥2
                                                              k=1


                                                         51
                                    DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




    The previous arguments have already established that

                            ∥AIj ∥2F + ∥ E[AX|X−Ij ]∥22 = Θ(E[∥AX∥2 ]).

    Using the concentration of Lemma 31 as before, we can establish that if event Ej,u holds for a
                                              (k)
small enough constant u, then conditional on X−Ij for k = 1, . . . , l we have, there exists absolute
constants c, C such that
                                  ∂ 2 ϕ(J)
                                           ≥ C · l · E[∥AX∥2 ]
                                    ∂A2
with probability at least
                                 1 − exp −c · l · E[∥AX∥2 ]
                                                             

We can now implement the exact same union bound argument that we had for the first derivative.
The only thing we need to check is the Lipschitzness of the second derivative, which will determine
the size of our net.
    Now, again by considering the net Us := N (Rs , ∥·∥2 , θ), taking a union bound over its elements
and using the lipschitzness of the second derivative, in exactly the same fashion as with the first
derivative, we get that conditioned on Ej,u
                       ∂ 2 ϕ(J)
                                ≥ C · l · E[∥AX∥2 ] − M · l · n · θ , ∀A ∈ Rs                   (25)
                         ∂A2
with probability at least
                                        1 − |Us | exp (−c · l · s)
Removing the conditioning and using Lemma 31, we have that (25) holds with probability at least
                                                             l · u2 /2
                                                                       
                   1 − |Us | exp (−c · l · s) − 2n · exp − 2
                                                          4n + 2u · n/3


We are now ready to use the above lemmas to argue about the value of the pseudolikelihood for
matrices that are “far” from J ∗ .

Theorem 37 Let X1 , . . . , Xl be independent samples drawn from an Ising model with interaction
matrix J ∗ satisfying Assumption 29. Let Jˆ ∈ Rn×n be the estimate of J ∗ that is obtained by
maximizing the pseudo-likelihood function (6), i.e.

                                       Jˆ(l) := argmax ϕ(J; X) ,
                                              J (l) ∈R(l)

where R = {J ∈ S0n : ∥J∥∞ ≤ M . Then, for any ϵ ∈ (0, 1) and δ > 0, if
                                   2                        
                                   n (log(1/(δε)) + log n)
                           l = Ω̃
                                                ϵ
then with probability at least 1 − δ

                                       E [∥(Jˆ − J ∗ )X∥22 ] ≤ ϵ ,
                                       J∗

where Õ hides exp(M ) factors.

                                                    52
Proof For any matrix J ∈ JM , an application of Taylor’s Theorem yields

                                         ∂ϕ(J ∗ )            1 ∂ 2 ϕ(Jξ )
                      ϕ(J) = ϕ(J ∗ ) +            |A=J−J ∗ +              |A=J−J ∗
                                          ∂A                 2 ∂A2
where Jξ belongs in the line segment connecting J, J ∗ . Thus, using the preceding arguments, we
know that with probability at least

                                                                             l · u2 /2
                                                                                      
                                          2
                                                    
     1 − (log n) · |Us | · exp −c min(t, t ) · l · s − 2n(log n) · exp − 2               ,
                                                                         4n + 2u · n/3
we have

ϕ(J) ≥ ϕ(J ∗ )+C ·l·E[∥(J −J ∗ )X∥22 ]−C ′ ·t·l·E[∥(J −J ∗ )X∥22 ]−C ′′ ·l·n·θ , ∀J : J −J ∗ ∈ Rs .
                                                                                               (26)
We now show how to choose the various parameters. First, we choose t to be a small enough
constant so that C ′ t < C/4. We also choose θ = O(s/n) so that C ′′ · l · n · θ ≤ Cs/4. These
choices mean that (26) can be written as
                                              C
                           ϕ(J) ≥ ϕ(J ∗ ) +     · l · s , ∀J : J − J ∗ ∈ Rs                     (27)
                                              4
This means that all matrices J such that J − J ∗ ∈ Us have a higher negative pseudolikelihood
value than J ∗ , which means that they will not be selected by the optimization procedure. Thus, this
allows us to conclude that Jˆ − J ∗ ∈ / Rs , which implies that E[∥(Jˆ − J ∗ )X∥22 ] ≤ s. We now turn
to analyze the probability that this event occurs. Let us set s = ϵ. We would like to have
                                                                         δ
                            (log n) · |Us | · exp −c min(t, t2 ) · l · ϵ ≤                      (28)
                                                                           2
for the specified error probability δ > 0. As we argued in the previous section, using Corollary
4.1.15 from Artstein-Avidan et al. (2021) gives
                                             2                  2!
                                          2 n                2n n
                                                    
                           |Us | ≤ M +          =O     M+
                                          θ                   ϵ

Thus, if we choose
                                 n2 log(n/ε) + log log n + log(1/δ)
                              l≥C                                                           (29)
                                                 ϵ
for some constant C > 0 that depends on M , we can satisfy (28). We would also like to have

                                                 l · u2 /2
                                                             
                                                                   δ
                           2n(log n) · exp − 2                   ≤                          (30)
                                             4n + 2u · n/3         2
In the above, u is a sufficiently small constant. To satisfy (30), it suffices to choose

                                    l ≥ C n2 log n + n2 log(1/δ)
                                                                     
                                                                                                (31)

samples. The conditions (29) and (31) give us the final sample complexity.




                                                   53
                                       DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




C.1. Proof of Proof of Corollary 10
Finally, we give a formal version of Corrolary 10 and then its proof.

Corollary 38 Suppose we are in the setting of Theorem 37. Additionally, assume there exist con-
stants γ, C > 0, such that PrJ ∗ satisfies (γ/n, C)-regularity regularity. Then, for any ϵ > 0, if
l = Ω̃(n3 /ϵ2 ), with probability 1 − o(1) over the choice of samples TV(PrJˆ, PrJ ∗ ) ≤ ϵ.

Proof Using the same representation for KL between Ising models as Lemma 20 of Dagan et al.
(2021), we get that for some matrix Jξ = ξJ ∗ + (1 − ξ)Jˆ
                                        1         h        i
                          KL PJˆ PJ ∗ = Var X ⊤ J ∗ − Jˆ X ,
                                           2 X∼Jξ
where in the above, the notation X is sampled from an Ising model with interaction matrix Jξ . The
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality now implies that
                            h             i                    
                       Var X ⊤ J ∗ − Jˆ X ≤ E[(X ⊤ J ∗ − Jˆ X)2 ]
                       X∼Jξ                              Jξ

                                                   ≤ n · E[∥(Jˆ − J ∗ )X∥22 ]
                                                              Jξ

                                                              EJξ [∥(Jξ − J ∗ )X∥22 ]
                                                   =n·
                                                                    (1 − ξ)2

Without loss of generality, assume that ϵ2 < γ. By Theorem 37, we know that if l = Ω̃(n3 /ϵ2 ), we
have with probability 1 − o(1)
                                                              ϵ2
                                     E∗ [∥(Jˆ − J ∗ )X∥22 ] ≤
                                     J                        n
Then, by scaling, this implies

                                                         ϵ2              ϵ2
                              E∗ [∥(Jξ − J ∗ )X∥22 ] ≤      · (1 − ξ)2 ≤
                              J                          n               n
                                     √
Thus, since we know J ∗ satisfies (γ/ n, C)-regularity, we have that

                                                               ϵ2 · (1 − ξ)2
                                  E[∥(Jξ − J ∗ )X∥22 ] ≤ C
                                  Jξ                                 n
which implies
                                         KL PJˆ PJ ∗ ≤ C · ϵ2
                                                    

Using Pinsker’s inequality as in Lemma 40 concludes the proof.


Appendix D. Applications of Learning with MLSI
In this Section, we present the proofs for the applications of Theorem 28. The step that remains is to
bound the total variation distance between two Ising models by the Frobenius norm of the difference
of their interaction matrices. We give two such bounds. The first is cruder and makes no additional
assumptions about the matrices.

                                                   54
Lemma 39 Suppose µ, µ∗ are the distributions corresponding to two Ising models with interaction
matrices J, J ∗ ∈ S0n and zero external fields. Then, we have the following property:

                                    ∥µ − µ∗ ∥T V ≤ n∥J − J ∗ ∥F .

    We give our version of the proof in Section E. Note that an alternative proof can be given using
the technique in Klivans and Meka (2017) Lemma 7.3.
    The second Lemma additionally assumes that both matrices, as long as any matrix in the line
that contains them, satisfy MLSI. In that case, we can obtain much more precise guarantees without
losing polynomial factors.

Lemma 40 Suppose J1 , J2 ∈ S0n are such that for every t ∈ [0, 1], PrJt satisfies MLSI(ρ), where
Jt = tJ1 + (1 − t)J2 . Then,

                                   TV(PJ1 , PJ2 ) ≤ ρ · ∥J1 − J2 ∥F

Proof First, using Pinsker’s inequality, we get
                                                     r
                                                          KL (PJ1 ∥PJ2 )
                                T V (PJ1 , PJ2 ) ≤                       .
                                                               2

Thus, it suffices to bound KL (PJ1 ∥PJ2 ). For this, we rely on a standard calculation for exponential
families that connects the KL divergence to the variance of the sufficient statistic. In particular, fol-
lowing the derivation in Lemma 20 of Dagan et al. (2021), we get that for some matrix Jξ contained
in the line segment connecting J1 and J2

                                               1      h              i
                            KL (PJ1 ∥PJ2 ) =     Var X ⊤ (J1 − J2 ) X ,
                                               2 X∼Jξ

where in the above, the notation X is sampled from an Ising model with interaction matrix Jξ . Since
Jξ satisfy MLSI(ρ), it also satisfies Po(2ρ)), which yields
                         h                i
                      Var X ⊤ (J1 − J2 ) X ≤ 2ρ E ∥(J1 − J2 )X∥22
                                                                 
                      X∼S                                 X∼S
                                                          n        h              i
                                                                Var (J1 − J2 )⊤
                                                          X
                                                  = 2ρ                        i X
                                                               X∼S
                                                           i=1
                                                            Xn
                                                  ≤ 4ρ    2
                                                                    ∥(J1 − J2 )i ∥22
                                                              i=1
                                                  = 4ρ ∥J1 − J2 ∥2F
                                                          2


This concludes the proof.


    We are now ready to present the proof of the applications.

                                                     55
                                    DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




D.1. Application: SK/diluted SK model
First, using Lemma 39 and Theorem 28, we can derive the following corollary:

Corollary 41 Let X1 , . . . , Xl be independent samples drawn from an Ising model with interaction
matrix J ∗ satisfying Assumption 17. Let Jˆ ∈ Rn×n be the estimate of J ∗ that is obtained by
maximizing the pseudo-likelihood function (6) for a set of matrices R ⊆ S0n , which is convex and
                                                                                                 
                                                                                        n4 log(1/(δε))
admits efficient projections in Frobenius norm. Then, for any ε ∈ (0, 1), if l = Õ           ε2
then with probability at least 1 − δ, T V (PJˆ, PJ ∗ ) ≤ ε, where Õ hides sub-polynomial factors of n,
and other terms involving λ, ρ and hmax . Moreover, we can implement MPLE in polynomial time.

Proof The proof follows immediately by setting ϵ = ϵ′ /n in the guarantees of Theorem 28. The
optimal value of the pseudolikelihood can be found in polynomial time using projected gradient
descent.

    Corollary 41 says that if we can find a set R that is convex and admits efficient projections, we
can solve the pseudolikelihood estimation problem in polynomial time. We instantiate this fact in
the cases of SK/diluted SK model now.

Corollary 42 Suppose we are given l independent samples X (1) , . . . , X (l) ∼ PrJ ∗ , where J ∗ is
sampled according to the SK-model with β < C, where C ≈ 0.295. That is, every Jij = Jji is
chosen i.i.d. from N (0, β 2 /n). Then, there is a polynomial time algorithm (MPLE) that produces
an estimate Jˆ ∈ S0n , such that with probability 1 − o(1) over the choice of samples and the choice
of matrix J ∗ we have TV(PrJˆ, PrJ ∗ ) ≤ ϵ, as long as l = Ω̃(n4 /ϵ2 ).

Proof By Anari et al. (2024b), when β < C, with 1 − o(1) probability over the choice of random
matrix J ∗ it satisfies ATE, which by Chen et al. (2021) means it also satisfies MLSI. Therefore, we
can run MPLE on the set of matrices R = {J ∈ S0n : ∥J∥op ≤ 4}. We know that J ∗ ∈ R with
probability 1 − o(1). Also, it is clear we can efficiently project to R by eigenvalue clipping. Thus,
applying Corollary 41 finishes the proof.

    Similar guarantees can be obtained for the diluted SK model.

Corollary 43 Suppose we are given l independent samples X (1) , . . . , X (l) ∼ PrJ ∗ , where J ∗ is
sampled according to the diluted SK-model with β < C, where C ≈ 0.295. That is, consider a
random d-regular graph G. If i and j are not connected, Jij = 0. If i and j are connected, then
                               β       β
Jij = Jji is chosen from { √d−1   , − √d−1 } with the same probability, independently for all such
pairs. Then, there is a polynomial-time algorithm (MPLE) that produces an estimate Jˆ ∈ S0n ,
such that with probability 1 − o(1) over the choice of samples and the choice of matrix J ∗ we have
TV(PrJˆ, PrJ ∗ ) ≤ ϵ, as long as l = Ω̃(n4 /ϵ2 ).

Proof The proof is similar to Corollary 42. By Anari et al. (2024b), when β < C, with 1 − o(1)
probability it satisfies ATE, thus also MLSI with a constant that depends on the distance of β from
C. Thus, we can use Corollary 41 to obtain the result.



                                                  56
D.2. Application: Spectrally Bounded Models
For spectrally bounded models, the set R can be naturally restricted to only include matrices that
satisfy MLSI. We thus get optimal guarantees for TV learning.

Corollary 44 Let X1 , . . . , Xl be independent samples drawn from an Ising model with interaction
matrix J ∗ ∈ S0n that belongs in the set R = {J ∈ S0n : λmax (J) − λmin (J) ≤ 1 − α}, for
some α ∈ (0, 1), and zero external field. Let Jˆ ∈ Rn×n be the estimate of J ∗ that is obtained
by maximizing the pseudo-likelihood function (6) over R(l) , given l independent samples from J ∗ .
Then, for any ε < 1, with probability at least 1 − δ

                                         T V (PJˆ, PJ ∗ ) ≤ ε ,

whenever
                           p                              n2 log(1/(δε)
                 l ≥ exp C0       log(n/δ) · α−1 + α−5/4 ε ·                  .
                                                                      ε2
Where C0 is a universal constant. Moreover, the algorithm can be implemented in polynomial time.

Proof First, let us argue that R is a convex set. We know that for two symmetric matrices, using the
Rayleigh quotient, we can derive that for any t ∈ (0, 1)

                     λmax (tA1 + (1 − t)A2 ) ≤ tλmax (A1 ) + (1 − t)λmax (A2 )
                     λmin (tA1 + (1 − t)A2 ) ≥ tλmin (A1 ) + (1 − t)λmin (A2 )

so if A1 , A2 ∈ R, tA1 + (1 − t)A2 ∈ R.
     By Lemma 12, every J ∈ R satisfies MLSI(1/α). Also, clearly ∥J∥op < 1 for every J ∈ R,
since the zero diagonal implies J will have both positive and negative eigenvalues. Thus, combining
Theorem 28 and Lemma 40 gives the desired guarantee in TV.
     Now, let us argue about the computational efficiency of the method. Since the pseudolikelihood
function is convex, to find Jˆ we can use the projected gradient descent algorithm as in Theorem 3.2
of Bubeck et al. (2015). Thus, we only need to argue that at every step we can efficiently project on
the set R.
     We have shown that R is a convex set, and the distance from it, which is measured in Frobenius
norm, is a convex function. Thus, one way of computing the projection would be using the result
in Lee et al. (2018), where they optimize the distance in polynomial time using only a membership
oracle for R, which is, of course, easy to implement in our case. Alternatively, one could write
the projection as a semi-definite program (SDP) Boyd and Vandenberghe (2004) and then solve it
efficiently using Jiang et al. (2020). For convenience, we spell out the details of the SDP approach
below.
     The SDP in standard form minimizes ⟨C, X⟩ subject to ⟨Ai , X⟩ ≤ bi and X ⪰ 0. We can use
a diagonal block matrix X so that X ⪰ 0 is equivalent to X1 , X2 , . . . , Xk ⪰ 0, and furthermore,
using the linear constraints ⟨Ai , X⟩ ≤ bi (both ⟨A, X⟩ ≤ b and ⟨−A, X⟩ ≤ b to build an equation)
we can encode linear relationships between matrices X1 , X2 , . . . , Xk . Therefore, we can actually
write several, rather than one, positive semi-definite constraints of matrices, where each element has
a linear relation to the other.
     Therefore, we can first encode two matrices J (the matrix that needs to be projected) and J ′
(the projected matrix), and three values λ1 , λ2 , t in X1 ’s off-diagonal and put free variables on the

                                                  57
                                     DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




diagonal of X1 so that X1 ⪰ 0 if we can make the diagonal large enough. In the linear constraints,
we encode the information that J and J ′ are both zero-diagonal symmetric matrices. Then, we
encode λ1 I − J ′ ⪰ 0 and J ′ − λ2 I ⪰ 0 and λ1 − λ2 ≤ 1 − α to make the constraint λmax (J ′ ) −
λmin (J ′ ) ≤1 − α. 
                     Finally, we flatten the elements in J − J ′ into a column vector v, and we add the
               I v
constraint             ⪰ 0 which is equivalent to t ≥ ∥J − J ′ ∥2F . Finally, we optimize t to make it
              v⊤ t
as small as possible. We solve this SDP to find J ′ , which is the projection from J to R. This SDP
has a polynomial size in n and a polynomial number of constraints. By Jiang et al. (2020) (the main
result), we can get an efficient algorithm solving the SDP, thus we can project on R efficiently.


D.3. Application: Antiferromagnetic Expanders
Corollary 45 Given 0 < α < 1 and c > 0. Let 1 be the all-one vector. Let A be the set of matrices
such that for all A ∈ A, A1 = 0 and 0 ⪯ A ⪯ (1 − α)I. Suppose we are given l independent
samples X (1) , . . . , X (l) ∼ PrJ ∗ , where J ∗ is from
                                                                          t
               R = S0n ∩ {∃r ∈ R, 0 ≤ t ≤ c, A ∈ A, s.t. J ∗ + rI = − 11⊤ + A}.
                                                                          n
Then, there is a polynomial time algorithm (MPLE) that produces an estimate Jˆ ∈ R, such that with
high probability over the choice of samples and the choice of matrix J ∗ we have TV(PrJˆ, PrJ ∗ ) ≤
ϵ, as long as l = Ω̃(n2 /ϵ2 ).
Proof First, we know that, from Anari et al. (2024b), any matrix in R satisfies ATE, and thus satisfies
modified-LSI. Following the previous recipe, we just need to prove that R is convex. First, we know
that A is convex. Since the average of two positive semi-definite (PSD) matrices is PSD, for any
A1 , A2 ∈ A, (A1 + A2 )/2 ⪰ 0, and (1 − α)I − (A1 + A2 )/2 ⪰ 0. Therefore, (A1 + A2 )/2 ∈ A.
Therefore, for J1 , J2 ∈ R, there exists real numbers r1 , r2 , t1 , t2 , A1 , A2 , such that Ji + ri I =
ti    ⊤                                                      r1 +r2        (t1 +t2 )/2
 n 11 + Ai for i = 1, 2. Therefore, we have (J1 + J2 )/2 + 2 I =                n      11⊤ + (A1 + A2 )/2,
and thus (J1 + J2 )/2 ∈ R, and thus R is convex.
     Again, we have shown that R is a convex set, and we are optimizing a convex function. And
the constraints of being a matrix in R are spectral or linear, as in the proof of Corollary 44. Thus,
we can formulate the problem as an SDP again and solve it efficiently Jiang et al. (2020). As in the
proof of Corollary 44, we encode matrices J (matrix need to be projected) and J ′ (the projected
matrix) and scalars λ1 , λ2 , t/n, v. We also encode M = J ′ − t/n · 11⊤ and 0 ≤ t ≤ c in the linear
constraint. We make M = M ⊤ , M has equal-diagonal, and M 1 = 0 in the linear constraints as
well. In addition, we have λ1 I − M ⪰ 0, M − λ2 I ⪰ 0 as a positive semi-definite constraint and
λ1 − λ2 ≤ 1 − α as a linear constraint. Finally, we repeat the steps in Corollary 44 for the final
step of the Frobenius norm. As we can write the SDP like that, we can get an efficient projection
algorithm.

Remark 46 We should mention that in this antiferromagnetic expanders model, despite the con-
straints, it could still be that ∥J ∗ ∥∞ is unbounded. Indeed, consider a Paley graph G of a 4k + 1
type prime p (that is, i and j are connected if and only if i − j is a quadratic residue), and con-
sider J − I − 2G, where J is the all-one matrix. We know that G has all the eigenvalues 0 once
                                   √
with the all-one vector, and ± p appears (p − 1)/2 times. Then, we know that if we consider
J ∗ = 1−α
       2 p (J − I − 2G) − t · (J − I) for 0 < t < c − 1, it will be in R.
        √



                                                   58
Appendix E. Bounding the TV distance by the Frobenius norm (Proof of Lemma 39)
Suppose we have two Ising models with interaction matrices J, J ∗ ∈ S0n respectively and zero
external fields. The following lemma bounds their TV distance in terms of ∥J − J ∗ ∥F .

Lemma 47 Suppose µ, µ∗ are the distributions corresponding to two Ising models with interaction
matrices J, J ∗ ∈ S0n and zero external fields. Then, we have the following property:

                                      ∥µ − µ∗ ∥T V ≤ n∥J − J ∗ ∥F .

Proof We consider the TV distance of the Xi conditioning on µ, µ∗ . By Pinsker’s inequality, we
have

                                      2∥µ − µ∗ ∥2T V ≤ KL(µ∥µ∗ )
   Consider the symmetric KL distance, we have


  4∥µ − µ∗ ∥2T V ≤ KL(µ∥µ∗ ) + KL(µ∗ ∥µ) = E (X ⊤ (J − J ∗ )X) + E ∗ (X ⊤ (J ∗ − J)X)
                                                   X∼µ                       X∼µ

   We expand one of them, and the second one is analogous.
   We can write
                         X                              X
 E (X ⊤ (J − J ∗ )X) = 2   (Jij − Jij∗ ) E (Xi Xj ) = 2    (Jij − Jij∗ )(2 Pr (Xi Xj = 1) − 1).
X∼µ                                         X∼µ                                 X∼µ
                              i<j                               i<j

   Therefore, after we group them, we have
                                                    X
 E (X ⊤ (J−J ∗ )X)+ E ∗ (X ⊤ (J ∗ −J)X) = 4               (Jij −Jij∗ )( Pr (Xi Xj = 1)− Pr ∗ (Xi Xj = 1))
X∼µ                      X∼µ                                          X∼µ             X∼µ
                                                    i<j

    The probability of Xi Xj = 1 can be upper-bounded by coupling. First, we consider the dis-
tribution of X and X ′ according to µ and µ∗ , respectively. We couple X and X ′ to achieve the
                       ′
probability X−i−j ̸= X−i−j                                                      ′
                            as small as possible. We call the event X−i−j ̸= X−i−j   to be E1 , and
             ′
X−i−j = X−i−j to be E2 . Therefore, we can split the difference in probability to be

             E (X ⊤ (J − J ∗ )X) + E ∗ (X ⊤ (J ∗ − J)X)
            X∼µ                    X∼µ
             X
                        ∗
          =4   (Jij − Jij )( Pr (Xi Xj = 1) − Pr ∗ (Xi Xj = 1))
                                X∼µ                 X∼µ
               i<j
               X
          ≤4         |Jij − Jij∗ | · | Pr (Xi Xj = 1) − Pr ∗ (Xi Xj = 1)|
                                    X∼µ                 X∼µ
               i<j
             X               
                       ∗
          ≤4   |Jij − Jij | · Pr(E1 ) · Pr (Xi Xj = 1|E1 ) − Pr ∗ (Xi Xj = 1|E1 )
                                             X∼µ                       X∼µ
               i<j
                                                                                        
                            + Pr(E2 ) · Pr (Xi Xj = 1|E2 ) − Pr ∗ (Xi Xj = 1|E2 )
                                          X∼µ                     X∼µ



                                                   59
                                      DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




    For E1 case, We have Pr(E1 ) ≤ ∥µ − µ∗ ∥T V along with the naive bound

                           | Pr(Xi Xj = 1|E1 ) − Pr(Xi Xj = 1|E1 )| ≤ 1.

    For the E2 case, we bound Pr(E2 ) ≤ 1, and we upper bound the probability difference by the
largest possible difference of the conditional probability. That is:

 Pr (Xi Xj = 1|E2 ) − Pr ∗ (Xi Xj = 1|E2 ) ≤ max Pr (Xi Xj = 1|X−i−j ) − Pr ∗ (Xi Xj = 1|X−i−j ) .
X∼µ                       X∼µ                          X−i−j X∼µ                               X∼µ

    To sum up, we have the following inequality:

   E (X ⊤ (J − J ∗ )X) + E ∗ (X ⊤ (J ∗ − J)X)
  X∼µ                     X∼µ
   X                 
≤4    |Jij − Jij∗ | · Pr(E1 ) · Pr (Xi Xj = 1|E1 ) − Pr ∗ (Xi Xj = 1|E1 )
                                   X∼µ                       X∼µ
    i<j
                                                                                 
             + Pr(E2 ) · Pr (Xi Xj = 1|E2 ) − Pr ∗ (Xi Xj = 1|E2 )
                          X∼µ                X∼µ
   X                                                                                   
≤4   |Jij − Jij∗ | · ∥µ − µ∗ ∥T V + max Pr (Xi Xj = 1|X−i−j ) − Pr ∗ (Xi Xj = 1|X−i−j )
                                         X−i−j X∼µ                             X∼µ
    i<j
                                                                    P                          P
    For Ising model µ with interaction matrix J, denote hi =           k̸=i,j Jik , and hj =    k̸=i,j Jjk we
can calculate that

      Pr(Xi Xj = 1)
                              exp(Jij + hi + hj ) + exp(Jij − hi − hj )
  =                                                                                           .
      exp(Jij + hi + hj ) + exp(Jij − hi − hj ) + exp(−Jij + hi − hj ) + exp(−Jij − hi + hj )
    Denote v = hi + hj and w = hi − hj . So, we have the following
                                              exp(Jij ) cosh(v)
            Pr(Xi Xj = 1) =                                                    =: F (Jij , u, w).
                               exp(Jij ) cosh(v) + exp(−Jij ) cosh(w)
    Denote v ∗ = k̸=i,j Jik  ∗ +               ∗         ∗               ∗              ∗
                   P             P                            P               P
                                      k̸=i,j Jjk and w =         k̸=i,j Jik −   k̸=i,j Jjk . Our target is to
upper bound |F (Jij , u, w) − F (Jij∗ , u∗ , w∗ )|. We take the derivative to show the Lipschitzness of F
to achieve this. By taking the derivative directly, we have

                         ∂F                  2 cosh(v) cosh(w)
                              =                                           .
                         ∂Jij   (exp(Jij ) cosh(v) + exp(−Jij ) cosh(w))2
                          ∂F                 sinh(v) cosh(w)
                             =                                           .
                          ∂v   (exp(Jij ) cosh(v) + exp(−Jij ) cosh(w))2
                         ∂F                  sinh(w) cosh(v)
                            =−                                           .
                         ∂v    (exp(Jij ) cosh(v) + exp(−Jij ) cosh(w))2
                                   ∂F
    By AM-GM ineqiality, we have | ∂J ij
                                         | ≤ 12 . By furthermore | sinh(x)| ≤ | cosh(x)|, we have
both | ∂F         ∂F     1
       ∂v | and | ∂w | ≤ 4 . Therefore, we have the bound:

                                                     1               1            1
             |F (Jij , u, w) − F (Jij∗ , u∗ , w∗ )| ≤ |Jij − Jij∗ | + |v − v ∗ | + |w − w∗ |
                                                     2               4            4

                                                     60
     Plugging back the expression of v, w, v ∗ , w∗ , we use the triangle inequalty, we have

                               X                X                 X                 X
               |v − v ∗ | =            Jik +             Jjk −              ∗
                                                                           Jik −              ∗
                                                                                             Jjk
                              k̸=i,j            k̸=i,j            k̸=i,j            k̸=i,j

                               X                                               X
                                                          ∗                                                   ∗
                        =              Jik − Jik + Jjk − Jjk ≤                         |Jik − Jik | + |Jjk − Jjk |.
                              k̸=i,j                                          k̸=i,j


     And, we can get the same for w − w∗ . Therefore, we can deduce that

                                                   1                1 X
           |F (Jij , u, w) − F (Jij∗ , u∗ , w∗ )| ≤ |Jij − Jij∗ | +             ∗
                                                                        |Jik − Jik             ∗
                                                                                   | + |Jik − Jjk |.
                                                   2                2
                                                                                       k̸=i,j

     Therefore, we can have the following inequality:

   E (X ⊤ (J − J ∗ )X) + E ∗ (X ⊤ (J ∗ − J)X)
  X∼µ                    X∼µ
   X                                                                                  
              ∗            ∗
≤4    |Jij − Jij | · ∥µ − µ ∥T V + max Pr (Xi Xj = 1|X−i−j ) − Pr ∗ (Xi Xj = 1|X−i−j )
                                                  X−i−j X∼µ                                              X∼µ
     i<j
                                                                                                                     
     X                                    1                                 1 X
≤4         |Jij − Jij∗ | · ∥µ − µ∗ ∥T V + |Jij − Jij∗ | +                                     ∗
                                                                                       |Jik − Jik             ∗ 
                                                                                                  | + |Jik − Jjk |
                                          2                2
     i<j                                                                      k̸=i,j


     By the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have
                              X                          1X                n
                                    |Jij − Jij∗ | =         |Jij − Jij∗ | ≤ ∥J − J ∗ ∥F .
                                                         2                 2
                              i<j                          i̸=j

     Also, the rest of that is
                                                                                   
       X                     1                1  X
           |Jij − Jij∗ | ·  |Jij − Jij∗ | +           |Jik − Jik∗              ∗ 
                                                                   | + |Jik − Jjk |
                             2                2
       i<j                                      k̸=i,j
                                                                       
        n X
       X                          1                1  X
     =          |Jij − Jij∗ | ·  |Jij − Jij∗ | +           |Jik − Jik∗ 
                                                                       |
                                  4                2
       i=1 j̸=i                                      k̸=i,j
                                                                                                   2
        n X                                                                    n
       X                          1                1  X                      X     1   X
     <          |Jij − Jij∗ | ·  |Jij − Jij∗ | +           |Jik − Jik∗ 
                                                                       | =              |Jij − Jij∗ | .
                                  2                2                               2
       i=1 j̸=i                                               k̸=i,j                               i=1         j̸=i


     By the Cauchy-Schwarzartz inequality, we know that
                                                      2
                                        X                    X
                                         |Jij − Jij∗ | ≤ n   |Jij − Jij∗ |2
                                         j̸=i                                j̸=i


                                                                   61
                                               DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




    Thus, we can have
                                                                                         
                  X                    1                       1 X
                      |Jij − Jij∗ | ·  |Jij − Jij∗ | +          |Jik − Jik∗             ∗ 
                                                                             | + |Jik − Jjk |
                                       2                2
                  i<j                                     k̸=i,j
                                          2
                   n                                 n
                  X   1 X                         X    nX                       n
                <             |Jij − Jij∗ | ≤                 |Jij − Jij∗ |2 = ∥J − J ∗ ∥2F .
                      2                                 2                        2
                  i=1         j̸=i                       i=1    j̸=i

So, in summary, we have
        E (X ⊤ (J − J ∗ )X) + E ∗ (X ⊤ (J ∗ − J)X)
        X∼µ                     X∼µ
                                                                                         
        X                                 1                1 X
     ≤4    |Jij − Jij∗ | · ∥µ − µ∗ ∥T V + |Jij − Jij∗ | +             ∗
                                                               |Jik − Jik             ∗ 
                                                                          | + |Jjk − Jjk |
                                          2                2
          i<j                                                           k̸=i,j
                    ∗                    ∗
     ≤2n∥µ − µ ∥T V · ∥J − J                 ∥F + 2n∥J − J ∗ ∥2F
    Because in the beginning we have established
                   4∥µ − µ∗ ∥2T V = E (X ⊤ (J − J ∗ )X) + E ∗ (X ⊤ (J ∗ − J)X),
                                             X∼µ                       X∼µ

    We have the quadratic formula
                        2∥µ − µ∗ ∥2T V ≤ n∥µ − µ∗ ∥T V · ∥J − J ∗ ∥F + n∥J − J ∗ ∥2F ,
    which yields that ∥µ − µ∗ ∥T V ≤ n∥J − J ∗ ∥F .


Appendix F. Discussion of guarantee from Theorem 37
Notice that for Ising model with bounded with, Lemma 6 in Dagan et al. (2021) has established
that (also in the proof of Theorem 48) there is a constant (depending only on M ) that EJ ∗ [∥(J −
J ∗ )X∥] ≥ CM ∥J − J ∗ ∥2F and thus we know that the condition E[∥(J − J ∗ )X∥2 ] ≤ ε2 implies
that ∥J − J ∗ ∥2F ≤ ε2 /CM . Therefore, the Corollary 7 follows from Theorem 6.
     Now, we use an example to show that in some cases, it is strictly stronger. Let β1 , β2 > 1 be
two numbers and J ∗ = βn1 11⊤ , and J = βn2 11⊤ .
     It is well known that (see e.g Ellis (2007)) for Curie Weiss model with inverse temperature
                                                      √
β > 1, we have with probability at least 1 − exp(−C n) that
                                         n
                                     1X
                                        Xi = ±(2s(β) − 1) + O(n−1/4 ) ,
                                     n
                                         i=1

where s(β) is the (larger) maximum in the optimization problem
                    s(β) = argmax −s log(s) − (1 − s) log(1 − s) + 2βs(1 − s).
                                     s

   Now, the condition given in Theorem 6 for matrices J, J ∗ says that EJ ∗ [∥(J − J ∗ )X∥2 ] ≤ ε2 .
                            2
This implies that (β1 −β 2)
                              EJ ∗ [( ni=1 Xi )2 ] ≤ ε2 , or, (β1 − β2 ) ≲ √n·(2s(β
                                                                                 ε
                                     P
                      n                                                                   . Therefore, this
                                                                                   1 )−1)
               ∗          ε                         ∗
implies ∥J − J ∥F ≲ √n , stricter than ∥J − J ∥F ≲ ε.

                                                           62
Appendix G. Verifying the regularity condition
In this section, we will demonstrate how the regularity condition of Theorem 37 can be verified
whenever our model satisfies two natural high-temperature conditions. These include the following
two cases: (1) Dobrushin’s condition holds, (2) the model is spectrally bounded. We also show
that it can be true even in low temperature settings, with the notable example being the Curie-Weiss
model.
    We start with the first claim.

Theorem 48 Suppose J ∗ ∈ S0n satisfies ∥J ∗ ∥∞ < 1 − δ, where δ > 0. Then, there is some ϵ0 > 0
that depends on δ, such that the Ising model with interaction matrix J ∗ satisfies (ϵ20 , C)-regularity,
where C depends on δ and ϵ.

Proof We compare E[∥(J −J ∗ )X∥2 ] with ∥(J −J ∗ )X∥2F . Specifically, because ∥J ∗ ∥∞ < 1−δ, we
can show that, by Lemma 6 in Dagan et al. (2021), there exists a universal constant C1 such that for
all a ∈ Rn , EJ ∗ [∥a⊤ X∥] = Var[a⊤ X] ≥ C1 ∥a∥2 . Therefore, we know that E[∥(J − J ∗ )X∥2 ] ≤
ε20 implies that
                         ∥J − J ∗ ∥2F ≤ C1−1 E∗ [∥(J − J ∗ )X∥2 ] ≤ C1−1 ϵ20 ,
                                             J
                                         q                                                 q
which then implies that ∥J − J ∗ ∥∞ ≤ C1−1 ε0 . So, we know that ∥J∥∞ ≤ 1 − δ + C1−1 ε0 .
                        √
Thus, if we take ε0 ≤ C1 δ/2, we know that ∥J∥∞ ≤ 1 − δ/2.
     Then, by Theorem 3.7 in Adamczak et al. (2019), we know that for the Ising model with inter-
action matrix J, there exists a constant C2 such that the Poincaré inequality holds with coefficient
C2
 δ . Therefore, we know that
                             n                                n
                             X                            C2 X                  C2
      E[∥(J − J ∗ )X∥2 ] =         Var[(J − J ∗ )⊤
                                                 i X] ≤        ∥(J − J ∗ )∥22 =    ∥J − J ∗ ∥2F
      J                                                   δ                     δ
                             i=1                             i=1

We conclude that
                                         C2                C2
                 E[∥(J − J ∗ )X∥2 ] ≤       ∥J − J ∗ ∥2F ≤    · E [∥(J − J ∗ )X∥2 ].
                 J                       δ                 δC1 J ∗



Theorem 49 Let J ∗ ∈ S0n satisfy λmax (J ∗ ) − λmin (J ∗ ) < 1 − δ. Then, there exists ϵ0 > 0 that
depends on δ, such that the Ising model with interaction matrix J ∗ satisfies (ϵ20 , C)-regularity, where
C > 0 is a constant that depends on δ.

Proof Like the previous lemma, we compare E[∥(J − J ∗ )X∥2 ] with ∥(J − J ∗ )X∥2F . Specifically,
because λmax (J ∗ ) − λmin (J ∗ ) < 1 − δ, we can show that, by Lemma 22, we have
                                         s             !2                r !2
                                                 1                         1
              ∥J − J ∗ ∥2F ≤ 2 cosh 4              ∗
                                                          ε20 ≤ 2 cosh 4        ε20 ,
                                            1 − ∥J ∥op                     δ
                                         √
which then implies that ∥J − J ∗ ∥F ≤
                                                    p
                                           2 cosh(4 1/δ)ε0 . So, we know that
                                                          √
                     λmax (J ∗ ) − λmin (J ∗ ) ≤ 1 − δ + 2 2 cosh(4 1/δ)ε0 .
                                                                   p


                                                   63
                                    DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO



                           √
Then, if we take ε0 ≤ δ/(4 2 cosh(4 1/δ)), we know that λmax (J ∗ ) − λmin (J ∗ ) ≤ 1 − δ/2.
                                     p

    We can then apply Lemma 15, which says that there exists an absolute constant C2 , such that the
Ising model with interaction matrix J satisfies the Poincare inequality with coefficient Cδ2 . There-
fore, we know that
                                                     C2
                              E[∥(J − J ∗ )X∥2 ] ≤      ∥J − J ∗ ∥2F
                              J                       δ
We conclude that
                                              s              !2
                ∗    C2       ∗ 2   2C2              1
   E[∥(J − J )X∥ ] ≤2
                        ∥J − J ∥F ≤     cosh 4                  E [∥(J − J ∗ )X∥2 ] .
   J                 δ               δ          1 − ∥J ∗ ∥op    J∗


    This finishes the proof.

   We conclude the section by showing that the Curie-Weiss model satisfies the regularity condition
even at low temperatures.

Theorem 50 Let J ∗ be the matrix for the Curie-Weiss model. That is, J ∗ = βn (J − I) where J
is the all-one matrix and β > 1. Then, we have J ∗ satisfies (c1 /n, c2 ) regularity, where c1 , c2 are
constants that depends on β.

Proof We know that the distribution is symmetric for all Xi . Therefore, the covariance matrix of
X1 , . . . , Xn , denoted by Σ, is a matrix of the form aJ + (1 − a)I for some 0 < a < 1. By Deb and
Mukherjee (2023), we can calculate that a converges to (2s − 1)2 where s > 1/2 is the solution of
                                     s
the equation 2(2s − 1) = log( 1−s      ). Therefore, for any A, we can calculate that

     E [∥AX∥2 ] = Tr(A E[XX ⊤ ]A) = Tr(A(aI + (1 − a)J)A) = (1 − a)∥A∥2F + a∥A1∥2
     J∗

    Now, suppose EJ ∗ [∥AX∥2 ] = nε , where ε < c1 . We will prove that

                                   E[∥AX∥2 ] ≤ c2 · E∗ [∥AX∥2 ] ,
                                   J                    J

for some constant c2 > 0.
    First of all, by assumption we have a · (∥A1∥2 ) + (1 − a)∥A∥2F = nε . Therefore, we have
                    q
                         ε
                                         pε
∥A∥op ≤ ∥A∥F ≤ (1−a)n        , and ∥A1∥ ≤ an   .
    Also, we can calculate the following:

           E [X ⊤ AX] = Tr(A E[XX ⊤ ]) = Tr(A(aI + (1 − a)J)) = (1 − a)1⊤ A1 ,
           J∗

since A has zero diagonal.
    Thus, we can derive that

                                       √                √
                                                                 r
                               ⊤                                      ε  p
                          |1 A1| ≤         n · ∥A1∥ ≤       n·          = ε/a.
                                                                     an

The quantity X ⊤ AX is important, since it represents the difference in Hamiltonians of J and J ∗ .

                                                  64
     First, we show an inequality: for some universal constant c (without loss of generality c ≤ 1)
                                                                  2              
                    h
                       ⊤           ⊤
                                             i                        t        t
                Pr    X AX − |1 A1| ≥ t ≤ 2 exp −c min                    ,
                 J∗                                                 ∥A∥2F ∥A∥op
This means that the difference in Hamiltonians is upper-bounded with high probability.
     To do that, we can use Deb and Mukherjee (2023) and the Hanson-Wright inequality. By Propo-
sition 4.2 in Deb and Mukherjee (2023), the Curie Weiss model can be written as a mixture of i.i.d.
distributions of Xi . Importantly, each of these mixtures has the property that all variables have the
same mean. Therefore, by Hanson-Wright inequality for each product measure µ, there exists a
universal constant c (for all µ) such that
                                                                      t2
                                                                                          
             ⊤             ⊤                                                            t
      Pr[|X AX − E[X AX]| ≥ t] ≤ 2 exp −c min                                       ,           .
       µ               µ                                    ∥A∥2F + [Eµ ∥AX∥]2 ∥A∥op

  Therefore, if we denote bµ = 1 − Eµ [Xi2 ] (remember this value is the same for all i by Deb and
Mukherjee (2023)), then

                  E[X ⊤ AX] = Tr(A E[XX ⊤ ]) = Tr(A E(bµ I + (1 − bµ )J)) .
                   µ                   µ                   µ

Therefore, we have for all i.i.d. measures µ in the decomposition

     E[X ⊤ AX] = Tr(A(bµ I + (1 − bµ )J)) = (1 − bµ )Tr(AJ) = (1 − bµ )(1⊤ A1) ≤ |1⊤ A1|,
     µ

Also, we can calculate that for any i.i.d. µ, Eµ [XX ⊤ ] = bµ J + (1 − bµ )I ⪯ I + J and therefore,
                                                                   ε/n
                         max E[|∥AX∥2 ] ≤ ∥A1∥2 + ∥A∥2F ≤                 ,
                           µ   µ                                 a(1 − a)

where the maximum is with respect to all product measures in the decomposition. Let u = |1⊤ A1|
          ε/n
and v = a(1−a) . Then, for all µ, by Hanson-Wright inequality

                                                                                      t2
                                                                                                       
                                                                                               t
Pr[X ⊤ AX−|1⊤ A1| ≥ t] ≤ Pr[X ⊤ AX−E[X ⊤ AX] ≥ t] ≤ 2 exp −c min                            ,                 .
 µ                                 µ         µ                                     ∥A∥2F + v ∥A∥op
    Taking expectation with respect to the random choice of measure µ in the decomposition, we
can derive the tail bound
                                                               t2
                                                                           
                    ⊤        ⊤                                           t
             Pr  [X AX − |1 A1| ≥ t] ≤ 2 exp −c min                  ,           ,
             J∗                                            ∥A∥2F + v ∥A∥op
which is what we wished to show. Similarly, we can prove for the lower tail,
                                                                  t2
                                                                             
                 ⊤          ⊤                                                t
           Pr  [X AX + |1 A1| ≤ −t] ≤ 2 exp −c min                      ,         .
            J∗                                                ∥A∥2F + v ∥A∥op
     Now let A = J − J ∗ , so we can write that
                                         "                               #
                                 2         Z(J ∗ ) exp( 12 X ⊤ AX)     2
                      E[∥AX∥ ] = E∗                                ∥AX∥ .
                       J              J             Z(J)

                                                  65
                                  DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO



                        Z(J)
   We first lower bound Z(J ∗ ) . We have

                                                     
                                 Z(J)           1 ⊤
                                        = E exp( X AX) .
                                 Z(J ∗ ) J ∗    2
   We note that, for a bounded random variable Z and a differentiable increasing function f (x)
such that f (0) = 1, if we want to lower bound E[eZ ], we can do the following: let Y = min(Z, 0).
Therefore, we have
                                      Z 0                   Z 0
                                           ′
       E[f (Z)] ≥ E[f (Y )] = E[1 −       f (t)dt] = 1 − E[      1[t ≥ Y ]f ′ (t)dt]
                                        Y                      −∞
                                  Z 0                                    Z 0
                                             ′
                           =1−              f (t) E[1[t ≥ Y ]]dt = 1 −         f ′ (t) Pr[Z ≤ t]dt.
                                    −∞                                    −∞

The second line is by Fubini. By the above inequality and the tail bound, when we view Z to be
X ⊤ AX + u and f (x) = ex/2 , we can calculate that
                                                                     
                          1 ⊤                             1
                E∗ exp      X AX        = e−u/2 E∗ exp( (X ⊤ AX + u))
                J         2                     J         2
                               Z ∞                                 
                 −u/2         1       −t/2      ⊤
              ≥e      · 1−          e      Pr [X AX + u ≤ −t]dt
                              2 0          J∗
                             Z ∞
                                                            t2
                                                                       
                 −u/2                      t                          t
              ≥e      · 1−        exp − − c min                  ,          dt .
                               0           2            ∥A∥2F + v ∥A∥op
Since we know ∥A∥op ≤ ∥A∥F ≤ v, we have that
                                                                     
                    1 ⊤            −u/2             1 ⊤
            E [exp( X AX)] = e           E exp        (X AX + u)
            J∗      2                    J∗         2
                         Z ∞
                                                        t2
                                                                       
             −u/2                     t                              t
          ≥e      · 1−        exp − − c min                     ,           dt
                          0           2             ∥A∥2F + v ∥A∥op
                        Z ∞                      2         
             −u/2                     t             t    t
          ≥e      · 1−        exp − − c min            ,√         dt
                          0           2             2v     v
                         Z 2√v                           Z ∞                       !
                                              t2
                                                                   
             −u/2                       t                                 t    t
          =e      · 1−          exp − − c           dt − √ exp − − c √             dt
                          0             2     2v           2 v            2     v
                         Z 2√v        Z ∞                       !
             −u/2                                    t       t
          ≥e      · 1−          1dt −       exp − − c √           dt
                          0             0            2        v
                          √
                                             
             −u/2                     1
          =e      · 1−2 v− √                    .
                                 c/ v + 1/2
                                      √       q
                                                     ε
We choose the ε small enough such that v = na(1−a)       ≤ c/8, so we have
                                                                     
                                                              1
                   E∗ [exp(X ⊤ AX)] ≥ e−u/2 · 1 − ∥A∥F −
                  J                                      c/∥A∥F + 1/2
                                              √
                 ≥e−u/2 · (1 − 1/4 − 1/4) ≥ e− ε/a/2 /2.


                                                   66
   Finally, we upper bound the expectation as follows
                                                 √              
                         1 ⊤               2             n           2
                E exp      X AX ∥AX∥ ≤ E∗ exp              ∥AX∥ ∥AX∥
               J∗        2                        J     2
   Using the Hanson-Wright inequality as before, replacing A with A2 , we have
                                                                      t2
                                                                                           
           2                 2                                                       t
 Pr  [∥AX∥ − max E[|∥AX∥ ] ≥ t] ≤ 2 exp −c min( 2 2                               ,        )
  J∗             µ µ                                     ∥A ∥F + maxµ Eµ [∥A2 X∥]2 ∥A2 ∥op
                                t2
                                                         
                                                        t
≤2 exp −c min                                       ,          .
                  ∥A∥4F + ∥A∥2F maxµ Eµ [∥AX∥2 ] ∥A∥2F
    Here, as before, maxµ is taking max function for all i.i.d. measure in the decomposition of the
Curie Weiss model Deb and Mukherjee (2023).
    Similar to the proof of the lower bound from before, if Z is a bounded random variable and f
is an increasing differentiable function such that f (0) = 0, if we want to upper bound E[f (Z)], we
can let W = max(Z, 0) and have
                                       Z W                 Z ∞
                                               ′
           E[f (Z)] ≤ E[f (W )] = E[          f (t)dt] = E[      1[t ≤ W ]f ′ (t)dt]
                                         0                  0
                                     Z ∞                           Z ∞
                                            ′
                                  =        f (t) E[1[W ≥ t]]dt =       f ′ (t) Pr[Z ≥ t]dt.
                                     0                             0
                √                        √            √
Let f (t) = te nt/2 , and f ′ (t) = exp( 2nt )(1 + 2nt ). The random variable Z will be ∥AX∥2 .
We will now use the concentration result for ∥AX∥2 to upper bound the expectation. Below, we
will use the simple observation that we made before maxµ Eµ [∥AX∥2 ] ≤ v. Using the identity
     √          √            √
exp( 2nt )(1 + 2nt ) ≤ exp( nt) in the rest of the calculation, we can calculate that
          √                      
               n                  2
  E exp          ∥AX∥ ∥AX∥
  J∗          2
  Z ∞        √          √ 
                nt             nt
≤       exp            1+            Pr(∥AX∥2 ≥ t)dt
                2             2
  Z0 ∞      √ 
≤       exp     nt Pr(∥AX∥2 ≥ t)dt
   0
  Z 2v+∥A∥2         √        Z ∞             √                    (t − v)2
                                                                                              
            F                                                                  t−v
≤               exp( nt)dt +             exp( nt) · 2 exp −c min             ,                       dt
   0                      2v+∥A∥2F                           ∥A∥F + ∥A∥F v ∥A∥2F
                                                                  4        2

  Z 2v+∥A∥2     √        Z ∞           √
                                                            
          F                                            t−v
=           exp( nt)dt +           exp( nt) · 2 exp −c         dt
   0                      2v+∥A∥2F                     ∥A∥2F
                                                                       √
Here, the first inequality is by taking Z to be ∥AX∥2 and f (x) = xe nx . The second one is because
of the inequality we mentioned, the third one is by the following: if t ≤ 2v + ∥A∥2F , the probability
of ∥AX∥2 ≥ t is at most 1. Otherwise, we use the concentration tail bound and get the upper bound.
    We know that nv = ε/(a(1 − a)), and ∥A∥2F ≤ ε/(n(1 − a)) ≤ v, so we have
      Z 2v+∥A∥2
                 F     √                          √                    3ε
                                                                                 
                                                                                        3ε
                                                                                             
                                               2    n(2v+∥A∥2F )
                   exp( nt)dt ≤ (2v + ∥A∥F )e                    ≤           exp               .
        0                                                          a(1 − a)n       a(1 − a)


                                                 67
                                   DASKALAKIS K ANDIROS YAO




   Also, if we take ε < 1 − a, we have
  Z ∞            √                             Z ∞            √
                                                                                       
                                     t−v                                           t−v
            exp     nt · 2 exp −c            dt ≤            exp( nt) · 2 exp −c          dt
   2v+∥A∥2F                          ∥A∥2F          v+∥A∥2F                       ∥A∥2F
  Z ∞                                           
                                           t−v
≤          exp(1/(4c) + cnt) · 2 exp −c             dt
   v+∥A∥2F                                 ∥A∥2F
                                                
        1              2                2     c          1/c
= exp       + (v + ∥A∥F ) · c · n − ∥A∥F ·          · 1
        4c                                 ∥A∥2F       ∥A∥2F
                                                             −n
                                                                              
        1                               1/c      ε            1    ε · (2 − a)         1/c    ε
≤ exp       + (v + ∥A∥2F )cn − c ·              · ≤ exp          +             −c ·          · .
        4c                           1−a−ε n                  4c    a(1 − a)        1−a−ε n

   Therefore, summing up all the things above, we have
                                                                             √
        2     ε     3               3ε               1    ε · (2 − a)        1/c
E[∥AX∥ ] ≤               exp                + exp       +             −c ·        ·2e ε/a/2 .
J            n a(1 − a)          a(1 − a)            4c    a(1 − a)        1−a−ε

    Since a is a constant depending on β, and we can take ε as a sufficiently small constant depend-
ing on β, the result follows.




                                                68
