                                              Communication Complexity of the Secret Key Agreement in
                                                         Algorithmic Information Theory
                                                                          Emirhan Gürpınar and Andrei Romashchenko
                                                                                                May 13, 2024
arXiv:2004.13411v6 [cs.IT] 9 May 2024




                                                                                                     Abstract
                                                   It is known that the mutual information, in the sense of Kolmogorov complexity, of any pair of strings x and y
                                              is equal to the length of the longest shared secret key that two parties can establish via a probabilistic protocol with
                                              interaction on a public channel, assuming that the parties hold as their inputs x and y respectively. We determine
                                              the worst-case communication complexity of this problem for the setting where the parties can use private sources of
                                              random bits.
                                                   We show that for some x, y the communication complexity of the secret key agreement does not decrease even
                                              if the parties have to agree on a secret key the size of which is much smaller than the mutual information between x
                                              and y. On the other hand, we discuss a natural class of x, y such that the communication complexity of the protocol
                                              declines gradually with the size of the derived secret key.
                                                   The proof of the main result uses the spectral properties of appropriate graphs and the expander mixing lemma,
                                              as well as information-theoretic techniques, including constraint information inequalities and Muchnik’s conditional
                                              descriptions.

                                                  A preliminary version of this paper was published in the proceedings of MFCS 2020. In the present version we
                                              give full proofs of all theorems and get rid of the assumption that the number of random bits used in the communica-
                                              tion protocols is polynomial.


                                        1 Introduction
                                        In this paper we study communication protocols that help two remote parties (Alice and Bob) to establish a common
                                        secret key, while the communication is done via a public channel. In most practical situations, this task is achieved
                                        with the Diffie–Hellman scheme, [8], or other computationally secure protocols based on the assumptions that the
                                        eavesdropper has only limited computational resources and that some specific problem (e.g., the computing of the
                                        discrete logarithm) is computationally hard. We, in contrast, address the information-theoretic version of this problem
                                        and assume no computational restriction on the power of the eavesdropper. In this setting, the problem of the common
                                        secret key agreement can be resolved only if Alice and Bob possess since the very beginning some correlated data. In
                                        this setting, the challenge is to extract from the correlated data available to Alice and Bob their mutual information and
                                        materialize it as a common secret key. Besides the obvious theoretical interest, this setting is relevant for applications
                                        connected with quantum cryptography (see, e.g., [7, 14]) or biometrics (see the survey [15]).
                                            The problem of the secret key agreement was extensively studied in the classical information theory in the formal-
                                        ism of Shannon’s entropy (this research direction dates back to the seminal papers [1, 22]). In our paper, we use the
                                        less common framework of algorithmic information theory based on Kolmogorov complexity. This approach seems
                                        to be an adequate language to discuss cryptographic security of an individual key (while Shannon’s approach helps
                                        to analyze properties of a probability distribution as a whole), see [3]. Besides, Kolmogorov complexity provides a
                                        suitable framework for the one shot paradigm, when we cannot assume that the initial data were obtained from an
                                        ergodic source of information or, moreover, there is possibly no clearly defined probability distribution on the data
                                        sources.
                                            Thus, in this paper we deal with Kolmogorov complexity and mutual information, which are the central notions of
                                        algorithmic information theory. Kolmogorov complexity C(x) of a string x is the length of the shortest program that

                                                                                                         1
prints x. Similarly, Kolmogorov complexity C(x|y) of a string x given y is the length of the shortest program that
prints x when y is given as the input. Let us consider two strings x and y. The mutual information I(x : y) can be
defined by the formula I(x : y) = C(x) + C(y) − C(x, y). Intuitively, this quantity is the information shared by x
and y. The mutual information between x and y is equal (up to logarithmic additive terms) to the difference between
the absolute and the conditional Kolmogorov complexity:

                                    I(x : y) ≈ C(x) − C(x|y) ≈ C(y) − C(y|x)

(see below the discussion of the Kolmogorov–Levin theorem). The “physical” meaning of the mutual information is
elusive. In general, the mutual information does not correspond to any common substring of x and y, and we cannot
materialize it as one object of complexity I(x : y) that can be easily extracted from x and separately from y. However,
this quantity has a sort of operational interpretation. The mutual information between x and y is essentially equal to
the size of a longest shared secret key that two parties, one having x and the other one having y, and both parties also
possessing the complexity profile of the two strings can establish via a probabilistic protocol:
Theorem 1 (sketchy version; see [30] for a more precise statement). (a) There is a secret key agreement protocol that,
for every n-bit strings x and y, allows Alice and Bob to compute with high probability a shared secret key z of length
equal to the mutual information of x and y (up to an O(log n) additive term).
    (b) No protocol can produce a longer shared secret key (up to an O(log n) additive term).
    In this paper we study the communication complexity of the protocols that appear in this theorem.
    The statement of Theorem 1 in the form given above is vague and sketchy. Before we proceed with our results,
we must clarify the setting of this theorem: we should explain the rules of the game between Alice, Bob, and the
eavesdropper, and specify the notion of secrecy of the key in this context.
Clarification 1: secrecy. In this theorem we say that the obtained key z is “secret” in the sense that it looks random.
Technically, it must be (almost) incompressible, even from the point of view of the eavesdropper who does not know
the inputs x and y but intercepts the communication between Alice and Bob. More formally, if t denotes the transcript
of the communication, we require that C(z|t) ≥ |z| − O(1). We will need to make this requirement even slightly
stronger, see below.
    If an n-bit string z is incompressible in terms of Kolmogorov complexity, i.e., if

                                C(z | all publicly available information) ≥ n − O(1),

this z seems to be a suitable secret key for many standard cryptographic applications. Indeed, if any deterministic
algorithm A produces a list of strings, then a string z whose complexity is close to n can appear in this list only at a
position ≥ 2n−O(1) (z can be found given A and the index of z in the list; such a description should not be shorter
than n − O(1), so the binary expansion of the index must be long enough). This means that any attempt to brute force
this secret key will take Ω(2n ) steps before we arrive to the value z. Also, it can be shown that for any computable
distribution P
                            Prob[a randomly sampled value is equal to z] ≤ 2−n+O(log n)
(see the relation between Kolmogorov complexity and the a priori probability, e.g., in [32, Section 4.5]), which means
that any attacker trying to randomly guess the value of the secret key would need on average ≥ 2n−O(log n) false
attempts before z is revealed. In other words, the standard properties of Kolmogorov complexity guarantee that any
naive attempt to crack such a key (deterministically or with randomization) would take exponential time, so this z
could be, for example, a good code for a safe with combination lock. A more systematic discussion of the foundations
of cryptography in terms of Kolmogorov complexity can be found in [3].
    Incompressible strings are abundant. For every string t and for every n, for a fraction ≥ 1 − 1/2c of strings
z ∈ {0, 1}n we have C(z|t) ≥ n − c. Thus, we can produce an incompressible z by tossing an unbiased coin.
However, Kolmogorov complexity is incomputable, and one cannot provide a certificate proving that some specific z
has large Kolmogorov complexity.
Clarification 2: randomized protocols. In our communication model we assume that Alice and Bob may use addi-
tional randomness. Each of them can toss a fair coin and produce a sequence of random bits with a uniform distribution.


                                                           2
The private random bits produced by Alice and Bob are accessible only to Alice and Bob respectively. (Of course,
Alice and Bob are allowed to send the produced random bits to each other, but then this information becomes visible
to the eavesdropper.)
    We assume that for each pair of inputs the protocol may fail with a small probability (the probability is taken over
the choice of random bits of Alice and Bob). The failure means that the parties do not produce any output, or Alice
and Bob produce mismatched keys, or the produced key z does not satisfy the secrecy condition.
    In an alternative setting, Alice and Bob use a common public source of randomness (also accessible to the eaves-
dropper). Theorem 1 from [30] is valid for both settings — for private or public sources of randomness, though in the
model with a public source of random bits the construction of a protocol is much simpler.
Clarification 3: minor auxiliary inputs. We assume also that besides the main inputs x and y Alice and Bob both are
given the complexity profile of the input, i.e., the values C(x), C(y), and I(x : y). Such a concession is unavoidable
for the positive part of the theorem. Indeed, Kolmogorov complexity and mutual information are non-computable; so
there is no computable protocol that finds a z of size I(x : y) unless the value of the mutual information is given to
Alice and Bob as a promise. This supplementary information is rather small, it can be represented by only O(log n)
bits. The theorem remains valid if we assume that this auxiliary data is known to the eavesdropper. So, formally
speaking, the protocol should find a key z such that

           C(z | communication transcript of the protocol and complexity profile of (x, y)) ≥ |z| − O(1).

    There exists no algorithm computing Kolmogorov complexity of an arbitrary string, the mutual information I(x :
y) cannot be algorithmically computed neither even given an access to both strings x and y. However, the requirement
to provide the complexity profile of (x, y) is not prohibitively unrealistic. Indeed, if a string x is taken uniformly at
random from an explicitly given set SX , we can claim that C(x) is close to log |SX | with an overwhelming probability.
Similarly, if a pair (x, y) is taken uniformly from an explicitly given set of pairs SXY , and if we know the combinatorial
parameters of this set (the cardinality of the entire set SXY , of its projections on each of the coordinates, the sizes of
the sections of this set along both coordinates) we can estimate the typical value of I(x : y). Thus, we can predict an
expected complexity profile for a “typical” pair (x, y) ∈ SXY .
    Even if (x, y) is produced by a more complicated random process, in many cases the expected complexity profile
of this pair can be computed given the probabilistic characteristics of the distribution from which it is sampled (below
we discuss in more detail the connection of Shannon’s characteristics of a distribution and Kolmogorov complexity of
a typical sampled outcome).
    The communication protocol in Theorem 1(a) still applies when Alice and Bob are provided with not the exact
complexity profile of the input but only with its approximation. The more precise approximation we provide, the larger
secret key is produced in the protocol, see [30, Remark 5]. For example, if Alice and Bob are given that C(x) ≥ k and
C(x|y) < ℓ, they can produce a secret key z of size k − ℓ − O(log(|x| + |y|)). So, if k and ℓ are δ-approximations for
the real values of C(x) and C(x|y), then the protocol results in a secret key of size I(x : y)−O(δ)−O(log(|x|+|y|)).
    Thus, if we know the physical nature of the process producing the initial data for Alice and Bob, although we cannot
predict exactly the complexity profile of the input, we possibly can estimate approximately the expected parameters
of this profile. Such an approximation is enough to apply the communication protocol from [30].
    Now we can formulate the main question studied in this paper:
Central Question. What is the optimal communication complexity of the communication problem from Theorem 1?
That is, how many bits should Alice and Bob send to each other to agree on a common secret key?
   A protocol proposed in [30] allows to compute for all pairs of inputs a shared secret key of length equal to the
mutual information between x and y with communication complexity

                                          min{C(x|y), C(y|x)} + O(log n).                                              (1)

This protocol is randomized (it can be adapted to the model with private or public sources of random bits). Alice and
Bob may need to send to each other different number of bits for different pairs of input (even with the same mutual
information). It was proven in [30] that in the worst case (i.e., for some pairs of inputs (x, y)) the communication
complexity (1) is optimal for communication protocols using only public randomness. The natural question whether

                                                            3
this bound remains optimal for protocols with private sources of random bits remained open (see Open Question 1
in [30]). The main result of this paper is the positive answer to this question. More specifically, we provide explicit
examples of pairs (x, y) such that       
                                          I(x : y) = 0.5n + O(log n)
                                              C(x|y) = 0.5n + O(log n)                                             (2)
                                         
                                              C(y|x) = 0.5n + O(log n)
and in every communication protocol satisfying Theorem 1 (with private random bits) Alice and Bob must exchange
approximately 0.5n bits of information. Moreover, the same communication complexity is required even if Alice and
Bob want to agree on a secret key that is much smaller then the optimal value I(x : y). Our bound applies to all
communication protocols that establish a secret key of size, say, ω(log n).
Theorem 2. Let π be a communication protocol such that given inputs x and y satisfying (2) Alice and Bob use private
random bits and compute with probability > 1/2 a shared secret key z of length δ(n) = ω(log n). Then for every n
there exists a pair of n-bit strings (x, y) satisfying (2) such that following this communication protocol with inputs x
and y, Alice and Bob send to each other messages with a total length of at least 0.5n − O(log n) bits. In other words,
the worst-case communication complexity of the protocol is at least 0.5n − O(log n).
Remark 1. We assume that the computational protocol π used by Alice and Bob is uniformly computable, i.e., the
parties send messages and compute the final result by following rules that can be computed algorithmically given the
length of the inputs. We require that the protocol can be applied to all pairs of inputs and all possible values of random
bits. An outcome of the protocol can be meaningless if we apply it to pairs (x, y) with too small mutual information
or with an unlucky choice of random bits, but the protocol must always converge and produce some outcome. We
may assume that the protocol is public (known to the eavesdropper). The constants hidden in the O(·) notation may
depend on the protocol, as well as on the choice of the optimal description method in the definition of Kolmogorov
complexity.
     An alternative approach might be as follows. We might assume that the protocol π is not uniformly computable
(but for each n its description is available to Alice, Bob, and to the eavesdropper). Then substantially the same
result can be proven for Kolmogorov complexity relativized conditional on π. That is, we should define Kolmogorov
complexity and mutual information in terms of programs that can access π as an oracle, and the inputs x and y should
satisfy a version of (2) with the relativized Kolmogorov complexity. Our main result can be proven for this setting
(literally the same argument applies). However, to simplify the notation, we focus on the setting with only computable
communication protocols (the size of which does not depend on n).
    Theorem 2 can be viewed as a special case of the general question of “extractability” of the mutual information
studied in [6]. We prove this theorem for two specific examples of pairs (x, y). In the first example x and y are
a line and a point incident with each other in a discrete affine plane. In the second example x and y are points of
the discrete plane with a fixed quasi-Euclidean distance between them. The proof of the main result consists in a
combination of spectral and information-theoretic techniques. In fact, our argument applies to all pairs with similar
spectral properties. Our main technical tools are the Expander Mixing Lemma (see Lemma 5) and the lemma on non-
negativity of the triple mutual information (see Lemma 7). We also use Muchnik’s theorem on conditional descriptions
with multiple conditions (see Proposition 2).
    Let us mention one more technical detail specific for algorithmic information theory. Many information-theoretical
tools, including the Kolmogorov–Levin theorem, are inherently inaccurate: they involve an unavoidable logarithmic
error term. This causes a difficulty if a communication protocol involves too many private random bits (then even a
logarithmic term including the number of random bits can become overwhelming). To get around this obstacle, we
must reduce the number of private random bits used in the protocol. Fortunately, using an argument similar to the
classical Newman theorem, we can reduce the number of random bits involved in the protocol to a polynomial (or
even a linear) function of the length of inputs (see Proposition 1).
    The communication protocol proposed in [30] and Theorem 2 imply together that we have the following threshold
phenomenon. When the inputs given to Alice and Bob are a line and a point (incident with each other in a discrete
affine plane), then the parties can agree on a secret key of size I(x : y) with a communication complexity slightly
above min{C(x|y), C(y|x)}. But when a communication complexity is slightly below this threshold, the optimal size
of the secret key sinks immediately to O(log n).

                                                            4
    We also show that the “threshold phenomenon” mentioned above is not universally true. There exist pairs (x, y)
with the same values of Kolmogorov complexities and the same mutual information as in the example above, but with a
sharply different trade-off between the size of a secret key and the communication complexity needed to establish this
key. In fact, for some (x, y) the size of the optimal secret key decreases gradually with the communication complexity
of the protocol. More specifically, we show that for some x and y, Alice and Bob can agree on a secret key of any size
k (which can be chosen arbitrarily between 0 and I(x : y)) via a protocol with a communication complexity of Θ(k).
This is the case for x and y with an appropriate Hamming distance between them.
    Secret key agreement in classical information theory. The problem of secret key agreement was initially proposed
in the framework of classical information theory by Ahlswede and Csiszár, [1] and Maurer, [22]. In these original
papers the problem was studied for the case in which the input data is a pair of random variables (X, Y ) obtained by
n independent draws from a joint distribution (Alice can access X and Bob can access Y ). In this setting, the mutual
information between X and Y and the secrecy of the key are measured in terms of Shannon entropy. Ahlswede and
Csiszár in [1] and Maurer in [22] proved that the longest shared secret key that Alice and Bob can establish via a
communication protocol is equal to Shannon’s mutual information between X and Y . This problem was extensively
studied by many subsequent works in various restricted settings, see the survey [33]. The optimal communication
complexity of this problem for the general setting remains unknown, though substantial progress has been made (see,
e.g., [34, 19]).
    There is a deep connection between the frameworks of classical information theory (based on Shannon entropy)
and algorithmic information theory (based on Kolmogorov complexity), see the detailed discussions in [18, 32] and in
[10]. It is know, for example, that for every computable distribution of probabilities on {0, 1}∗ the average value of
Kolmogorov complexity of a sampled string is close to Shannon entropy of the distribution, see [10, Theorem 2.10].
In the simplest case, if (Xi , Yi ) for i = 1, . . . , n is a sequence of i.i.d. copies of random pair (X, Y ) distributed in
some finite range, then with a high probability the pair of sampled values

                                                  x ← (X1 . . . Xn ),
                                                  y ← (Y1 . . . Yn )

has the profile of Kolmogorov complexities approximately proportional to the corresponding values of Shannon’s
entropy of (X, Y ),

               C(x) = H(X) · n + o(n), C(y) = H(Y ) · n + o(n), C(x, y) = H(X, Y ) · n + o(n),

where H(·) denotes Shannon’s entropy of a random variable. Using this observation one can transform a secret key
agreement protocol in the sense of Theorem 1(a) in a secret key agreement for Shannon’s settings (e.g., in the sense
of [1, Model S in Definition 2.1] or [22, Definition 1]). We refer the reader to [30] for a more detailed discussion of
parallels between Shannon’s and Kolmogorov’s version of the problem of secret key agreement. We believe that the
correspondence between Shannon entropy and Kolmogorov complexity might help to use Theorem 1 and Theorem 2
as a tool in the classical information theory, including (and especially) one-shot settings.
    Differences between Shannon’s and Kolmogorov’s framework. Let us mention two important distinctions between
Shannon’s and Kolmogorov’s framework. The first one regards ergodicity of the input data. Most results on secret key
agreement in Shannon’s framework are proven with the assumption that the input data are obtained from a sequence of
independent identically distributed random variables (or at least enjoy some properties of ergodicity and stationarity).
In the setting of Kolmogorov complexity we usually deal with inputs obtained in “one shot” without any assumption
of ergodicity of the sources (see, in particular, Example 1 and Example 2 below). Another distinction regards the
definition of correctness of the protocol. The usual paradigm in classical information theory is to require that the
communication protocol works properly for most randomly chosen inputs. In Theorem 1 the protocol works properly
with high probability for each valid pair of input data (this approach is more typical for the theory of communication
complexity).
    Though homologous statements in Shannon’s and Kolmogorov’s frameworks may look very similar, the proofs in
these frameworks are usually pretty different. Despite a close connection between Shannon entropy and Kolmogorov
complexity, many techniques from the classical information theory (designed for the framework of Shannon entropy)
cannot be translated directly in the language of Kolmogorov complexity. Even manipulations with the chain rule


                                                             5
for the mutual information and other standard information inequalities become more difficult in the framework of
Kolmogorov complexity. The difficulty is that Kolmogorov’s version of the chain rule is valid not absolutely but only
up to an additive logarithmic term (see below in Preliminaries the comments on the Kolmogorov–Levin theorem).
Such a minor error term can be harmless when it appears alone, but it causes difficulties when we need to sum up
many copies of similar equalities or inequalities. (In particular, we deal with this difficulty in Section 4.2.)
     Computational complexity of the protocol and potential practical realizations. In this paragraph we discuss the
relation of our settings to secret key agreement protocols that are, or eventually can be, deployed in practice. As
we argue above, the setting including non-computable pre-conditions (the complexity profile of the input data or its
approximation given us as a promise) is not completely unrealistic. Indeed, in practice we may have partial knowledge
of the distribution on the input data sets, so that we might be able to estimate the expected value of Kolmogorov
complexity profile for the inputs of the protocol (approximations of the numbers C(x), C(y), and I(x : y)).
    The universal communication protocol constructed in [30] is theoretically computable (once again, assuming that
the necessary auxiliary data are given as a part of the input) though it is not computationally efficient. This situation
is frequently encountered in information theory. For instance, the secret key agreement protocols constructed by
Ahlswede-Csiszar [1] and Maurer [22] for Shannon’s setting are also computationally non-efficient. These results
reveal the theoretically reachable limits; knowing such a limit, we can try to approach it with more efficient protocols
(valid, perhaps, in more restrictive settings).
    We also observe that the connection between Shannon entropy and Kolmogorov complexity (see above) allows
to transform a secret key agreement protocol in the setting of Theorem 1(a) in a secret key agreement for Shannon’s
settings (in the sense of Model S in [1, Definition 2.1] or [22, Definition 1]). Thus, communication protocols valid
for Kolmogorov’s setting can be used to provide a protocol with similar parameters for the more classical Shannon’s
setting.
     Plugging a secret key in a secure encryption scheme. It is typical for modern theoretical cryptography that fun-
damental concepts and protocols (cryptographic primitives) can be studied separately from each other. Thus, in the
literature on key agreement protocols, and, more generally, on common randomness generation, authors tend to focus
on the problem of producing the shared randomness and do not discuss potential usage of this randomness. In this pa-
per we follow this tradition and ignore various applications of the secret keys resulted from such protocols. However,
we keep in mind that in a typical application we need to achieve the secrecy not for a randomly sampled key per se but
for a message encrypted with such a key. Of course, the conventional encryption schemes guarantee that there is no
leakage of information about the transmitted message assuming that the key used for encryption is kept in secret. This
idea is pretty standard in the classical (probabilistic) settings. A similar framework of information-theoretic cryptog-
raphy based on the notion of Kolmogorov complexity was proposed in [3]. In Section A we briefly recall the basic
definitions of security used in this approach.
     Overview of the proof of the main result. Let us sketch the proof of Theorem 2, the main result of this paper. For
every large enough n we provide a hard pair of inputs (x, y) for which the communication complexity must be large. To
this end we construct explicitly a bipartite graph Gn with N = 2n vertices in each part and with degree of each vertex
D = 2n/2 . Most edges (x, y) in such a graph satisfy the property that C(x) =+ C(y) =+ n and I(x : y) =+ n/2.
Theorem 1 claims that for these x and y Alice and Bob can produce a secret key of length approximately I(x : y)
by exchanging approximately C(x|y) bits. We prove that any protocol will have to exchange for these pairs of inputs
(x, y) approximately the same number of bits, even to agree on a much shorter secret key.
     We fix an arbitrary communication protocol π, take a typical edge (x, y) in Gn and proceed as follows. Let
z = z(x, y) denote the secret key produced by π for inputs (x, y) and t = t(x, y) denote the transcript (sequence of
messages sent by Alice and Bob following the protocol). Our aim is to show that t consists of at least n/2 − O(log n)
bits.
     On the one hand, we show that the mutual information between x and y can only decrease if we add t as a condition,
i.e., I(x : y|t) ≤+ I(x : y), and it must decrease further by at least |z| bits if we add to the condition z. Thus, the gap
between I(x : y|t, z) and I(x : y) must be at least |z|. In this part of the argument we have to overcome the technical
difficulty mentioned above: we cannot use freely the chain rule if the number of rounds in the protocol is unbounded
(to handle this difficulty, we use the lemma from [30] saying that the external information complexity cannot be less
than the internal information complexity, and then apply Muchnik’s theorem on conditional descriptions to reduce a
generic communication protocol to the case where the external and the internal information complexity are equal to


                                                            6
each other).
     On the other hand, we use the expander mixing lemma to show that the gap between I(x : y|w) and I(x : y) is
negligibly small for every w with a small enough Kolmogorov complexity (if C(w) is not greater than 0.5n). This
leads to a contradiction if complexity of w = ht, zi is smaller than 0.5n. By reducing the key size |z| to Θ(log n)
(which only makes the protocol weaker) we conclude that the contradiction can be avoided only if C(t) alone is greater
than 0.5n − O(log n). This means that the transcript must contain at least 0.5n − O(log n) bits, which concludes the
proof. This part of the argument works if the graph Gn has a large spectral gap (a large difference between the first
and the second eigenvalue). This condition is necessary to apply the expander mixing lemma.
     In this sketch, we did not take into account the random bits produced by Alice and Bob. Adding private random bits
to the overall picture complicates the technical details of the argument, but does not lead to any conceptual difficulties.
     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Preliminaries (Section 2) we sketch the basic definitions and
notations for Kolmogorov complexity and communication complexity. In Section 3 we translate information theoretic
properties of pairs (x, y) in the language of graph theory and present three explicit examples of pairs (x, y) satisfying
(2).
    • Example 1 involves finite geometry, x and y are incident points and lines on a finite plane;
    • Example 2 uses a discrete version of the Euclidean distance, x and y are points on the discrete plane with a
      known quasi-Euclidean distance between them;
    • Example 3 involves binary strings x and y with a fixed Hamming distance between them.
The pairs (x, y) from these examples have pretty much the same complexity profile, but the third example has sig-
nificantly different spectral properties. The proof of the main result sketched above applies only to Example 1 and
Example 2 (for Example 3 not only the argument fails but the statement of the main result is false1 ).
    In Section 4 we use a spectral technique to analyze the combinatorial properties of graphs. We combine spec-
tral bounds with information-theoretic arguments and prove our main result (Theorem 2) for the pairs (x, y) from
Example 1 and Example 2 mentioned above.
    In Section 5 we show that the statement of Theorem 2 is not true for the pairs (x, y) from our Example 3: for
those x and y there is no “threshold phenomenon” mentioned above, and the size of the longest achievable secret key
depends continuously on the communication complexity of the protocol, see Theorem 3 and Theorem 4.
    In Appendix we provide a self-contained proof of a version of Newman’s theorem on the reduction of the number
of random bits used in a communication protocol (we prove a variant of this theorem for protocols with independent
sources of private randomness).


2 Preliminaries
Kolmogorov Complexity. Given a Turing machine M with two input tapes and one output tape, we say that p is
a program that prints a string x conditional on y (a description of x conditional on y) if M prints x on the pair of
inputs p, y. Here M can be understood as an interpreter of some programming language that simulates a program p
on a given input y. We denote the length of a binary string p by |p|. The algorithmic complexity of x conditional on y
relative to M is defined as
                                        CM (x|y) = min{|p| : M (p, y) = x}.
It is known that there exists an optimal Turing machine U such that for every other Turing machine M there is a
number cM such that for all x and y
                                           CU (x|y) ≤ CM (x|y) + cM .
Thus, if we ignore the additive constant cM , the algorithmic complexity of x relative to U is minimal. In the rest we
fix an optimal machine U , omit the subscript U and denote

                                                        C(x|y) := CU (x|y).
   1 The revealed difference between Examples 1 and 2 on the one hand and Example 3 on the other hand shows that the optimal communication

between Alice and Bob is not determined by the complexity profile of the input and depends on subtler properties of (x, y).


                                                                    7
This value is called Kolmogorov complexity of x conditional on y. Kolmogorov complexity of a string x is defined as
the Kolmogorov complexity of x conditional on the empty string Λ,

                                                    C(x) := C(x|Λ).

We fix an arbitrary computable bijection between binary strings and all finite tuples of binary strings (i.e., each tuple
is encoded in a single string). Kolmogorov complexity of a tuple hx1 , . . . , xk i is defined as Kolmogorov complexity
of the code of this tuple. For brevity we denote this complexity by C(x1 , . . . , xk ).
    We use the conventional notation

                                          I(x : y) := C(x) + C(y) − C(x, y)

and
                                     I(x : y|z) := C(x|z) + C(y|z) − C(x, y|z).
In this paper we use systematically the Kolmogorov–Levin theorem, [36], which claims that all x, y.

                                   |C(x|y) + C(y) − C(x, y)| = O(log(|x| + |y|)).

It follows, in particular, that

                I(x : y) = C(x) − C(x|y) + O(log(|x| + |y|)) = C(y) − C(y|x) + O(log(|x| + |y|)).

   Since many natural equalities and inequalities for Kolmogorov complexity hold up to a logarithmic term, we
abbreviate some formulas by using the notation A =+ B, A ≤+ B, and A ≥+ B for

                           |A − B| = O(log n), A ≤ B + O(log n), and B ≤ A + O(log n)

respectively, where n is clear from the context. Usually n is the sum of the lengths of all strings involved in the
inequality. In particular, the Kolmogorov–Levin theorem can be rewritten as C(x, y) =+ C(x|y) + C(y).
    We also use the notation

                  I(x : y : z) := C(x) + C(y) + C(z) − C(x, y) − C(x, z) − C(y, z) + C(x, y, z).

Using the Kolmogorov–Levin theorem it is not hard to show that

               I(x : y : z) =+ I(x : y) − I(x : y|z) =+ I(x : z) − I(x : z|y) =+ I(y : z) − I(y : z|x).

These relations can be observed on a Venn-like diagram, as shown in Fig. 1.
   In the usual jargon, x is said to be (almost) incompressible given y if

                                                     C(x|y) ≥+ |x|,

and x and y are said to be independent, if I(x : y) =+ 0.
   For a survey of basic properties of Kolmogorov complexity we refer the reader to the introductory chapters of [18]
and [32].

Communication Complexity. In what follows we use the conventional notion of a communication protocol for
two parties (traditionally called Alice and Bob), see for detailed definitions [17]. In a deterministic communication
protocol the inputs of Alice and Bob are denoted x and y respectively. A deterministic communication protocol is said
to be correct for inputs of length n if for all x, y ∈ {0, 1}n, following this protocol Alice and Bob obtain a valid result
z = z(x, y). The sequence of messages sent by Alice and Bob to each other while following the steps of the protocol
is called a transcript of the communication.
    In the setting of randomized protocols with private sources of randomness, Alice can access x and an additional
string of bits rA , and Bob can access y and an additional string of bits rB . A randomized communication protocol is

                                                            8
                            x                                                            y
                                                         I(x : y|z)
                                      C(x|y, z)                            C(y|x, z)


                                                      I(x : y : z)

                                            I(x : z|y)                I(y : z|x)


                                                         C(z|x, y)




                                                            z
Figure 1: Complexity profile for a triple x, y, z. On this diagram it is easy to observe several standard equations:
• C(x) = C(x|y, z) + I(x : y|z) + I(x : z|y) + I(x : y : z)
  (the sum of all quantities inside the left circle representing x);
• I(x : y) = I(x : y|z) + I(x : y : z)
  (the sum of the quantities in the intersection of the left and the right circles representing x and y respectively);
• C(x, y) = C(x|y, z) + C(y|x, z) + I(x : y|z) + I(x : z|y) + I(y : z|x) + I(x : y : z)
  (the sum of all quantities inside the union of the left and the right circles);
• C(x|y) = C(x|y, z) + I(x : z|y)
  (the sum of the quantities inside the left circle but outside the right one);
and so on; all these equations are valid up to O(log(|x| + |y| + |z|)).




                                                             9
said to be correct for inputs of length n if for all x, y ∈ {0, 1}n and for most rA and rB , following this protocol Alice
and Bob obtain a valid result z = z(x, rA , y, rB ).
    In a secret key agreement protocol, correctness of the result z means that (i) z is of the required size and (ii) it
is almost incompressible even given the transcript of the communication. That is, if t = t(x, rA , y, rB ) denotes the
transcript of the communication, then C(z|t) must be close enough to |z|. Note that in this setting the transcript t and
the final result z are not necessarily functions of the inputs x, y, they may depend also on the random bits used by
Alice and Bob. For a more detailed discussion of this setting we refer the reader to [30].
    Communication complexity of a protocol is the maximal length of its transcript, i.e., max |t(x, rA , y, rB )|.
                                                                                            x,rA ,y,rB
    In this paper we deal with communication protocols that can be meaningfully applied only to pairs of inputs with
a special property (in particular, the mutual information between the inputs of Alice and Bob must be large enough).
However, we assume that by definition a communication protocol can be formally applied to any inputs with any
values of random bits. This means that with any input data a protocol produces some communication transcript, and
each party ends up with some outcome.
    In communication complexity, it is typical to study a communication protocol as a scheme defined for inputs of
one fixed length. In this paper, we prefer to deal with protocols that are defined for inputs of all lengths. We always
assume that the communication protocols under consideration are uniformly computable: there are algorithms for
Alice and Bob that compute the messages to be sent by the parties, and produce at the end of the protocol the final
result. Uniformity means that the same algorithms can be used for inputs of all lengths. This approach simplifies
the formal definition of secrecy — we may assume that the communication protocol (an algorithm that computes this
protocol) is a finite object, and this object is known to Alice, Bob, and to the eavesdropper (see also Remark 1 on p. 4).
We may ignore the description of a protocol in the definition of secrecy, since the information on a finite object affects
only additive constant terms in all expressions with Kolmogorov complexity.

The Amount of Randomness in Communication Protocols. In the usual definition of a randomized communi-
cation protocol, Alice and Bob are allowed to use any number of random bits. However, for most settings, it can
be shown that the amount of randomness in use can be reduced without loss of the performance of the protocol. It is
known that for a communication protocol computing a function of Alice’ and Bob’s inputs with help of a public source
of randomness, the number of used random bits can be reduced to O(log n) (where n is an upper bound on the length
of the inputs of the protocol) at the price of only a minor degradation of the error probability, see Newman’s theorem
[28]. We cannot apply Newman’s theorem directly in our setting. The main reason is that we care about not only the
result obtained by Alice and Bob but also about the relation between the final result (the secret key) and the transcript
of the communication (the secrecy condition). In general, we cannot reduce the number of random bits used in such
a protocol to O(log n), but we will see that O(n) random bits is always enough. In an arbitrary protocol of this type
we cannot delegate the task of generating the random bits to only one participant of the protocol, and Alice and Bob
must be careful when communicating the produced random bits to each other. Indeed, sending the random bits via
the communication channel not only affects the communication complexity of the protocol but may also reveal to the
eavesdropper some information on the resulting secret key. Thus, another technical difficulty with our communication
protocols is that we have to deal with two private sources of randomness (we need to handle separately the random
bits produced by Alice and the ones produced by Bob). However, the ideas used in the proof of Newman’s theorem
(random sampling) can be adapted to this setting. We are not aware of such results being previously published, so in
what follows we present it in more detail.
    We deal with two-party communication protocols where Alice and Bob are given inputs x and y respectively
(usually of the same length n) and can use any number of private random bits. Following the protocol, the parties
exchange several messages (this sequence of messages is a transcript t of the protocol), and end up with some results
— final answers z1 (the answer of Alice) and z2 (the answer of Bob). For every pair of inputs (x, y), a randomized
communication protocol can produce with different probabilities different answers z1 , z2 and different transcripts t.
(We usually require that Alice and Bob obtain with a high probability the same answer, i.e., z1 = z2 . However, in
general the results obtained by two parties can be different.) These outcomes of the protocol can be valid or invalid. In
the classical settings, where Alice and Bob compute some function F (x, y), the results are valid if z1 = z2 = F (x, y).
In the setting where Alice and Bob compute a relation R, an answer zi is valid if the relation R(x, y, zi ) is true. In
a secret key agreement protocol the condition of validity is more involved: for each admissible pair of inputs (x, y)


                                                           10
                               x                                                        y

                                C(x|y) = 0.5n        I(x : y) = 0.5n       C(y|x) = 0.5n




Figure 2: A diagram for the complexity profile of two strings x, y: from the Kolmogorov–Levin theorem we have
C(x) =+ C(x|y) + I(x : y) =+ n, C(y) =+ C(y|x) + I(x : y) =+ n, and C(x, y) =+ C(x|y) + C(y|x) + I(x :
y) =+ 1.5n.


(technically, for all x and y satisfying (2)) the outcome of the protocol is valid if
    • answers z1 and z2 are equal to each other;
    • Kolmogorov complexity of the obtained key z1 = z2 is bigger than some fixed threshold (e.g., we may require
      that Kolmogorov complexity of the key is close to I(x : y));
    • the information in the transcript on the obtained secret key is smaller than some fixed threshold (e.g., we may
      require that C(zi |t) ≥ |zi | − O(log n)).
Let π be a two-party communication protocol of secret key agreement with private randomness such that for all inputs
x and y satisfying (2) with a probability > 1 − ε the produced answers z1 , z2 and the transcript t are valid in the sense
explained above. We may assume that the transcript is reasonably short (its length is at most O(n), as it is the case
for all protocols of interest). Under this assumption, we argue that there is another communication protocol π ′ that
produces valid outcomes with almost the same probability and uses only O(n) random bits.
Proposition 1. Let ε1 , ε2 be positive numbers, and let π be a two-party communication protocol of secret key agree-
ment with private randomness such that for all inputs x and y satisfying (2) with a probability > 1 − ε1 the produced
answers z1 , z2 and the transcript t are valid in the sense explained above. Assume that the lengths of the produced
answers z1 and z2 is always bounded by O(n) and communication complexity of the protocol is O(n). Then there
exists a communication protocol π ′ that produces valid outcomes with a probability > 1 − ε1 − ε2 , and Alice and Bob
use at most O(n + log(1/ε2 )) private random bits.
    Moreover, if the original protocol was uniformly computable (there is an algorithm that implements the protocol
for all inputs of all lengths), then the new protocol also can be made uniformly computable.
    Notice that we do not assume that the notion of validity of the output of a protocol is computable (we cannot assume
that because Kolmogorov complexity and the mutual information are not computable). However, we do assume that
the protocol is defined for all pairs of inputs (even on those which do not satisfy (2) and for which the outcome of the
communication is meaningless). The proof of Proposition 1 uses the standard idea of random sampling. The proof is
deferred to Appendix.


3 From Information-Theoretic Properties to Combinatorics of Graphs
To study the information-theoretic properties of a pair (x, y) we will embed this pair of strings in a large set of pairs
that are in some sense similar to each other. We will do it in the language of bipartite graphs. The information-theoretic

                                                            11
properties of the initial pair (x, y) will be determined by the combinatorial properties of these graphs. In their turn, the
combinatorial properties of these graphs will be proven using the spectral technique. In this section we present three
examples of (x, y) corresponding to three different constructions of graphs. In the next sections we will study the
spectral and combinatorial properties of these graphs and, accordingly, the information-theoretic properties of these
pairs (x, y).
    We start with a simple lemma that establishes a correspondence between information-theoretic and combinatorial
language for the properties of pairs (x, y).
Lemma 1. Let G = (L ∪ R, E) be a bipartite graph such that |L| = |R| = 2n+O(1) and the degree of each vertex is
D = 20.5n+O(log n) . We assume that this graph has an explicit construction in the sense that the complete description
of this graph (its adjacency matrix) has Kolmogorov complexity O(log n). Then most2 (x, y) ∈ E (pairs of vertices
connected by an edge) have the following complexity profile:
                             
                                  n − O(log n) ≤ C(x)           ≤ n + O(log n),
                                   n − O(log n) ≤       C(y)     ≤ n + O(log n),                                   (3)
                             
                                1.5n − O(log n) ≤ C(x, y) ≤ 1.5n + O(log n)

(which is equivalent to the triple of equalities in (2), see Fig. 2).
Proof. There are D · |L| = D · |R| = 21.5n+O(log n) edges in the graph. Each of them can be specified by its index
in the list of elements of E, and this index should consists of only log |E| bits; the set E itself can be described by
O(log n) bits. Therefore,
                                  C(x, y) ≤ log |E| + O(log n) = 1.5n + O(log n).
For most (x, y) ∈ E this bound is tight. Indeed, for every number c there are at most 21.5n−c objects with complexity
less than 1.5n − c. Therefore, for all but |E|/2O(log n) = 21.5n−O(log n) edges in E we have

                                                     C(x, y) ≥ 1.5n − O(log n).                                                            (4)

Similarly, for each x ∈ L and for each y ∈ R we have

               C(x) ≤ log |L| + O(log n) = n + O(log n), C(y) ≤ log |R| + O(log n) = n + O(log n).

To prove that for most pairs (x, y) these bounds are also tight, we use the fact that each vertex in the graph has D
neighbors. A pair (x, y) ∈ E can be specified by a description of x combined with the index of y in the list of all
neighbors of x. It follows that

                              C(x, y) ≤ C(x) + log D + O(log n) = C(x) + 0.5n + O(log n).

Therefore, if C(x) is significantly (by at least ω(log n)) less than n, then C(x, y) must be significantly less than 1.5n.
But we have seen that (4) is true for the vast majority of pairs (x, y). Hence, for the vast majority of pairs we have
C(x) ≥ n − O(log n). A similar argument implies that for most pairs (x, y) ∈ E we have C(y) ≥ n − O(log n).
Remark 2. In a graph satisfying the conditions of Lemma 1 each vertex has D = 20.5n+O(log n) neighbors. Therefore,
for all (x, y) ∈ E we have

                                    C(x|y) ≤ 0.5n + O(log n), C(y|x) ≤ 0.5n + O(log n),

(given x, we can specify y by its index in the list of all neighbors of x and vice-versa.) From Lemma 1 and the
Kolmogorov–Levin theorem it follows that for most (x, y) ∈ E these inequalities are tight, i.e., C(x|y) = 0.5n ±
O(log n) and C(y|x) = 0.5n ± O(log n).
   2 For every d > 0, we can make the fraction of such pairs greater than is 1 − 1/nd by choosing the constants hidden in the terms O(log n) in

(3).




                                                                     12
                                                                               |E|
Remark 3. The density of edges in the graph G = (L ∪ R, E) (i.e., the ratio |L|·|R| ) corresponds on the logarithmic
scale to the mutual information between x and y. Indeed, the equations in (3) mean that for most (x, y) ∈ E
                                   |E|            2C(x,y)+O(log n)
                                           = C(x)+O(log n) C(y)+O(log n) = 2−I(x:y)±O(log n) .
                                 |L| · |R|  2             ·2
Below we pay attention to the density of edges in the induced subgraphs of G. We will see that this ratio corresponds
in some sense to the property of “extractability” of the mutual information. We will show that for some specific graphs
G satisfying Lemma 1, in all large enough induced subgraphs, the density of edges is close to 2−I(x:y).
Example 1 (discrete plane). Let Fq be a finite field of cardinality q = 2n . Consider the set L of points on plane F2q
and the set R of non-vertical lines, which can be represented as affine functions y = ax − b for (a, b) ∈ F2q . Let
G = (L ∪ R, E) be the bipartite graph where a point (x0 , y0 ) is connected to a line y = ax − b if and only if it is on
the line i.e. y0 = ax0 − b. Clearly |L| = |R| = 22n . The degree of each vertex is 2n since there are exactly q points
on each line and there are exactly q lines on each point. In the sequel we denote this graph by GP l
                                                                                                 n .
    This graph (or its adjacency matrix) can be constructed effectively when the field Fq is given. We assume a
standard construction of the field F2n to be fixed. Thus, the graph is uniquely defined by the binary representation of
n. Therefore, we need only O(log n) bits to describe the graph (as a finite object). Lemma 1 applies to this graph, so
for most (x, y) ∈ E the equalities in (3) are satisfied.
    The graph from Example 1 was used in [24, 6] to construct an example of a pair with non-extractable mutual
information. We will use a similar property of this graph (although formulated differently and proven by a different
technique, see Remark 9 below).
Example 2 (discrete Euclidean distance). Let Fq be a finite field of order q, where q is an odd prime power. Let us
define the distance function between two points x = (x1 , x2 ), y = (y1 , y2 ) in F2q as

                                                dist(x, y) = (x1 − y1 )2 + (x2 − y2 )2 .
For every r ∈ Fq \ {0} we define the finite Euclidean distance graph G = (L ∪ R, E) as follows: L = R = F2q , and
                                                    E = {(x, y)) | dist(x, y) = r}.
Obviously, |L| = |R| = q 2 .
   This graph is regular: for each point x ∈ F2q the number of neighbors is equal by definition to the number of points
y = x + u where the coordinates of u = (u1 , u2 ) satisfy u21 + u22 = r. This number depends on q and r but not on a
specific x. It can be shown that for all r 6= 0 the degree of this graph is Θ(q), and |E| = Θ(q 3 ), see [23].
   For definiteness, we can fix for each n one qn such that ⌈log(qn2 )⌉ = n. Since the prime numbers are dense
enough3, for every large enough integer n we can fix a suitable prime number qn .
   For the defined above graph G = (L ∪ R, E) for this Fqn we have |L| = |R| = 2n+O(1) and |E| = 21.5n+O(1) ,
and Lemma 1 applies to this graph. We should also fix the value of r. Any non-zero element of Fqn would serve the
purpose. For simplicity we may assume that r = 1. Thereafter we denote this graph by GEuc   n .

    In our next example we use the following standard lemma.
Lemma 2. Denote h(t) := −t log t − (1 − t) log(1 − t). For any real number γ ∈ (0, 1) and every positive integer
    m
m, γm  = 2h(γ)m+O(log m) .

Example 3 (Hamming distance). We choose θ ∈ (0, 21 ) such that h(θ) = 0.5. Let L = R = {0, 1}n. We define the
bipartite graph G = (L ∪ R, E) so that two strings (vertices) from L and R are connected if and only if the Hamming
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                               n
distance between them is θn. Clearly |L| = |R| = 2n . By Lemma 2 the degree of each vertex is D = θn               =
20.5n+O(log n) . Lemma 1 applies to this graph. Therefore, for most (x, y) ∈ E we have (3). Subsequently we denote
this graph by GHam
                 θ,n .
  3 It is known, see [27], that for all x ≥ 25 there exists a prime number between x and (1 + 1 )x. Since (1 + 1 )2 < 2, this implies that for all
                                                                                              5                5
n ≥ 10 we can find a square of a prime number between 2n−1 and 2n (starting, for example, with the number 23 whose square lies between 29
and 210 ).


                                                                       13
    We are interested in properties of (x, y) that are much subtler than those from Lemma 1. For example, we would
like to know whether there exists a z materializing a part of the mutual information between x and y (i.e., such that
C(z|x) ≈ 0, C(z|y) ≈ 0, and C(z) ≫ 0). These subtler properties are not determined completely by the “complexity
profile” of (x, y) shown in Fig. 2. In particular, we will see that some of these properties are different for pairs (x, y)
from Example 1 and Example 2 on the one hand and from Example 3 on the other hand. In the next section we will
show that some information-theoretic properties of (x, y) are connected with the spectral properties of these graphs.

Randomized Communication Protocols in the Information-Theoretic Framework. In our main results we dis-
cuss communication protocols with two parties, Alice and Bob, who are given inputs x and y. We will assume that
Alice and Bob are given the ends of some edge (x, y) from GP       l        Euc            Ham
                                                                 n , from Gn , or from Gθ,n .
    We admit randomized communication protocols with private sources of randomness. Technically this means that
besides the inputs x and y, Alice and Bob are given strings of random bits, rA and rB respectively. We assume that
both rA and rB are binary strings from {0, 1}m. Without loss of generality we may assume that m = poly(n), see
Proposition 1.
    It is helpful to represent the entire inputs available to Alice and Bob as an edge in a graph. The data available to
Alice are x′ := hx, rA i and the data available to Bob are y ′ := hy, rB i. We can think of the pair (x′ , y ′ ) as an edge in
the graph
                                                   d
                                                   GP l := GP l ⊗ K
                                                                     M,M
                                                    n         n

(if (x, y) is an edge in GP l
                          n ), or
                                                 [
                                                 GEuc := GEuc ⊗ K
                                                                  M,M
                                                  n       n

(if (x, y) is an edge in GEuc
                          n ), or
                                                \
                                                GHam := GHam ⊗ K
                                                 θ,n     θ,n     M,M

(if, respectively, (x, y) is an edge in GHam                                                       m
                                         θ,n ). Here KM,M is a complete bipartite graph with M = 2 vertices in each
part, and ⊗ denotes the usual tensor product of bipartite graphs.
                                                                                                       d
     Keeping in mind Example 1, Example 2, and Example 3, we obtain that for most edges (x′ , y ′ ) in G         [
                                                                                                        P l , in GEuc ,
                                                                                                        n         n
and in G \Ham we have
         θ,n
                                              C(x′ )   =+        n   +      m,
                                                  ′
                                              C(y )    =+        n   +      m,
                                             C(x , y ) =+
                                                ′ ′
                                                                1.5n +      2m.


4 Bounds with the Spectral Method
4.1 Information Inequalities from the Graph Spectrum
In this section we show that the spectral properties of a graph can be used to prove information-theoretic inequalities
for pairs (x, y) corresponding to the edges in this graph. We start with a reminder of the standard considerations
involving the spectral gap of a graph.
    Let G = (L ∪ R, E) be a regular bipartite graph of degree D on 2N vertices (|L| = |R| = N , each edge e ∈ E
connects one vertex from L with another one from R, and each vertex is incident to exactly D edges). The adjacency
matrix of such a graph is a (2N ) × (2N ) zero-one matrix H of the form
                                                                
                                                          0 J
                                                         J⊤ 0

(the N × N submatrix J is usually called bi-adjacency matrix of the graph; Jab = 1 if and only if there is an edge
between the a-th vertex in L and the b-th vertex in R). Let

                                                  λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥ . . . ≥ λ2N .



                                                             14
be the eigenvalues of H. Since H is symmetric, all λi are real numbers. It is well known that for a bipartite graph
the spectrum is symmetric, i.e., λi = −λ2N −i+1 for each i. As the degree of each vertex in the graph is equal to D,
we have λ1 = −λ2N = D. We focus on the second eigenvalue of the graph λ2 ; we are interested in graphs such that
λ2 ≪ λ1 (that is, the spectral gap is large).
Remark 4. If the bi-adjacency matrix of the graph is symmetric, then the spectrum of the (2N ) × (2N ) matrix H
consists of the eigenvalues of the N × N matrix J and their opposites. This observation makes the computation of the
eigenvalues simpler.
     It is immediately clear that the bi-adjacency matrices of the bipartite graphs from Example 2 and Example 3 are
symmetric. For Example 1 this is also true, since a point with coordinates (x, y) and a line indexed (a, b) are incident
if a · x − y − b = 0.
   In the rest we will use the fact that for the graphs from Example 1 and Example 2 the value of λ2 is much less than
λ1 = D:
Lemma 3 (see lemma 5.1 in [29]). For the √bipartite graph GP l
                                                           n from Example 1 (incident points and lines on plane
 2                                    √
Fq ) the second eigenvalue is equal to q = D.
Remark 5. We prove the main result of this paper (Theorem 2) for the construction of (x, y) from Example 1. The
same result can be proven for a similar (and even somewhat more symmetric) construction: we can take lines and
points in the projective plane over a finite field. The construction based on the projective plane has spectral properties
similar to Lemma 3.
                                                          Euc
                                                       √ Gn from Example 2 (a discrete version of the Euclidean
Lemma 4 (see theorem 3 in [23]). For the bipartite graph
                                              √
distance) the second eigenvalue is equal to O( q) = O( D).
Remark 6. For the tensor product of two graphs G1 ⊗ G2 , the eigenvalues can be obtained as pairwise products of
                                                 d
the eigenvalues of G1 and G2 . So, for the graph G P l (see p. 14) the eigenvalues are all pairwise products of the graph
                                                   n
                                Pl
of incidents lines and
                    √  points G n   and the complete   bipartite graph KM,M . For GP    l
                                                                                       n the first eigenvalue D and the
second eigenvalue D. The bi-adjacency matrix of KM,M is the M × M matrix with 1’s in each cell. It is not hard
to see that its maximal eigenvalue is M and                                                                  dP l is equal
                                          √ all other eigenvalues are 0. Therefore, Euc
                                                                                     the first eigenvalue of Gn
to M D and the second one is equal to M D. A similar observation is valid for Gn .
    It is well known that the graphs with a large gap between the first and the second eigenvalues have nice combi-
natorial properties (vertex expansion, strong connectivity, mixing). One version of this property is expressed by the
expander mixing lemma, which was observed by several researchers (see, e.g., [13, lemma 2.5] or [2, theorem 9.2.1]).
We use a variant of the expander mixing lemma for bipartite graphs (see [9]):
Lemma 5 (Expander Mixing Lemma for bipartite graphs). Let G = (L ∪ R, E) be a regular bipartite graph, where
|L| = |R| = N and each vertex has degree D. Then for each A ⊆ L and B ⊆ R we have

                                                   D · |A| · |B|     p
                                      E(A, B) −                  ≤ λ2 |A| · |B|,
                                                        N

where λ2 is the second largest eigenvalue of the adjacency matrix of G and E(A, B) is the number of edges between
A and B.

Remark 7. In what follows we apply Lemma 5 to the graphs with a large gap between D and λ2 . This technique
is pretty common. See, e.g., [35, Theorem 3] where the Expander Mixing Lemma was applied to the graph from
Example 1. Due to technical reasons, we will need to apply the Expander Mixing Lemma not only to the graph GP
                                                                                                            n
                                                                                                              l
                      Euc
from Example 1 and Gn from Example 2 but also to the tensor product of these graphs and a complete bipartite
graph, see below.
   In what follows we use a straightforward corollary of the expander mixing lemma:



                                                           15
                                                                                                        √
Corollary 1. (a) Let G = (L ∪ R, E) be a graph satisfying the same conditions as in Lemma 1 with λ2 = O( D).
Then for A ⊆ L and B ⊆ R such that |A| · |B| ≥ N 2 /D we have
                                                                      
                                                         D · |A| · |B|
                                      |E(A, B)| = O                      .                                (5)
                                                              N

     (b) Let G = (L ∪ R, E) be the same graph as in (a), and let KM,M be a complete bipartite graph for some
integer M . Define the tensor product of these graphs Ĝ := G ⊗ KM,M (this is a bipartite graph (L̂ ∪ R̂, Ê) with
|L̂| = |R̂| = N · M , with degree D · M ).
     Then for all subsets A ⊂ L̂ and B ⊂ R̂ such that |A| · |B| ≥ (M N )2 /D inequality (5) holds true.
Proof. (a) From Lemma 5 it follows that
                                                    D · |A| · |B|     p
                                      |E(A, B)| ≤                 + λ2 |A| · |B|                                     (6)
                                                         N
                     √
Assuming that λ2 = O( D) and |A| · |B| ≥ N 2 /D we conclude that the first term on the right-hand side of (6) is
dominating:                                                         
                                      p                D · |A| · |B|
                                    λ2 |A| · |B| = O
                                                            N
Given this and Lemma 5 we obtain (5).
    (b) Let us recall that the eigenvalues of G ⊗ KM,M are pairwise products of the √
                                                                                    eigenvalues of G and KM,M .
Therefore, the maximal eigenvalue of G ⊗ KM,M is M D and the second one is O(M D), see Remark 6. The rest
of the proof is similar to the case (a).
    Now we translate the combinatorial property of mixing in the information-theoretic language. We show that a
large spectral gap in a graph implies some inequality for Kolmogorov complexity that is valid for each pair of adjacent
vertex in this graph. We do it in the next lemma, which is the main technical ingredient of the proof of our main result.
Lemma 6. Let G = (L ∪ R, E) be a bipartite    √ graph satisfying the same conditions as in Lemma 1, with |L| =
|R| = N√ = 2n+O(1) and degree D = O( N ). Assume also that the second largest eigenvalue of this graph is
λ2 = O( D). Let KM,M be a complete bipartite graph for some M = 2m . Define the tensor product of these graphs
Ĝ := G ⊗ KM,M .
    For each edge (x, y) in Ĝ and for all w one of the following inequalities is true: either

                                     C(x|w) + C(y|w) ≤ 1.5n + 2m + O(log k)                                          (7)

or
                                            I(x : y|w) ≥ 0.5n − O(log k),                                            (8)
where k = n + m.
Remark 8. Note that Lemma 6 applies to the graphs from Example 1 and Example 2 due to Lemma 3 and Lemma 4
respectively.
Proof. Denote a = C(x|w) and b = C(y|w). If a + b ≤ 1.5n + 2m + O(log k), then (7) is true and we are done. In
what follows we assume that a + b > 1.5n + 2m + c log k (for some constant c to be specified later), and our aim is
to prove (8).
    Let A be the set of all x′ ∈ L such that C(x′ |w) ≤ a and B be the set of all y ′ ∈ R such that C(y ′ |w) ≤ b. Note
that by definition A contains x and B contains y. In what follows we show that for all pairs (x′ , y ′ ) ∈ (A × B) ∩ E
we have C(x′ , y ′ ) ≤+ a + b − 0.5n.
Claim 1. We have log |A| − a ≤ O(log k) and log |B| − b ≤ O(log k).
Proof of the claim 1: We start with a proof of the upper bounds for the cardinalities of A and B. Each element of A
can be obtained from w with a programs (description) of length at most a. Therefore, the number of elements in A is

                                                           16
not greater than the number of such descriptions, which is at most 1 + 2 + . . . + 2a < 2a+1 . Similarly, the number of
elements in B is less than 2b+1 .
    Now we proceed with the lower bounds. Given w and an integer number a we can take all programs of size at most
a, apply them to w and run in parallel. As some programs converge, we will discover one by one all elements in A
(though we do not know when the last stopping program terminates, and when the last element of A is revealed). The
element x must appear in this enumeration. Therefore, we can identify it given its position in this list, which requires
only log |A| bits. Thus, we have
                                           C(x|w) ≤ log |A| + O(log k)
(the logarithmic additive term is needed to specify the binary expansion of a). On the other hand, we know that
C(x|w) = a. It follows that log |A| ≥ a − O(log k), and we are done. The lower bound log |B| ≥ b − O(log k) can
be proven in a similar way.
Claim 2. The number of edges between A and B is rather small:
                                                                       
                                                          D · |A| · |B|
                                    |(A × B) ∩ E| ≤ O                     .
                                                               N

Proof of the claim 2: By Claim 1 we have |A| = 2a+O(log k) and |B| = 2b+O(log k) . Since a + b > 1.5n + 2m + c log k
we obtain
                             |A| · |B| = 2a+b+c log k±O(log k) > 21.5n+2m = (N M )2 /D
(here we fix the constant c: the term O(log k) can be negative but it should be compensated by the positive term
c log k). Hence, we can apply Corollary 1 (b) and obtain the claim.
Claim 3. For all pairs (x′ , y ′ ) ∈ (A × B) ∩ E we have

                                       C(x′ , y ′ |w) ≤ log |E(A, B)| + O(log k).

Proof of the claim 3: Given a string w and the integer numbers a, b, we can run in parallel all programs of length at
most a and b (applied to w) and reveal one by one all elements of A and B. If we have in addition the integer number
n, then we can construct the graph G and enumerate all the edges between A and B in the graph G. The pair (x′ , y ′ )
must appear in this enumeration. Therefore, we can identify it by its ordinal number in this enumeration. Thus,

                                       C(x′ , y ′ |w) ≤ log |E(A, B)| + O(log k),

where the logarithmic term involves the binary expansions of n, a, and b.
   Now we can finish the proof of the lemma. By claim 3, we have

                                       C(x′ , y ′ |w) ≤ log |E(A, B)| + O(log k)

for all pairs x′ , y ′ ∈ (A × B) ∩ E. By using claim 2, we obtain

                            C(x′ , y ′ |w) ≤ log D + log |A| + log |B| − log N + O(log k).

With claim 1 this rewrites to
                                       C(x′ , y ′ |w) ≤ a + b − 0.5n + O(log k).
Now we apply this inequality to the initial x and y:

                          I(x : y|w)    =+    C(x′ |w) + C(y ′ |w) − C(x′ , y ′ |w)
                                        ≥+    a + b − (a + b − 0.5n) + O(log k) =+ 0.5n.




                                                          17
Remark 9. The property of “extractability” of the mutual information for neighboring vertices in the graph from
Example 1 was studied in [24, 6]. Instead of the expander mixing lemma, these papers used the fact that this graph
has no cycles of length 4 (since two lines cannot intersect at two different points). With this technique, it was proven
in [6] that for the same x and y as above and for every w

                               C(w) ≤ 2C(x|w) + 2C(y|w) + O(log(|x| + |y| + |w|)).                                        (9)

(Technically, [6] only considered the case m = 0; however, the same argument applies to an arbitrary m, [37].)
This result is incomparable with Lemma 1. On the one hand, (9) is weaker then (8). Indeed, (8) together with
I(x : y) =+ 0.5n imply
                               C(w) ≤ C(x|w) + C(y|w) + O(log(|x| + |y| + |w|))
(without factors 2 in the right-hand side). On the other hand, (9) is true for every w, while (8) is proven only under the
assumption that (7) is false.
    The bound (9) is not strong enough to prove our main theorem.

4.2 Information Inequalities for a Secret Key Agreement
In this section we prove some information-theoretic inequalities that hold true for the objects involved in a communi-
cation protocol: the inputs given to Alice and Bob, the transcript of the communication, and the final result computed
by Alice and Bob.
    The intuitive meaning of the argument below can be explained as follows. We would like to reduce every transcript
of a communication protocol to a “natural” form, where the complexity profile for the triple

                                            hAlice’ data, Bob’s data, transcripti

looks as it is shown in the diagram in Fig. 3. The key property of this profile is that the triple mutual information

                          I(Alice’ data : Bob’s data : transcript) =
                          I(Alice’ data : Bob’s data) − I(Alice’ data : Bob’s data | transcript)

is equal to 0 (as usual, within a logarithmic precision). In Shannon’s entropy setting, a similar property would mean
that the external information complexity of the protocol is equal to its internal information complexity. In other words,
the quantity of information learned from the transcript by the eavesdropper is equal to the sum of information quantities
learned from the transcript by Alice and Bob.
    In Fig. 3, the transcript is split into two components, tA and tB . These components are independent with each
other (the mutual information I(tA : tB ) is negligibly small), one of them is independent of Alice’ data and the other
one is independent of Bob’s data. Intuitively, one of these component should consist of all messages of Alice, and the
other one should consist of all messages of Bob.
    The diagram in Fig. 3 represents well enough the situation for “natural” examples of communication protocols.
Indeed, in naturally constructed examples, each message of Alice can be chosen in such a way that it has virtually no
mutual information with Bob’s input (even given all the previous messages of the protocol as a condition). Similarly,
each message of Bob can be chosen in such a way that it has virtually no mutual information with Alice’ input (again,
given all the previous messages of the protocol as a condition).
    In general case, the transcript of the protocol cannot be represented as shown in Fig. 3. Indeed, Alice may put in
her messages some information that is already known to Bob, and vice-versa. However, it seems plausible that the
protocols which are not natural (in the sense explained above) are also not optimal in the sense of communication
complexity. Indeed, if Alice and Bob send to each other excessive information, then it looks believable that we can
“compress” excessively long messages of Alice and Bob and, therefore, make the communication complexity smaller.
The aim of this section is to formulate and prove a more precise version of this intuitive guess.
    We will prove that the transcript t of every communication protocol can be reduced in some sense to the form shown
in Fig. 3. More precisely, we will extract from a generic transcript t a digital fingerprint t′ so that the complexity profile
of the triple hAlice’ data, Bob’s data, t′ i looks as shown in Fig. 3. Moreover, this “extraction” preserves all essential
information of the original transcript: Alice and Bob can retrieve from the new t′ (almost) the same information as

                                                             18
                              Alice’ data                                          Bob’s data

                                                            ≥0
                                                 ≥0                    ≥0

                                                             0
                                                     tA              tB

                                                             0




                                                   transcript = htA , tB i

          Figure 3: Complexity profile for Alice’ and Bob’s data and a “natural” communication transcript.


they could obtain from the original transcript t. The formal version of this statement is given in Lemma 8(e), see
below.
    The reduction of an arbitrary communication transcript t to its compressed version t′ is quite non-trivial, especially
for protocols with an unbounded number of rounds. We use in the proof two important technical tools: Muchnik’s
technique of conditional descriptions (see Proposition 2) and the lemma on the non-negativity of the triple mutual
information for communication transcripts (see Lemma 7).
    The following lemma was proven in [30] (see also a similar result proven for Shannon entropy in [16]):
Lemma 7 ([30]). Let us consider a deterministic communication protocol with two parties. Denote by x and y
the inputs of the parties, and denote by t = t(x, y) the transcript of the communication between the parties. Then
I(x : y : t) ≥+ 0, see Fig. 4.

Proposition 2 (Muchnik’s theorem on conditional descriptions, [25]). (a) Let a and b be arbitrary strings of length at
most n. Then there exists a string p of length C(a|b) such that
    • C(p|a) = O(log n),
    • C(a|p, b) = O(log n).
(b) Let a, b1 , b2 be arbitrary strings of length at most n. Then there exist strings q1 , q2 of length C(a|b1 ) and C(a|b2 )
respectively such that
    • C(qj |a) = O(log n),
    • C(a|bj , qj ) = O(log n)
for j = 1, 2; we may also require that one of the strings q1 , q2 is a prefix of another one. As usual, the constants in
O(log n)-notation do not depend on n.
Remark 10. In Proposition 2(a) the string p can be interpreted as an almost (up to O(log n)) shortest description of
a conditional on b that satisfies a nice additional property: it can be easily computed given a. In other words, p is a
“digital fingerprint” of a (it is easy to obtain p from a) such that we can reconstruct a given this fingerprint and b.
    Similarly, in Proposition 2(b) the strings q1 and q2 can be interpreted as almost shortest descriptions of a given b1
and b2 respectively. The non-trivial part of (b) is the requirement that one of the strings q1 , q2 (the shorter one) is a
prefix of the other (longer) one. In particular, if C(a|b1 ) = C(a|b2 ), then q1 = q2 , and we can use one and the same
shortest program to transform b1 or b2 into a.


                                                             19
                              x                                                         y
                                                          I(x : y|t)
                                        C(x|t, y)                           C(y|t, x)


                                                            ≥0

                                             I(t : x|y)                I(t : y|x)


                                                              0




                                                              t
Figure 4: Complexity profile for inputs x, y, and the transcript t of a communication protocol with given inputs. Note
that C(t|x, y) is negligibly small (we can compute t by simulating the communication protocol) and I(x : y|t)≤+ I(x :
y) due to Lemma 7.


    Since p in Proposition 2(a) is an almost optimal description of a given b, we can conclude that p is almost incom-
pressible given b, i.e., C(p|b) = |p| + O(log n). Similar properties hold true for q1 and q2 in Proposition 2(b): these
strings are almost incompressible conditional on b1 and b2 respectively. We will use this observation in the proof of
the next lemma.
    This proposition can be proven by an ad hoc argument, [25], or by using the generic technique of extractor, as
shown in [5]. For a discussion of different proofs of this theorem we refer the reader to [26].
   Now we can prove the main technical result of this section.
Lemma 8. Assume a deterministic communication protocol for two parties on inputs x and y gives transcript t and
denote n = C(x, y, t).
(a) C(t|x, y) = O(log n).
(b) C(t|x) =+ I(t : y|x).
(c) C(t|y) =+ I(t : x|y).
(d) C(t|x) + C(t|y) =+ I(t : x|y) + I(t : y|x) + O(log n) ≤+ C(t).
(e) There exist tx and ty such that
    • C(tx ) = C(t|x) and C(ty ) = C(t|y),
    • C(tx |t) = O(log n) and C(ty |t) = O(log n),
    • C(t|tx , x) = O(log n) and C(t|ty , y) = O(log n),
    • C(tx , ty ) =+ C(tx ) + C(ty ).
Speaking informally, tx and ty are “fingerprints” of t that can play the roles of (almost) shortest descriptions of
t conditional on x and y respectively. The last condition means that the mutual information between tx and ty is
negligibly small.
    The complexity profile for x, y, and htx , ty i is shown in Fig. 5.

                                                             20
                                  x                                                y
                                                        I(x : y)
                                        C(x|t, y)                      C(y|t, x)

                                                            0
                                               C(ty )              C(tx )

                                                            0




                                                    t′ := htx , ty i

Figure 5: Complexity profile for x, y, and t′ := htx , ty i from Lemma 8. Note that C(tx ) = I(x : t|y), C(ty ) = I(y :
t|x), and I(x : y|t′ ) = I(x : y).


Remark 11. Lemma 8 is a technical statement, and its claim (e) might look artificial. However, this claim has an
intuitive motivation, as explained in the beginning of this section. The “compressed” components tx and ty correspond
to the components tB and tA of a “natural” transcripts shown in Fig. 3.
    In an arbitrary protocol the messages of Alice and Bob may have positive mutual information with the data of their
counterparts: Alice may send a message (partially) known to Bob, and Bob may send a message (partially) known to
Alice, in absolute terms or conditional on the previously sent messages. We can find “compressed” descriptions of each
individual message in the protocol using Muchnik’s method, Proposition 2. Indeed, for each of Alice’ message there
exists a compressed description that looks incompressible from Bob’s point of view, conditional on the data available
to Bob and the previous messages of Alice; similarly, for each of Bob’s messages there exists a compressed description
that looks incompressible from Alice’ perspective. By combining together the obtained compressed codes of separate
messages, we can try to construct tx and ty required in the claim (e) of the lemma. However, this approach fails for
protocols with unbounded number of rounds. Indeed, “compressing” each individual message with Proposition 2(a)
costs us a logarithmic error term; as the number of messages is large, the sum of logarithmic terms grows beyond
control. This is why we have to use a less intuitive argument based on Lemma 7, which helps to handle the transcript
of a protocol in one piece, without splitting it into separate messages, as we do in the proof below.
Proof. (a) follows trivially from the fact that t can be computed given (x, y) (we may simulate the communication
protocol on the given inputs). Note that the constant in the term O(·) includes implicitly a description of the commu-
nication protocol (we assume that the protocol has a description of size O(1), see the discussion on p. 10).
    (b) For all x, y, t we have
                                          C(t|x) =+ C(t|x, y) + I(t : y|x).
The term C(t|x, y) vanishes due to (a), and we are done.
   (c) Is similar to (b).
   (d) A routine check shows that for all x, y, t we have

                       C(t) =+ I(t : x|y) + I(t : y|x) + (I(x : y) − I(x : y|t)) + C(t|x, y).

Due to Lemma 7 we have I(x : y) − I(x : y|t) =+ I(x : y : t) ≥+ 0, so (d) follows.
   (e) First, we apply Proposition 2(a) with a = t and b = x; we obtain a string p of length C(t|x) such that
    • C(p|t) = O(log n) and

                                                            21
    • C(t|p, x) = O(log n).
From (b) we have C(p) =+ I(t : y|x). So we can let tx := p.
   Observe that
                         C(t|tx ) =+ C(t) − C(tx ) =+ C(t) − I(t : y|x) ≥ C(t|y)
(this inequality follow from (d)). Now we apply Proposition 2(b) with a = t, b1 = y, and b2 = tx . We obtain q1 , q2 of
length C(t|y) and C(t|tx ) respectively such that
    • q1 and q2 are comparable (one of these strings is a prefix of the other one),
    • C(q1 |t) = O(log n) and C(q2 |t) = O(log n),

    • C(t|y, q1 ) = O(log n), where q1 is the prefix of q having length C(t|y), and
    • C(t|tx , q2 ) = O(log n), where q2 is the prefix of q having length C(t|tx ).
Note that the length of q2 is not less (up to O(log n)) than the length of q1 . Since q2 is incompressible conditional
on tx , the shorter prefix q1 must be also incompressible conditional on tx . Thus, tx and q1 are independent. We let
ty := q1 , and (e) is proven.

4.3 Proof of Theorem 2
Now we are ready to combine the spectral technique from Section 4.1 and the information-theoretic technique from
Section 4.2 and prove our main result.
Proof of Theorem 2. Let us take a pair of (x, y) from Example 1 or Example 2. We know that it satisfies (3) and,
therefore, (2). Assume that in a communication protocol π Alice and Bob (given as inputs x and y respectively) agree
on a secret key z of size δ(n). We will prove a lower bound on the communication in this protocol. To simplify the
notation, in what follows we ignore the description of π in all complexity terms (assuming that it is a constant, which
is negligible compared with n).
    In this proof we will deal with four objects: the inputs x′ = hx, rA i and y ′ = hy, rB i, the transcript t, and the
output of the protocol (secret key) z. Our aim is to prove that C(t) cannot be much less than 0.5n. This is enough
to conclude that the length of the transcript measured in bits (which is exactly the communication complexity of the
protocol) also cannot be much less than 0.5n. Due to some technical reasons that will be clarified below we need to
reduce in some sense the sizes of t and z.
    Reduction of the key. First of all, we reduce the size of z. This step might seem counter-intuitive: we make the
assumption of the theorem weaker by suggesting that Alice and Bob agree on a rather small secret key. We know
from [30] that C(z) can be pretty large (more specifically, it can be of complexity 0.5n + O(log n)). However, we
prefer to deal with protocols where Alice and Bob agree on a moderately small (but still not negligibly small) key. To
this end we may need to degrade the given communication protocol and reduce the size of the secret key to the value
µ log n (the constant µ to be chosen later). It is simple to make the protocol weaker: if the original protocol provides
a common secret key z of larger size, then in the degraded protocol Alice and Bob can take only the δ(n) first bits
of this key. Thus, without loss of generality, we may assume that the protocol gives a secret key z with complexity
δ(n) = µ log n.
     Reduction of the transcript. Now we perform a reduction of t. We know from Lemma 7 that I(x′ : y ′ : t) is
non-negative. We want to reduce t to a t′ such that I(x′ : y ′ : t′ ) is exactly 0 (here exactly means, as usual, an equality
that holds up to O(log n)). To this end, we apply Lemma 8 to the triple (x′ , y ′ , t) and obtain tx and ty , which play the
roles of optimal descriptions of t given the conditions x′ and y ′ respectively. We let t′ := htx , ty i. Though technically
this t′ is not a transcript of any communication protocol, we will see that in some sense it behaves similarly to the
initial transcript.
     We know from Lemma 8(d,e) that C(t′ ) ≤+ C(t). Thus, to prove the theorem, it is enough to show that C(t′ ) ≥+
0.5n − 2δ(n).



                                                             22
Lemma 9. For t′ = htx , ty i we have the following equalities:
  (a) C(x′ |t′ , z) =+ n + m − C(ty ) − δ(n),
  (b) C(y ′ |t′ , z) =+ n + m − C(tx ) − δ(n),
  and
                      (c) I(x′ : y ′ |t′ , z) =+ I(x′ : y ′ ) − C(z) + O(log n) = 0.5n − δ(n),                      (10)
see Fig. 6.



                                   x′                                                    y′
                                       0.5n + m − C(ty ) 0.5n − δ 0.5n + m − C(tx )


                                                                δ
                                                    C(ty )              C(tx )

                                                                0




                                                             ht′ , zi

              Figure 6: Complexity profile for the triple that consists of x′ , y ′ , and ht′ , zi from Lemma 9.


Proof of the lemma. The proof is a routine check where we use repeatedly the Kolmogorov–Levin theorem. For (a)
we have
                  C(x′ |t′ , z) =+ C(x′ , t′ , z) − C(t′ , z)
                                     / from the Kolmogorov–Levin theorem /
                                =+ C(x′ ) + C(t′ |x′ ) + C(z|t′ , x′ ) − (C(t′ ) + C(z))
                                     / since z is independent of t′ /
                                  +
                                =    C(x′ ) + C(t′ |x′ ) − C(t′ ) − C(z)
                                     / z is computable given t and x′ , so C(z|x′ , t′ ) = O(log n) /
                                  +
                                =    C(x′ ) + I(y ′ : t|x′ ) − I(x′ : t|y ′ ) − I(y ′ : t|x′ ) − C(z)
                                     / from Lemma 8 /
                                =+ C(x′ ) − I(x′ : t|y ′ ) − δ(n)
                                =+ n + m − C(ty ) − δ(n)
The proof of (b) is similar.
   Since t and z can be computed from (x′ , y ′ ) by a simulation of the protocol and t′ has negligibly small complexity
conditional on t, we obtain from the Kolmogorov–Levin theorem
              C(x′ , y ′ |t′ , z) =+    C(x′ , y ′ , t′ , z) − C(t′ , z)
                                         / from the Kolmogorov–Levin theorem /
                                =+      C(x′ , y ′ ) − C(t′ , z)
                                        / since t′ and z have logarithmic complexity conditional on (x′ , y ′ ) /
                                =+      C(x′ , y ′ ) − C(t′ ) − C(z)
                                        / since z is incompressible given t′ /
                                =+      1.5n + 2m − I(x′ : t|y ′ ) − I(y ′ : t|x′ ) − δ(n).

                                                               23
Combining this with (a) and (b) we obtain (c).
   Now we are ready to prove the theorem. Assume that

                                     C(tx ) + C(ty ) < 0.5n − 2δ(n) − λ log n.                                    (11)

If the constant λ is large enough, then we obtain from Lemma 9(a,b)

                                  C(x′ |t′ , z) + C(y ′ |t′ , z) > 1.5n + 2m + c log n.                           (12)

By choosing λ we can make the constant c in this inequality sufficiently large, so that (12) contradicts (7). Now we
can apply Lemma 6 (the spectral bound applies to Example 1 and Example 2, see Remark 8), and (8) rewrites to

                                          I(x′ : y ′ |t′ , z) ≥ 0.5n − O(log n).                                  (13)

Comparing (10) and (13) we conclude that δ(n) = O(log n) (the constant hidden in O(·) depends only on the choice
of the optimal description method in the definition of Kolmogorov complexity). This contradicts the assumption
δ(n) = µ log n, if µ is chosen large enough. Therefore, the assumption in (11) is false (without this assumption we
cannot apply Lemma 6 and conclude with (13)).
    The negation of (11) gives

                          C(t) ≥ C(tx ) + C(ty ) − O(log n) ≥ 0.5n − 2δ(n) − O(log n),

and we are done.


5 Pairs with a Fixed Hamming Distance
Theorem 2 estimates communication complexity of the protocol in the worst case. For some classes of inputs (x, y)
there might exist more efficient communication protocol. In this section we study one such special class — the pairs
(x, y) from Example 3. The spectral argument from the previous section does not apply to this example. The spectral
gap for the graph√from Example 3 is too small: for this graph we have λ2 = Θ(λ1 ), while in Example 1 and Example 2
we had λ2 = O( λ1 ). In fact, the spectrum of the graph from Example 3 can be computed explicitly: the eigenvalues
of this graph are the numbers
                                          θn
                                          X                
                                                   h i   n−i
                              Kθn (i) =        (−1)             for i ∈ {0, 1, . . . n}
                                                     h θn − h
                                          h=0

with different multiplicities, see [4] and the survey [20]. In particular,
                                                                          the maximal eigenvalue of this graph is
               n
Kθn (0) = θn      and its second eigenvalue is Kθn (1) = n−1     −   n−1
                                                                    θn−1 . It is not difficult to verify that Kθn (1) =
      n
                                                          θn
Ω θn (for a fixed θ and n going to infinity), so the difference between the first and the second eigenvalues is only
a constant factor. Thus, we cannot apply Lemma 6 to this graph.
    It is no accident that our proof of Theorem 2 fails on Example 3. Actually, the statement of the theorem is not
true for (x, y) from this example. In what follows we show that given these x and y Alice and Bob can agree on a
secret key of any size m (intermediate between log n and n/2) with communication complexity Θ(m). The positive
part of this statement (the existence of a communication protocol with communication complexity O(m)) is proven in
Theorem 3. The negative part of the statement (the lower bound Ω(m) for all communication protocols) is proven in
Theorem 4.
Theorem 3. For every δ ∈ (0, 1) there exists a two-parties randomized communication protocol π such that given
inputs x and y from Example 3 (a pair of n-bit strings with the Hamming distance θn and complexity profile (2)) Alice
and Bob with probability > 0.99 agree on a secret key z of size δn/2 − o(n) with communication complexity O(δn).
(The constant hidden in the O(·) does not depend on n or δ.)



                                                           24
Theorem 4. For every δ ∈ (0, 1) for every randomized communication protocol π such that for inputs x and y from
Example 3 Alice and Bob with probability > 0.99 agree on a secret key z of size ≥ δn, the communication complexity
is at least Ω(δn). (The constant hidden in the Ω(·) does not depend on n or δ.)
Proof of Theorem 3. We start the proof with a lemma.
Lemma 10. Let (x, y) be a pair from from Example 3 (two n-bit strings with the Hamming distance θn and complexity
profile (2)). Let m = δn for some δ ∈ (0, 1). Denote by x̂ and ŷ the m-bit prefixes of x and y respectively. Then
    • C(x̂) = m + o(n),
    • C(ŷ) = m + o(n),
    • I(x̂ : ŷ) = 0.5m + o(n),
    • the Hamming distance between x̂ and ŷ is θm + o(n).
Proof of lemma. Denote by x̂′ and ŷ ′ the suffixes of length n − m of x and y respectively (so x is a concatenation of x̂
and x̂′ , and y is a concatenation of ŷ and ŷ ′ ). The idea of the proof is simple: the law of large number guarantees that
for the vast majority of pairs (x, y) such that HammingDist(x, y) = θn, the fraction of positions where x̂ differs from
ŷ and the fraction of positions where x̂′ differs from ŷ ′ are both close to θ; the pairs violating this rule are uncommon;
therefore, Kolmogorov complexity of these “exceptional” pairs is small, and they cannot satisfy (2). To convert this
idea into a formal proof, we need the following technical claim:
Claim: If the pair (x, y) satisfies (3) and the Hamming distance between x and y is θn, then

                                     HammingDist(x̂, ŷ)      = θm + o(n),
                                     HammingDist(x̂′ , ŷ ′ ) = θ(n − m) + o(n).

Proof of the claim. Denote
                                                 1
                                           θ1 := m  · HammingDist(x̂, ŷ),
                                                   1
                                           θ2 := n−m   · HammingDist(x̂′ , ŷ ′ )
(note that θ1 m + θ2 (n − m) = θn; as θ is fixed, there is a linear correspondence between θ1 and θ2 ). For a fixed x
of length n, the number strings y of the same length that matches the parameters m, θ1 , θ2 (i.e., that differ from x in
exactly θ1 m bits in the first m positions and in θ2 (n − m) bits in the last n − m positions) is
                               m
                                       n−m
                                              
                              θ1 m · θ2 (n−m)     = 2h(θ1 )m+O(log n) · 2h(θ2 )(n−m)+O(log n)
                                                         m        n−m
                                                  =   2( n h(θ1 )+ n h(θ2 ))n+O(log n)
                                                  =   2(δh(θ1 )+(1−δ)h(θ2 ))n+O(log n)
                                                  ≤   2h(θ)n+O(log n) = 20.5n+O(log n) ,

where h(τ ) = −τ log τ − (1 − τ ) log(1 − τ ) is the binary entropy function. The last inequality follows from the fact
that the function h(τ ) is concave, and therefore

                                 δh(θ1 ) + (1 − δ)h(θ2 ) ≤ h (δθ1 + (1 − δ)θ2 ) = h(θ).                                 (14)

If θ1 and θ2 are not close enough to the average value θ, then the gap between the left-hand side and the right-hand
side in (14) is getting large. More specifically, it is not hard to verify that the difference

                                              h(θ) − δh(θ1 ) − (1 − δ)h(θ2 )                                            (15)

grows essentially proportionally to the square of |θ1 − θ| (as the second term ofp
                                                                                 the Taylor series of the function around
the extremum point). So, if |θ1 − θ| and |θ2 − θ| are getting much larger than (log n)/n, then the gap (15) becomes
much bigger than (log n)/n, and then we obtain
                                                             
                                          m           n−m
                                               ·                  < 20.5n−ω(log n) .
                                         θ1 m      θ2 (n − m)

                                                             25
On the other hand,
                                                                                         
                                    +                        +              m        n−m
                        C(x, y) = C(x) + C(y|x) ≤ n + log                        ·              .
                                                                           θ1 m    θ2 (n − m)

Thus, the assumption C(x, y) =+ 1.5n can be true only if θ1 m = θm + o(n) and θ2 (n − m) = θ(n − m) + o(n).
    Note that
                                          C(x̂) ≤      |x̂| + O(1) =       m + O(1),
                                          C(ŷ) ≤      |ŷ| + O(1) =       m + O(1).
Further, from the Claim it follows that
                                                            
                                     +      m
                          C(ŷ|x̂) ≤ log                         = h(θ) · m + o(n) = 0.5m + o(n).                       (16)
                                         θm + o(n)

Therefore,
                                      C(x̂, ŷ) =+ C(x̂) + C(ŷ|x̂) ≤+ 1.5m + o(n).
Thus, we have proven that
                                                  C(x̂)      ≤  m + o(n),
                                                  C(ŷ)      ≤  m + o(n),
                                                 C(x̂, ŷ)   ≤ 1.5m + o(n).
It remains to show that these three bounds are tight. To this end, we observe that a similar argument gives the upper
bound
                                             C(x̂′ , ŷ ′ ) ≤ 1.5m + o(n).
Since
                                         C(x̂, x̂′ , ŷ, ŷ ′ ) =+ C(x, y) = 1.5n + O(1),
we obtain
                                                   C(x̂, ŷ) ≥ 1.5m − o(n).
Due to (16), this implies C(x̂) ≥ m − o(n), and similarly C(ŷ) ≥ m − o(n).
     Thus, Alice and Bob can take the prefixes of their inputs x, y of size m = δn. Lemma 10 guarantees that
these prefixes x̂ and ŷ have the complexity profile (Kolmogorov complexities and mutual information) similar to the
complexity profile of the original pair (x, y) scaled with the factor of δ (up to an o(n)-term). Thus, Alice and Bob can
apply to x̂ and ŷ the communication protocol from Theorem 1 and end up with a secret key z of size δn/2 − o(n).
It is shown in [30] that communication complexity of this protocol is C(x̂|ŷ) + O(log m) (note that it is enough for
Alice and Bob to know the complexity profile of (x̂, ŷ) within a precision o(n), see Remark 5 in [30]). In our setting
this communication complexity is equal to δn/2 + o(n).
Proof of Theorem 4. In the proof of the theorem we use two lemmas. The first lemma gives us a pair of simple
information inequalities:
Lemma 11 (see, e.g., Ineq 6 in [11] or lemma 7 in [21]). For all binary strings a, b, c, d

                                   (i)   C(c)        ≤+      C(c|a) + C(c|b) + I(a : b),
                                   (ii) C(c|d)       ≤+      C(c|a) + C(c|b) + I(a : b|d).

    The other lemma is more involved:
Lemma 12 ([31], see also exercise 316 in [32]). There exists an integer number k with the following property. Let
x = x0 and y = y0 be a pair of strings from Example 3 (two n-bit strings with the Hamming distance θn and
complexity profile (2)). Then there exist two sequences of n-bit binary strings x1 , . . . , xk and y1 , . . . , yk such that
    • I(xi : yi |xi+1 ) = O(log n) for i = 0, . . . , k − 1,

                                                                  26
    • I(xi : yi |yi+1 ) = O(log n) for i = 0, . . . , k − 1,
    • I(xk : yk ) = O(log n).
(Note that k is a constant that does not depend on n. It is determined uniquely by the value of θ, which is the normalized
Hamming distance between x and y.)
Remark 12. In the proof Lemma 12 suggested in [31], each pair (xi , yi ) consists of two binary strings of length n
with Hamming distance θi n and maximal possible (for this value of θi ) Kolmogorov complexity. In our case, the
initial θ0 = θ is chosen so that I(x0 : y0 ) =+ n/2. Each next θi is bigger than the previous one. For the last pair
we have θk = 1/2. This means that in the last pair (xk , yk ) the strings differ in a half of the positions, so the mutual
information is only O(log n).
   Applying Lemma 11(ii), we obtain for every string w and for all xi , yi , xi+1 , yi+1 the inequalities

                               C(w|xi+1 )     ≤+     C(w|xi ) + C(w|yi ) + I(xi : yi |xi+1 ),
                               C(w|yi+1 )     ≤+     C(w|xi ) + C(w|yi ) + I(xi : yi |yi+1 ).

Combining these inequalities for i = 0, . . . , k − 1 and taking into account the assumptions I(xi : yi |xi+1 ) = O(log n)
and I(xi : yi |yi+1 ) = O(log n), we obtain

                                  C(w|xk ) + C(w|yk ) ≤+ 2k · (C(w|x0 ) + C(w|x0 )) .

Now we use Lemma 11(i) and obtain

                                      C(w) ≤+ C(w|xk ) + C(w|yk ) + I(xk : yk ).

With the condition I(xk : yk ) = O(log n) we get

                  C(w) ≤+ 2k · (C(w|x0 ) + C(w|y0 )) + I(xk : yk ) =+ 2k · (C(w|x) + C(w|y)) .                       (17)

Denote by rA and rB the strings of random bits used in the protocol by Alice and Bob respectively. With high
probability the randomly chosen rA and rB have negligibly small mutual information with w, x, y. Therefore, (17)
rewrites to
                                  C(w) ≤+ 2k · (C(w|x, rA ) + C(w|y, rB )) .                                (18)
   We apply (18) to w := ht, zi, where z is the secret key obtained by Alice and Bob, and t is the transcript of the
communication protocol. Then
                                             C(w) =+ C(z) + C(t)
(the key has no mutual information with the transcript), and

                                       C(w|x, rA ) ≤+ C(t), C(w|y, rB ) ≤+ C(t)

(given the transcript and the data available to Alice or to Bob, we can compute z). Plugging this in (18) we obtain

                                               C(z) + C(t) ≤+ 2k+1 · C(t),

which implies C(t) = Ω(C(z)). Therefore, the size of the transcript t is not less than Ω(δn), and we are done.


6 Conclusion
In Theorem 2 we have proven a lower bound for communication complexity of protocols with private randomness.
The argument can be extended to the setting where Alice and Bob use both private and public random bits (the private
sources of randomness are available only to Alice and Bob respectively; the public source of randomness is available



                                                               27
to both parties and to the eavesdropper). Thus, the problem of the worst case complexity is resolved for the most
general natural model of communication.
    For pairs of inputs (x, y) from Example 1 and Example 2 (corresponding to edges of a graph with a large spectral
gap) we have got a lower bound for communication complexity that matches the known upper bound. However, in
the known protocols achieving this bound the communication is very non-symmetric: all (or almost all) the burden of
communication falls on only one of two participants. We do not know whether there exist more balanced protocols,
where the communication complexity is shared equally between Alice and Bob.
    We have no characterization of the optimal communication complexity of the secret key agreement for pairs of
inputs (x, y) that do not enjoy the spectral property required in Corollary 1. In particular, there remains a large
gap between constant hidden in the O(δn) notation in Theorem 3 and in the Ω(δn) notation in and Theorem 4, so the
question on the optimal trade-off between the secret key size and communication complexity for (x, y) from Example 3
remains open (cf. Conjecture 1 in [19] for an analogous problem in Shannon’s setting).
    In some applications (see, e.g., [7, 14]) it is natural to assume that the eavesdropper is given a non-negligible a
priori information about Alice’ and Bob’s inputs. For this setting we do not have a characterization of the optimal size
of the key and the communication complexity of the protocol.

Acknowledgements The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for instructive suggestions and corrections con-
cerning this conference publication as well as the full version of the paper. The second author is grateful to the Max
Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences (Leipzig, Germany) for hospitality, and thanks Rostislav Matveev
and Jacobus Portegies for useful discussions.


References
 [1] Rudolf Ahlswede and Imre Csiszár. Common randomness in information theory and cryptography. I. Secret
     sharing. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 39(4):1121–1132, 1993.
 [2] Noga Alon and Joel H. Spencer. The probabilistic method. John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
 [3] Luis Antunes, Sophie Laplante, Alexandre Pinto, and Liliana Salvador. Cryptographic security of individual
     instances. In International Conference on Information Theoretic Security, pages 195–210. Springer, 2007.
 [4] Andries E. Brouwer, Sebastian M. Cioabă, Ferdinand Ihringer, and Matt McGinnis. The smallest eigenvalues
     of hamming graphs, johnson graphs and other distance-regular graphs with classical parameters. Journal of
     Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 133:88–121, 2018.
 [5] Harry Buhrman, Lance Fortnow, and Sophie Laplante. Resource-bounded kolmogorov complexity revisited.
     SIAM Journal on Computing, 31(3):887–905, 2001.
 [6] Alexei Chernov, Andrej Muchnik, Andrei Romashchenko, Alexander Shen, and Nikolai Vereshchagin. Upper
     semi-lattice of binary strings with the relation “x is simple conditional to y”. Theoretical Computer Science,
     271(1-2):69–95, 2002.
 [7] Igor Devetak and Andreas Winter. Distillation of secret key and entanglement from quantum states. Proceedings
     of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and engineering sciences, 461(2053):207–235, 2005.
 [8] Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman. New directions in cryptography. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
     22(6):644–654, 1976.
 [9] Shai Evra, Konstantin Golubev, and Alexander Lubotzky. Mixing properties and the chromatic number of ra-
     manujan complexes. International Mathematics Research Notices, 2015(22):11520–11548, 2015.
[10] Peter Grünwald and Paul Vitányi.       Shannon information and kolmogorov complexity.            arXiv preprint
     arXiv:0410002, 2004.



                                                          28
[11] Daniel Hammer, Andrei Romashchenko, Alexander Shen, and Nikolai Vereshchagin. Inequalities for shannon
     entropy and kolmogorov complexity. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 60(2):442–464, 2000.
[12] Wassily Hoeffding. Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random variables. Journal of the American
     Statistical Association, 58(301):13–30, 1963.
[13] Shlomo Hoory, Nathan Linial, and Avi Wigderson. Expander graphs and their applications. Bulletin of the
     American Mathematical Society, 43(4):439–561, 2006.
[14] Ryszard Horodecki, Paweł Horodecki, Michał Horodecki, and Karol Horodecki. Quantum entanglement. Re-
     views of modern physics, 81(2):865, 2009.
[15] Tanya Ignatenko and Frans MJ Willems. Biometric security from an information-theoretical perspective. Foun-
     dations and Trends® in Communications and Information Theory, 7(2–3):135–316, 2012.
[16] Tarik Kaced, Andrei Romashchenko, and Nikolai Vereshchagin. A conditional information inequality and its
     combinatorial applications. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 64(5):3610–3615, 2018.
[17] Eyal Kushilevitz and Noam Nisan. Communication Complexity. Cambridge University Press, 2006.
[18] Ming Li and Paul Vitányi. An introduction to Kolmogorov complexity and its applications. Springer, 4 edition,
     2019.
[19] Jingbo Liu, Paul Cuff, and Sergio Verdú. Secret key generation with limited interaction. IEEE Transactions on
     Information Theory, 63(11):7358–7381, 2017.
[20] Xiaogang Liu and Sanming Zhou. Eigenvalues of cayley graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.09829, 2018.
[21] Konstantin Makarychev, Yury Makarychev, Andrei Romashchenko, and Nikolai Vereshchagin. A new class of
     non-shannon-type inequalities for entropies. Communications in Information and Systems, 2(2):147–166, 2002.
[22] Ueli M. Maurer. Secret key agreement by public discussion from common information. IEEE transactions on
     information theory, 39(3):733–742, 1993.
[23] Archie Medrano, Perla Myers, Harold M. Stark, and Audrey Terras. Finite analogues of euclidean space. Journal
     of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 68(1-2):221–238, 1996.
[24] An A Muchnik. On common information. Theoretical Computer Science, 207(2):319–328, 1998.
[25] Andrej A. Muchnik. Conditional complexity and codes. Theoretical Computer Science, 271(1-2):97–109, 2002.
[26] Daniil Musatov, Andrei Romashchenko, and Alexander Shen. Variations on muchnik’s conditional complexity
     theorem. Theory of Computing Systems, 49(2):227–245, 2011.
[27] Jitsuro Nagura. On the interval containing at least one prime number. Proceedings of the Japan Academy,
     28(4):177–181, 1952.
[28] Ilan Newman. Private vs. common random bits in communication complexity. Information processing letters,
     39(2):67–71, 1991.
[29] Omer Reingold, Salil Vadhan, and Avi Wigderson. Entropy waves, the zig-zag graph product, and new constant-
     degree expanders and extractors. In Proceedings 41st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
     pages 3–13. IEEE, 2000.
[30] Andrei Romashchenko and Marius Zimand. An operational characterization of mutual information in algorithmic
     information theory. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 66(5):1–42, 2019.
[31] Andrei E. Romashchenko. Pairs of words with nonmaterializable mutual information. Problems of Information
     Transmission, 36(1), 2000.

                                                        29
[32] Alexander Shen, Vladimir Uspensky, and Nikolay Vereshchagin. Kolmogorov complexity and algorithmic ran-
     domness, volume 220. American Mathematical Soc., 2017.
[33] Madhu Sudan, Himanshu Tyagi, and Shun Watanabe. Communication for generating correlation: A unifying
     survey. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 66(1):5–37, 2019.
[34] Himanshu Tyagi. Common information and secret key capacity. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
     59(9):5627–5640, 2013.
[35] Le Anh Vinh. The Szemerédi–Trotter type theorem and the sum-product estimate in finite fields. European
     Journal of Combinatorics, 32(8):1177–1181, 2011.
[36] Alexander K. Zvonkin and Leonid A. Levin. The complexity of finite objects and the development of the concepts
     of information and randomness by means of the theory of algorithms. Russian Mathematical Surveys, 25(6):83,
     1970.
[37] Rustam Zyavgarov. Private communication, 2022.


A     Information-theoretic security in the language of Kolmogorov complex-
      ity.
In this section we briefly recall the notion of secure encoding in the classical settings (in terms of probability distribu-
tions and Shannon’s information theory) and its homologues in the framework of Kolmogorov complexity, as proposed
in [3]. We begin with the very basic cryptographic primitive—a symmetric encryption scheme.
Definition 1. We say that a private-key encryption scheme is a pair of algorithms (Encn , Decn ) and associated spaces:
the set of clear messages Mn , the set of ciphertexts Cn , and for the space of keys K = {0, 1}n,

                                                Encn : Mn × Kn → Cn
                                                Decn : Cn × Kn → Mn

such that for every m ∈ M and every k ∈ Kn we have Decn (Encn (m, k), k) = m (encrypting a message and then
decrypting the resulting ciphertext with the same key yields the original message).
    There is a pretty common definition of a perfectly secure encryption scheme:
Definition 2. A private-key encryption scheme (Encn , Decn ) is called perfectly secure if for the uniform distribution
of messages on Mn and the uniform distribution of the key on K (independent of the distribution of the messages m),
we have

         ∀m ∈ Mn , ∀e ∈ Cn , Pr[the clear message is m | Encn (m, k) = e] = Pr[the clear message is m]

In words: the knowledge of the ciphertext does not bring any information on the message.
Remark 13. We can easily reformulate the definition for more general (non-uniform) distributions on Mn .
Example 4. The classical Vernam cipher scheme (one-time pad) where Enc(m, k) = m⊕k (bitwise XOR) is perfectly
secure.
    The assumption of independence of two random variables is a clean and nice mathematical concept, it is a perfect
starting point for building an elegant mathematical theory. But, in practice, we hardly can guarantee that two random
values are absolutely independent. Let us define a relaxed version of Definition 2, with a minor imprecision allowed
in the condition of independence:




                                                            30
Definition 3 (see [3]). A private-key encryption scheme with a distribution µ defined on Mn × Kn is called σ-almost
perfectly secure if

                      H(random value of m) − H(random value of m | random value of e) < σ,

where e = Encn (m, k), and H(·) stands for Shannon entropy. In what follows we assume for simplicity that µ is
uniform, although this definition can be used in much more general settings.
   This definition of security has a homologue in the framework of Kolmogorov complexity, where we define not
security of the scheme in general but security of a specific ciphertext for a specific message.
Definition 4 (again, see [3]). Let us fix a private-key encryption scheme and a distribution µ on Mn × Kn . We say
that for an instance (m, k) ∈ Mn × Kn the ciphertext e = Enc(m, k) is ρ-secure if

                                                 C(m) − C(m | e) < ρ.

In words: the encryption is secure if the ciphertext contains negligibly small information on the message.
Example 5. In the Vernam cipher scheme, XOR-ing the clear message m with a Kolmogorov-random (independent
of m) key k results in a secure ciphertext; XOR-ing the clear message m with an instance of key k = 000 . . . 0 is not
secure, see [3, Section 3.3] for more details.
    Definition 3 and Definition 4 are related with each other in some formal sense. If a scheme is almost perfectly
secure (Definition 3), then for most instances (m, k) ∈ Mn × Kn the ciphertext is secure (Definition 4). There is also
an implication in the opposite direction: if many instances of a cipher system are secure (Definition 4), then the system
is almost perfectly secure (Definition 3). Moreover, the connection between the definitions of security in Shannon’s
and Kolmogorov’s frameworks can be extended to non-uniform distributions. The precise statement of the translation
between Definition 3 and Definition 4 (the trade-off between σ in Definition 3 and ρ in Definition 4) can be found in
[3, Theorem 13].
    A number of other cryptographic definitions can also be translated into the language of Kolmogorov complexity,
see, e.g., the discussion of secret sharing and authentication codes in [3].


B Technical Lemmas and a Proof of Proposition 1
In this section we prove a version of Newman’s theorem (on sampling random bits) for communication protocols with
private randomness. We start with two technical lemmas and then proceed with a proof of Proposition 1.
Definition 5. Let RA and RB be finite sets and let S ⊂ A × B. We say that a sequence (or a multiset) of elements
a1 , . . . , ak in A and a sequence (multiset) of elements b1 , . . . , bk in B provide a δ-precise sampling of S in A × B if

                                                                         |S|
                                          Probi,j [(ai , bj ) ∈ S] −           < δ,
                                                                       |A × B|

see Fig. 7.

Lemma 13. Let A and B be finite sets and let S ⊂ A × B. We choose at random sequences of elements a1 , . . . , ak in
A and b1 , . . . , bk in B (all ai and bj are independent and uniformly distributed on A and B respectively). Then with
                                 2
probability at least 1 − 4e−δ k/2 the chosen pair of sequences provides a δ-precise sampling of S.
Proof. To prove the lemma, we split the process of sampling in two steps. At first, we substitute A by a sequence
a1 , . . . , ak and estimate the difference

                              Probi∈{1,...,k},b∈B [(ai , b) ∈ S] − Proba∈A,b∈B [(a, b) ∈ S] ,                           (19)



                                                             31
                                    bk •           •    ◦ ◦ ◦            ◦
                                     ..
                                      .
                                    b6 •           ◦    • • •            ◦
                                    b5 •           ◦    • • •            ◦

                            B       b4 •           ◦    ◦ • •            ◦

                                    b3 •           ◦    ◦ ◦ •
                                                                   S •
                                    b2 •           ◦    ◦ ◦ ◦            •
                                    b1 •           ◦    ◦ ◦ ◦            •


                                                   •    • • •            •
                                                   a1   a2 a3 a4   . . . ak

                                                              A

Figure 7: Sampling random points in S ⊂ A × B by choosing independently random columns ai ∈ A and random
rows bj ∈ B.




                            B

                                                                   S

                                                   •    • • •            •
                                                   a1   a2 a3 a4   . . . ak

                                                              A

Figure 8: Restriction of a set S ⊂ A × B onto the product {a1 , . . . , ak } × B with randomly chosen columns ai ∈ A.




                                                         32
see Fig. 8. Then, we fix a sequence a1 , . . . , ak , choose at random a sequence b1 , . . . , bk ∈ B and estimate the
difference
                   Probi∈{1,...,k},j∈{1,...,k} [(ai , bj ) ∈ S] − Probi∈{1,...,k},b∈B [(ai , b) ∈ S] .            (20)
We show that both of these differences are typically small and, therefore, the difference
                                Probi∈{1,...,k},j∈{1,...,k} [(ai , bj )] − Proba∈A,b∈B [(a, b) ∈ S]
is typically small as well.
Claim: For a randomly chosen sequence a1 , . . . , ak ∈ A, the probability that the difference in (19) is larger than δ/2
                 2
is less than 2e−δ k/2 .

Proof of the claim: For every a ∈ A we denote by ϕ(a) the fraction of elements from S in the column of the Cartesian
product A × B corresponding to the value a, i.e.,
                                                               |S ∩ ({a} × B)|
                                                   ϕ(a) :=                     .
                                                                     |B|
From the definition it follows that 0 ≤ ϕ(a) ≤ 1 for every a ∈ A, and the average value of ϕ(a) (for a randomly
                             |S|
chosen a) is equal to σ := |A×B|  . Since a1 , . . . , ak are chosen in A independently, the values ϕ(a1 ), . . . , ϕ(ak ) are
independent and identically distributed. Hence, we can apply Hoeffding’s inequality (see [12]):
                                                                           
                                      ϕ(a1 ) + . . . + ϕ(ak )                            2
                             Prob                               − σ ≥ δ/2 ≤ 2e−2(δ/2) k .
                                                  k
                                                           2
This means that with a probability ≥ 1 − 2e−2(δ/2) k the gap (19) is less than δ/2.
      Let us fix now a sequence a1 , . . . , ak ∈ A, and estimate the difference in (20) as a function of random sequence
b1 , . . . , bk ∈ B. We can use once again the same argument with Hoeffding’s inequality as in Claim above, now for the
                                                                                                                     2
sampling of values of the second coordinate in {a1 , . . . , ak } × B. It follows that with a probability ≥ 1 − 2e−δ k/2
the gap (20) is less than δ/2. Combining the bounds for (19) and(20), we obtain the lemma.
Lemma 14. Let π be a two-party communication protocol where Alice and Bob access inputs x and y respectively,
and use private random bits rA ∈ {0, 1}s and rB ∈ {0, 1}s respectively. For z1 , z2 , t we denote by p(x, y, z1 , z2 , t)
the probability of the following event: given x and y as inputs, Alice and Bob apply the protocol π and end up with
an answer z1 ∈ {0, 1}m for Alice, an answer z2 ∈ {0, 1}m for Bob, and a communication transcript t ∈ {0, 1}l . The
probability is taken on independent and uniformly distributed rA , rB .
    We apply to π a random transformation as follows: we choose two random sequences a1 , . . . , ak and b1 , . . . , bk
in {0, 1}s. In the new communication protocol π ′ Alice and Bob choose at random i, j ∈ {1, . . . , k}, and then apply
the original communication protocol with private strings of random bits ai and bj respectively. By construction, in the
protocol π ′ Alice and Bob need log k private random bits each (they both need to choose a random index between 1
and k).
    Denote by p′ (x, y, z1 , z2 , t) the probability analogous to p(x, y, z1 , z2 , t) computed for the protocol π ′ . The prob-
ability is taken on the choice of independent and uniformly distributed i, j ∈ {1, . . . , k}. We claim that for all
x, y, z1 , z2 , t the probability of the event
                                           |p(x, y, z1 , z2 , t) − p′ (x, y, z1 , z2 , t)| < δ                                 (21)
                            2
is greater than 1 − 4e−δ k/2 (here the probability is taken over the choice of a1 , . . . , ak and b1 , . . . , bk in {0, 1}s in
the construction of π ′ ).
Proof. We apply Lemma 13 with A = B = {0, 1}s (the space of random bits of the original protocol), and S =
S(x, y, z1 , z2 , t) that consists of the pairs (rA , rB ) ∈ {0, 1}s × {0, 1}s compatible with the given x, y, z1 , z2 , t. In
other words, a pair (rA , rB ) belongs to S, if Alice and Bob given x and y as inputs and rA and rB as random bits,
obtain with the protocol π answers z1 and z2 respectively and produce a communication transcript t. From the lemma
                                                 2
it follows that with the probability 1 − 4e−δ k/2 , the choice of a1 , . . . , ak and b1 , . . . , bk in {0, 1}s in the construction
of π ′ provides a δ-precise sampling of S.

                                                                  33
    Now we are ready to prove a version of Newman’s theorem suitable for our setting.
Proof of Proposition 1. Due to Lemma 14, with randomly chosen samples a1 , . . . , ak and b1 , . . . , bk with a probability
           2
> 1−4e−δ k/2 we obtain a new protocol π ′ such that for each (x, y, z1 , z2 , t) we have (21). We apply this construction
with a δ such that
                                                              ε2
                                     δ :=
                                            #answers z1 · #answers z2 · #transcripts t
and a k such that
                            2
                      4e−δ k/2 · #inputs (x, y) · #answers z1 · #answers z2 · #transcripts t < 1.                            (22)

The property (22) implies that there are samples a1 , . . . , ak and b1 , . . . , bk such that (21) is true simultaneously for all
(x, y, z1 , z2 , t). Let us fix one such instance of sampling.
     In the obtained protocol π ′ , for each pair of input (x, y) the total probability to obtain an invalid outcome (which
is the sum over all (z1 , z2 , t) that are invalid) increases in comparison with the original protocol π by at most

                                   δ · #answers z1 · #answers z2 · #transcripts t < ε2 .                                     (23)

Note that we can claim (23) even without having an explicit description of the sets of valid and invalid outcomes, it is
enough to have (21) for each tuple of inputs and outcomes.
    Since the length of the outputs and the communication complexity of π are linear in n, the total number of inputs
(x, y), outputs (z1 , z2 ), and transcripts t is 2O(n) . It is not hard to see that we can chose

                                              δ = ε2 /2O(n) and k = 2O(n) /ε22

so that (22) and (23) are satisfied. From the choice of k it follows that in the new protocol π ′ Alice and Bob need only
log k = O(n + log(1/ε2 )) private random bits.
      It remains to notice that an appropriate instance of sampling in Lemma 14 (suitable sequences a1 , . . . , ak and
b1 , . . . , bk ) can be found by brute-force search. To organize this search we do not need to know the precise definition
of the validity of the outcome nor the class of admissible inputs (x, y). Indeed, we can simulate the original protocol
π on all pairs of inputs of length n and find an instance of sampling such that for each (z1 , z2 , t) the probability of this
outcome increases by at most δ. Thus, if the original protocol was uniformly computable, so is the new one (though
the computational complexity could increase dramatically).




                                                               34
