                                        Lossy Planarization: A Constant-Factor Approximate Kernelization
                                                            for Planar Vertex Deletion∗
                                                       Bart M. P. Jansen†                                Michal Wlodarczyk‡
                                               Eindhoven University of Technology                 Eindhoven University of Technology
arXiv:2202.02174v1 [cs.DS] 4 Feb 2022




                                                                                          Abstract
                                                  In the F-minor-free deletion problem we are given an undirected graph G and the goal
                                              is to find a minimum vertex set that intersects all minor models of graphs from the family F.
                                              This captures numerous important problems including Vertex cover, Feedback vertex
                                              set, Treewidth-η modulator, and Vertex planarization. In the latter one, we ask
                                              for a minimum vertex set whose removal makes the graph planar. This is a special case of
                                              F-minor-free deletion for the family F = {K5 , K3,3 }.
                                                  Whenever the family F contains at least one planar graph, then F-minor-free deletion
                                              is known to admit a constant-factor approximation algorithm and a polynomial kernelization
                                              [Fomin, Lokshtanov, Misra, and Saurabh, FOCS’12]. A polynomial kernelization is a polynomial-
                                              time algorithm that, given a graph G and integer k, outputs a graph G0 on poly(k) vertices and
                                              integer k 0 , so that OPT(G) ≤ k if and only if OPT(G0 ) ≤ k 0 . The Vertex planarization
                                              problem is arguably the simplest setting for which F does not contain a planar graph and the
                                              existence of a constant-factor approximation or a polynomial kernelization remains a major open
                                              problem.
                                                  In this work we show that Vertex planarization admits an algorithm which is a com-
                                              bination of both approaches. Namely, we present a polynomial α-approximate kernelization,
                                              for some constant α > 1, based on the framework of lossy kernelization [Lokshtanov, Panolan,
                                              Ramanujan, and Saurabh, STOC’17]. Simply speaking, when given a graph G and integer k, we
                                              show how to compute a graph G0 on poly(k) vertices so that any β-approximate solution to G0
                                              can be lifted to an (α · β)-approximate solution to G, as long as (α · β) · OPT(G) ≤ k. In order
                                              to achieve this, we develop a framework for sparsification of planar graphs which approximately
                                              preserves all separators and near-separators between subsets of the given terminal set.
                                                  Our result yields an improvement over the state-of-art approximation algorithms for Vertex
                                              planarization. The problem admits a polynomial-time O(nε )-approximation algorithm, for any
                                              ε > 0, and a quasi-polynomial-time (log n)O(1) -approximation algorithm, where n is the input size,
                                              both randomized [Kawarabayashi and Sidiropoulos, FOCS’17]. By pipelining these algorithms
                                              with our approximate kernelization, we improve the approximation factors to respectively
                                              O(OPTε ) and (log OPT)O(1) .




                                          ∗
                                            This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s
                                        Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No 803421, ReduceSearch).
                                          †
                                            Address: b.m.p.jansen@tue.nl
                                          ‡
                                            Address: m.wlodarczyk@tue.nl
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                          1

2 Outline                                                                                               5

3 Preliminaries                                                                                        12

4 Treewidth reduction                                                                               18
  4.1 Irrelevant vertices in a grid minor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
  4.2 Finding a large grid minor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

5 Constructing a strong modulator                                                               25
  5.1 Planarizing small neighborhoods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
  5.2 Reducing the neighborhood of planar components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28

6 Reducing the radial diameter                                                                         30
  6.1 Protrusion replacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       31
  6.2 Outerplanar decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        34
  6.3 Outerplanarity layers and vertex-disjoint paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        36
  6.4 Compressing the outerplanarity layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        38

7 Solution preservers                                                                                  44
  7.1 Reduction to single-faced boundaried graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        46
  7.2 Inseparability in single-faced boundaried graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       50
  7.3 From inseparability to a solution preserver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      54

8 Compressing the negligible components                                                                59

9 Wrapping up                                                                                          68

10 Planarization criteria                                                                               73
   10.1 The new criterion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
   10.2 Irrelevant vertices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76

11 Conclusion                                                                                          77
1    Introduction
    Background and motivation A graph is planar if it can be drawn in the plane without
crossings. Planar graphs play an important role in (algorithmic) graph theory, forming the subject
of well-known characterizations of planar graphs by Kuratowski [Kur30], Wagner [Wag37], Mac
Lane [Lan37], Whitney [Whi32], and Tutte [Tut59], along with a variety of efficient algorithms to
test whether a graph is planar [BM04, HT74, MM96, MG70] and to solve optimization problems on
planar graphs [Bak94, DH08]. For a non-planar graph G, the Vertex planarization problem asks
to find a minimum vertex set whose removal makes G planar. Aside from obvious applications in
graph drawing and visualization, it is important because several other NP-complete problems can be
solved efficiently on graphs which are close to planar, if a deletion set is known [DGK+ 19]. Vertex
planarization is NP-complete [FdFG+ 06, LY80], but its decision version is fixed-parameter
tractable (FPT) when parameterized by the solution size: Jansen, Lokshtanov, and Saurabh [JLS14]
gave an algorithm that, given an n-vertex graph G and integer k, determines whether G can be
made planar by removing k vertices in the near-optimal time bound 2O(k log k) · n [JLS14], following
earlier algorithms for the problem by Marx and Schlotter [MS12] and Kawarabayashi [Kaw09]. The
existence of a single-exponential algorithm with running time 2O(k) · nO(1) remains open. From
the perspective of two other algorithmic paradigms, approximation algorithms and kernelization
algorithms, the problem remains far from understood.
    Despite significant interest in the problem, no constant-factor approximation algorithm for
Vertex planarization is known. Kawarabayashi and Sidiropoulos [KS19] gave a polynomial-time
algorithm that, given an n-vertex graph of maximum degree ∆, outputs a solution of size ∆O(1) ·
(log n)3.5 · OPT, improving on an earlier approximation algorithm for bounded-degree graphs
by Chekuri and Sidiropoulos [CS18]. Kawarabayashi and Sidiropoulos [KS17] also developed
a randomized algorithm that outputs a solution of size (log n)O(1) · OPT in quasi-polynomial
time nO(log n/ log log n) , as well as a randomized algorithm to find a solution of size O(nε ) · OPT in
time nO(1/ε) for any fixed ε > 0. Whether or not a constant-factor approximation algorithm exists
remains wide open.
    The second paradigm in which Vertex planarization remains elusive is that of kerneliza-
tion [CFK+ 15, FLSZ19, Kra14], a formalization of efficient preprocessing originating in parameter-
ized complexity theory. A parameterized problem is a decision problem where each instance x is
associated with a positive integer k called the parameter, which forms an additional measurement of
its complexity aside from the total input length. A kernelization for a parameterized problem is a
polynomial-time algorithm that reduces any parameterized instance (x, k) to an instance (x0 , k 0 ) with
the same yes/no answer, such that |x0 | + k 0 ≤ f (k) for some function f that is called the size of the
kernelization. While all fixed-parameter tractable problems have a kernelization [CFK+ 15, Lemma
2.2], a large body of research [BFL+ 16, BDFH09, Dru15, FLMS12, FS11, KW20] is devoted to
investigating which problems have kernelizations of polynomial size, which are especially interesting
from a practical perspective. Whether Vertex planarization has a kernelization of polynomial
size is one of the main open problems in kernelization [FLSZ19, §A.1], [JPvL19], [FLMS12], [Mis16]
as advocated in the 2019 Workshop on Kernelization [Sau19].
    Vertex planarization is the prototypical example of a large class of vertex-deletion problems
for which the existence of three desirable types of algorithms remains unknown: constant-factor
approximation, polynomial-size kernelization, and single-exponential FPT algorithm. This family
of problems is defined in terms of hitting forbidden minors. For a finite family of graphs F, the
F-minor-free deletion problem asks to find a minimum vertex set whose removal ensures the
resulting graph does not contain any graph H ∈ F as a minor. By Wagner’s theorem [Wag37],
Vertex planarization corresponds to F = {K3,3 , K5 }. Fomin et al. [FLMS12] developed


                                                   1
a framework based on protrusion replacement to show that for each finite family F that contains at
least one planar graph, the corresponding deletion problem admits a polynomial kernelization, a
randomized constant-factor approximation algorithm, and a single-exponential FPT algorithm. The
relevance of this restriction on F stems from the fact that the family of F-minor-free graphs has
bounded treewidth if and only if F contains a planar graph [RS86]. For Vertex planarization,
the machinery of Fomin et al. [FLMS12] cannot be applied since planar graphs can have arbitrary
large treewidth, as witnessed by grids. Hence the existing tools for kernelization break completely for
the family of forbidden minors F = {K3,3 , K5 }. As Fomin et al. note in their conclusion [FLMS20,
§9], not a single family F is known that does not contain a planar graph but for which one of the
three desirable types of algorithms described above exists, making it tempting to conjecture that
the presence of a planar graph in F marks the boundary of this type of tractability. Understanding
the complexity of F-minor-free deletion, which was identified as an important open problem in
the appendix of the textbook by Downey and Fellows [DF13, §33.2], forms another motivation for
the study of Vertex planarization.
    In this work, we develop a new algorithm for Vertex planarization via the framework of lossy
kernelization which was introduced by Lokshtanov, Panolan, Ramanujan, and Saurabh [LPRS17].
While the formal details are deferred to the preliminaries, the main idea behind this framework is
to relax the correctness requirements of a kernelization: a lossy kernelization of size f (k) reduces an
instance (x, k) to an instance (x0 , k 0 ) with |x0 | + k 0 ≤ f (k), such that if the optimum of x is at most k,
then a good approximation to x0 can be efficiently lifted to a good approximation on the original
instance x. Hence to approximate the problem, it suffices to work with the reduced instance (x0 , k 0 ).
The framework is of interest when the approximation guarantee of the lossy kernelization is better
than the best-known polynomial-time approximation factor. Lossy kernelizations are known for
several problems that do not admit polynomial kernelizations, including connected variants of
minor/subgraph hitting [EHR17, LPRS17, Ram19, Ram21], graph contraction problems [KMRT16],
and Connected dominating set on sparse graphs [EKM+ 19].

    Our contribution We present the first polynomial-size lossy kernelization for Vertex pla-
narization. To state it, we use the term planar modulator in a graph G to refer to a vertex set S
whose removal makes G planar, and use mvp(G) (the minimum vertex planarization number) to
denote the minimum size of planar modulator in G. The formal definition of a lossy kernelization is
given in Section 3. Our main result is the following theorem.
Theorem 1.1. The Vertex planarization problem admits a deterministic 510-approximate
kernelization of polynomial size. There is a deterministic polynomial-time algorithm that, given a
graph G and integer k, outputs a graph G0 on k O(1) vertices and integer k 0 ≤ k such that any planar
modulator S 0 in G0 can be lifted in polynomial time to a planar modulator S in G satisfying:
                             min(|S|, k + 1)            min(|S 0 |, k 0 + 1)
                                              ≤ 510 ·                        .
                           min(mvp(G), k + 1)         min(mvp(G0 ), k 0 + 1)
                                                                                |S|            |S |        0
    To understand this statement, compare the guarantee to the statement mvp(G)      ≤ 510 · mvp(G  0) ,
which would simply say that the approximation factor of S is at most 510 times worse than that
of S 0 . The lossy kernelization framework caps the solution cost at k + 1 to ensure that k captures
the complexity of the task in a meaningful way. Such a requirement is natural for a framework
aimed at obtaining approximate kernelizations whose approximation factors are better than the best-
known polynomial-time approximations: the existence of a constant-factor approximate lossy kernel
without capping the cost of a solution in terms of k would imply the existence of a polynomial-time
constant-factor approximation algorithm, by simply running the lossy kernel for k ∈ O(1), solving

                                                       2
the resulting instance G0 optimally by brute force in O(1) time, and lifting the resulting solution
back to G. In terms of the capped solution cost, the theorem guarantees that a β-approximation
on G0 can be lifted to a (510 · β)-approximation on G.
    Theorem 1.1 resolves an open problem posed by Daniel Lokshtanov during the 2019 Workshop
on Kernelization [Lok19]. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first result making progress
towards a polynomial kernelization for Vertex planarization. To prove Theorem 1.1 we develop
a substantial set of tools to reduce and decompose instances of the problem, which we believe will
be useful in settling the existence of an exact kernelization of polynomial size. By pipelining our
lossy kernelization with the approximation algorithms by Kawarabayashi and Sidiropoulos [KS17],
we can effectively reduce the dependence on n to OPT in their approximation guarantees.

Theorem 1.2. Vertex planarization admits the following randomized approximation algorithms.

  1. O(OPTε )-approximation in time nC(ε) , where C(ε) is a constant depending on ε, for sufficiently
     small ε > 0,
                                                                                
                                                                     log OPT
                                                      O
  2. O((log OPT)32 )-approximation in time nO(1) + OPT             log log OPT
                                                                                     .

    This constitutes the best polynomial-time approximation factor achieved for Vertex pla-
narization so far. The randomization occurs within the algorithms by Kawarabayashi and
Sidiropoulos [KS17] which are invoked to process the compressed instance. The algorithm might
return a solution larger than the approximation guarantee with probability at most n−c , where c is
an arbitrarily large constant.

    Techniques While we defer a detailed technical outline of our algorithm to Section 2, we
discuss the overall algorithmic strategy here. At a high level, the algorithm starts by reducing to an
input which has a planar modulator of size k O(1) . We refine the properties of this modulator in
several phases to arrive at a decomposition of the instance into k O(1) parts, each of which corresponds
to a planar subgraph which can be embedded so that it only communicates with the rest of the
graph via k O(1) vertices which lie on the outer face. Then we process each part independently, and
find a solution preserver of size k O(1) which, intuitively, is a vertex set containing a constant-factor
approximate solution for each of the exponentially many ways in which the remainder of the graph
can be planarized and embedded. The union over these solution preservers has size k O(1) and is
guaranteed to contain a constant-factor approximate solution to Vertex planarization. We can
therefore interpret the remaining vertices as “forbidden to be deleted” without significantly affecting
the optimum. With this interpretation, we can replace these forbidden vertices by gadgets of total
size k O(1) which enforces the same conditions on the behavior of solutions, thereby leading to the
approximate kernelization of size k O(1) .
    Although our algorithm consists of several phases, we consider the computation of solution
preservers, for planar subgraphs with a k O(1) -size set of terminals, the most crucial. Roughly
speaking, given a plane graph C with some terminal set T ⊆ V (C) of size k O(1) , we want to compute
a set M ⊆ V (C) of size k O(1) with the following guarantee: for every graph G with mvp(G) ≤ k
that can be obtained from C by inserting vertices and edges which are not incident on any vertex
of V (C) \ T , there should be an O(1)-approximate planar modulator S in G satisfying S ∩ V (C) ⊆
M ∪ T . In particular, it might be necessary for the solution to disconnect some subsets of the
terminals. This task resembles Vertex multiway cut on planar graphs. However, the kernelization
task for Vertex planarization is significantly harder because the obstacles which have to be
intersected in the planarization problem (partial minor models of K5 and K3,3 ) are significantly
more complex than simply paths between terminals which have to be intersected in Multiway

                                                   3
         a        b                                                               b
j                          j         a       b               j           1                    b
                      c                          c                                    c
         1                           1                                                            c
                                                                         a                            a   jd
i        3            d              3                               i        d
              4                                      d                            4
    2                                                            2
                                                     i                                                        i

h                     e    e                     h           h                        e   h                   e
         gf                          fg                                  gf                       gf


    Figure 1: The leftmost figure shows a vertex set D (circles) in an input graph G for Vertex
    planarization which induces a planar subgraph together with its neighborhood (squares). The
    vertices NG (D) have neighbors in the remainder of the graph. Planarizing G may require removing
    some vertices of D, to allow the remainder of D to be re-embedded consistently with the remaining
    graph (visualized schematically in gray, in the remaining figures). The second figure shows that
    when removing {2, 4}, the embedding of terminals {h, g, f, e} can be flipped, potentially allowing
    an embedding compatible with the remainder. In the third figure, removing vertex 3 allows part
    of the remainder to be drawn inside, and part of the remainder outside the subgraph. In the last
    figure, removing {1, 2, 3, 4} allows different subsets of terminals to be embedded in different regions
    of the remaining graph.


    cut. See Figure 1 for an example how removing some vertices allow the terminals to be drawn in a
    different arrangement, which may play a role in merging the embedding of C with the remainder of
    the graph. We adapt the techniques from the (exact) kernelization for Vertex multiway cut on
    planar graphs by Jansen, Pilipczuk, and van Leeuwen [JPvL19] to reduce the problem to the case
    where all the terminals from the set T are embedded on the outer face of the plane graph C. The
    phenomenon that planar graph problems become easier when all terminals lie on the outer face has
    been exploited in multiple settings [Ben19, BM89, EMV87, JPvL19, PPSL18].
        As one of our main algorithmic contributions, we develop a theory of inseparability to capture
    graphs with terminal vertices, in which no vertex set S can separate two subsets of Ω(|S|) terminals
    each. We show that whenever a plane graph C, whose terminals lie on the outer face, is inseparable
    then deleting any vertex set within C can be simulated by removing a set of terminals of comparable
    size. If C is not inseparable, we decompose it recursively into k O(1) inseparable subgraphs and
    collect small separators violating inseparability. These separators suffice to build approximate
    solutions to Vertex planarization.
        Compared to planar multiway cut, another challenge comes from the fact that the graph only
    becomes planar after removing a solution, which means that first we need to decompose the
    graph into planar parts. Here we face the additional difficulty that no deterministic polynomial-
    time OPTO(1) -approximation is known for Vertex planarization, while many kernelization
    algorithms [AMSZ19, BvD10, FLMS12, JP18, JPvL19, PPSL18], start by applying such an algorithm
    to learn the rough structure of the graph and apply reduction rules.
        Finally, we remark why the existing techniques from kernelization for F-minor-free dele-
    tion [FLMS12] are not applicable when F does not contain a planar graph. If F contains a planar
    graph and G − S is F-minor-free, then G − S has constant treewidth. Using an approximate solution
    as S, this allows the graph G − S to be decomposed into near-protrusions, subgraphs Ci of constant
    treewidth of which any optimal solution removes all but O(1) neighbors. The characteristics of
    each bounded-treewidth subgraph Ci can be analyzed exactly in polynomial time using Courcelle’s
    theorem. The fact that only O(1) neighbors survive after removing an optimal solution implies

                                                         4
that the number of relevant deletion sets in Ci which may be needed to accommodate a choice
of solution outside Ci , can be bounded by k O(1) . This allows an irrelevant vertex or edge to be
detected if |V (Ci )| > k O(1) , and leads to a polynomial kernelization. In Vertex planarization we
work with a target graph class of unbounded treewidth. This means that we cannot use Courcelle’s
theorem, and that a totally new approach is needed to control how forbidden minor models are
formed by connections through terminals.

    Related work Apart from the mentioned FPT algorithms [MS12, Kaw09, JLS14] for Vertex
planarization, there is an FPT algorithm for the generalization of deleting vertices to obtain a
graph of genus g for fixed g due to Kociumaka and Pilipczuk [KP19] and an FPT algorithm for
general F-minor-free deletion by Sau, Stamoulis, and Thilikos [SST20]. An exact algorithm for
Vertex planarization with running time 1.7347n was given by Fomin and Villanger [FTV11].
    The edge deletion version of the planarization problem, which is related to the crossing num-
ber [CMT20], has also been studied intensively. Chuzhoy, Makarychev and Sidiropoulos [CMS11]
gave approximation algorithms for bounded-degree graphs and inputs which are close to planar.
Approximation algorithms for the dual problem, finding a planar subgraph with a maximum number
of edges, were given by Calinescu et al. [CFFK98].

    Organization In Section 2 we give a detailed outline of our algorithm. A substantial amount
of technical preliminaries is given in Section 3, after which we devote one section to each step
of the algorithm until we combine all the pieces in Section 9. Section 10 contains proofs of the
planarization criteria formulated in the preliminaries. We conclude in Section 11.


2    Outline
We present the algorithm as a series of graph modifications G = G0 → G1 → · · · → G` , where
G` is a graph of size k O(1) . In each step we need to show two types of safeness: (a) the forward
safeness which links mvp(Gi+1 ) to mvp(Gi ), and (b) the backward safeness which allows us to lift
a given solution in Gi+1 of size at most k to a solution in Gi of comparable size, in polynomial
time. The simplest type of modification involves removal of an irrelevant vertex. A vertex v ∈ V (G)
is called k-irrelevant if for any set S ⊆ V (G) \ {v} of size at most k, when G − (S ∪ {v}) is
planar then also G − S is planar. When such a vertex v is identified, it can be safely removed
from the graph, because any solution in G − v of size at most k is also valid in G. This provides
the backward safeness of this modification, whereas forward safeness here follows since removal
of a vertex cannot increase the optimum. The irrelevant vertex technique has found use in
many previous algorithms for Vertex planarization [JLS14, Kaw09, MS12], as well as other
problems [AKK+ 17, FGT19, FLP+ 20, KP19, LSV20, RS12]. We start by explaining how to certify
planarity, which is needed in proving the irrelevance of a vertex and other properties used in proving
the backward safeness.

Planarization criterion Let G be a planar graph and C be a cycle in G. We consider the set of
C-bridges in G which is given by all the connected components of G − V (C), together with their
attachments at C, and all chords of C. If two C-bridges are drawn on the same side of the Jordan
curve given by the embedding of C, then they cannot “overlap”, that is, their attachments at C
cannot be intrinsically crossed. This gives a necessary and sufficient condition for a graph G with a
cycle C to be planar: (1) the graph given by the pairs of overlapping C-bridges must be bipartite,
and (2) each C-bridge, when considered together with C, must induce a planar graph. This criterion


                                                  5
allows us to examine the planarity of G in some sense locally and it has been leveraged in several
contexts [DETT99, HT74, JLS14]. While this proof technique has already been used for showing
that the center of a flat Θ(k) × Θ(k)-grid is k-irrelevant, we utilize the criterion to derive irrelevance
in less restrictive settings.

Finding a size-k O(1) planar modulator A common approach in designing kernelization algo-
rithm for vertex-deletion problems is to bootstrap with an approximate solution: a modulator X in
graph G to the considered graph property, of size O(k) or even k O(1) ; and then focus on compressing
the connected components of G − X. Unfortunately, there is no such approximation algorithm
known for Vertex planarization. The best available approximation factor is (log n)O(1) [KS17]
but, even though we are able to bound (log n) by k O(1) , it works in randomized quasi-polynomial
time. As we aim at deterministic polynomial time, we need another approach.
    It suffices to reduce the treewidth of G to k O(1) and then a greedy argument allows us to
either construct a planar modulator X of size k O(1) or conclude that there is no solution of size
at most k. Bounding treewidth plays an important role in parameterized algorithms for Vertex
planarization and may be performed by combining the irrelevant vertex technique with either
recursion [JLS14, Kaw09] or iterative compression [CFK+ 15, MS12]. None of these techniques are
compatible with polynomial-time kernelization though. We reduce the treewidth differently by
detecting a large grid minor and inspecting its non-planar regions.
    Grid minors are known to form obstructions to having small treewidth and vice versa: a graph
with treewidth Ω(tc ), for a sufficiently large constant c, contains a t × t-grid as a minor [CT21]. In
particular, there is a randomized polynomial-time algorithm that given a graph G either returns a
minor model of the t × t-grid in G or a tree decomposition of G of width tO(1) [CC16]. However,
as we want to avoid randomization, we show that in our setting we can find either a t × t-
grid minor or a tree decomposition of width tO(1) deterministically. First, we can assume that
log n ≤ k log k as otherwise the FPT algorithm for Vertex planarization with running time
2O(k log k) n [JLS14] works in polynomial time. Next, we find a subgraph of relatively large treewidth
and maximal degree ∆ = 4 [KT10] and exploit the poly(log n, ∆)-approximation algorithm for
Vertex planarization [KS19] to find a planar subgraph of large treewidth, where a large grid
minor can be found deterministically.
    Supplied with a minor model of the t × t-grid in G, where t = Ω(k 3 ), we look for a subgrid of size
Θ(k) × Θ(k) which (a) represents a planar subgraph of G and (b) is not incident to any non-local
edges, i.e., edges connecting non-adjacent branch sets of the grid. A vertex located in the center of
such a subgrid must be k-irrelevant. Unfortunately, such a subgrid may not exist when there are
many pairs of branch sets connected by non-local edges. If these edges are sufficiently scattered
over the grid, we prove that some non-local edges remain untouched by any set of k vertices which
implies that mvp(G) > k. Otherwise, we inspect the spanning trees inside the branch sets of the
minor model to identify a vertex v which must be present in every solution of size at most k—we
call such a vertex k-necessary—which again can be safely removed from G.

Strengthening the planar modulator From now on we can assume that we are given a planar
modulator X in G of size k O(1) and a tree decomposition of G − X of width k O(1) . Note that
X might not be a valid solution for the original instance because the conditions of the backward
safeness apply only to solutions of size at most k. We would like to augment the modulator X to
satisfy the following property: when C is a connected component of G − X, then the graph induced
by NG [C] (the set C together with its neighborhood) is planar. Such a modulator is called strong.
This concept is inspired by the idea of tidying sets [VBMN12] (cf. [JP18]), introduced in the context


                                                    6
of kernelization for different graph problems, aimed at finding a possibly larger modulator which
remains valid after removing a single vertex from it. Observe that when the maximal degree in
G is bounded by k O(1) then NG [X] is a strong modulator of size k O(1) but we cannot make such
an assumption on the vertex degrees. Unlike the previous steps, constructing a strong modulator
requires graph modifications which are lossy, i.e., the lifting algorithm might increase the size of the
solution by a constant factor.
    We construct a vertex set Y ⊆ V (G) \ X of size k O(1) , such that for any connected component
of G − (X ∪ Y ) it holds that |NG (C) ∩ X| ≤ 2. First, we try to construct such a set Y greedily,
marking maximal subtrees in the tree decomposition of G − X which represent connected subgraphs
of G − X with at least 3 neighbors in X. If this procedure terminates in k O(1) steps, we mark
a set of bags in the tree decomposition, whose union gives the set Y . Otherwise, we identify a
triple x1 , x2 , x3 ∈ X and a family of k + 3 disjoint subsets Vi ⊆ V (G) \ X such that each G[Vi ] is
connected and {x1 , x2 , x3 } ⊆ NG (Vi ). Suppose that a set S ⊆ V (G) is a planar modulator of size at
most k. There must be 3 indices i1 , i2 , i3 such that Vij ∩ S = ∅ for j = 1, 2, 3. If {x1 , x2 , x3 } ∩ S = ∅
then G − S contains a K3,3 -minor so it is not planar. This means that any solution of size at most
k must contain at least one of x1 , x2 , x3 . We can therefore remove x1 , x2 , x3 from the graph and
decrease the value of parameter to k − 1. This forms a lossy reduction in which we decrease the
parameter at the expense of approximation factor 3. To get a strong modulator, we need to begin
this process with a modulator X satisfying the following: inserting any two vertices from X to any
connected component of G − X does not affect its planarity. This can be enforced with a lossy
reduction of a similar kind.
    When no reductions are applicable anymore, we are able to find a strong planar modulator X of
size k O(1) and we proceed by reducing the size of the components of G − X. However, the number of
such components can be also large. We observe that the components with just one or two neighbors
in X can be neglected, as they can be easily compressed in a later step of the algorithm. To reduce
the number of the remaining components, we proceed as before: if there are too many components
with at least 3 neighbors in X, then we can locate 3 vertices in X such every solution of size at
most k must contain at least one of them; hence all three vertices can be removed.

Reducing the radial diameter Let GhCi denote the subgraph of G induced by the set NG [C]
with the vertices from NG (C) marked as the boundary vertices, also referred to as terminals. As
the strong modulator allows us to assume that GhCi is planar for each connected component C
of G − X, we can consider some plane embedding of GhCi. This allows us to unlock the vast
algorithmic toolbox available for problems on plane graphs. The current task can be regarded as
processing a plane graph with k O(1) terminals and mimicking the behavior of any size-k solution
over C with another plane graph of size k O(1) with the same set of terminals, by possibly paying a
constant factor in the approximation ratio. A landmark result of this kind is a polynomial (exact)
kernelization for Steiner tree on planar graphs parameterized by the number of edges in the
solution [PPSL18] which also found application in designing a polynomial kernelization for Vertex
multiway cut on planar graph parameterized by the size of the solution [JPvL19]. Observe that
our task is at least as hard as Vertex multiway cut on planar graphs (see [JPvL19, Lemma 6.3])
because the behavior of a solution over C might be to disconnect some sets of terminals. However,
preserving multiway cuts is not enough because removing the solution vertices can, e.g., reduce
the size of a minimal separator between some terminals in GhCi from 3 to 2, which may play a
role when considering the remaining vertices outside NG [C]. Observe that different biconnected
components can be re-arranged in an embedding by pivoting around an articulation point that
separates them, while different triconnected components attaching to the same separation pair can


                                                      7
also be reordered among each other (see Figure 1). Hence (nearly) separating vertices leads to more
freedom in making an embedding and therefore understanding the separation properties of vertex
sets is paramount to understand their role in potential solutions.
    An important special case for terminal-based problems on plane graphs occurs when all the
terminals are located on a common face. We would like to reduce our task to this special case but
a priori we have no control over the embedding of terminals. As a step in this direction, we reduce
the radial diameter to k O(1) , where the radial diameter is the longest sequence of incident faces
necessary to make a connection between a pair of vertices in the plane graph.
    Following the idea for Vertex multiway cut on planar graphs [JPvL19], we decompose a
plane graph into outerplanarity layers: a vertex belongs to layer i if it lies on the outer face of
the graph obtained by i − 1 rounds of removing all vertices on the outer face. As a worst-case
scenario, consider one group T1 of terminals located on the outer face, a deep “well” of nested
cycles from different outerplanarity layers, each of length o(k), and another group T2 of terminals
located inside the well. Note that the terminals are connected in G to other parts of the graph so in
this situation we cannot find any k-irrelevant vertices. We show that only the O(k) outerplanarity
layers closest to T1 or T2 are relevant and in the middle layers it suffices to preserve a maximal
family of vertex-disjoint (T1 , T2 )-paths P. Assume for a moment that the number of paths in
P is at least 4. First we give an argument to ensure that these paths never go back and forth
through the outerplanarity layers. Then, we remove all the vertices and edges in the middle layers
leaving out only subdivided edges corresponding to subpaths from P. Now we need to argue for the
backward safeness of this modification. When S is some solution in G of size at most k, it must
leave untouched at least 2 cycles in the relevant part closer to T1 and 2 cycles on the side of T2 .
If G − S contains at least 4 paths from P, we use them together with the 4 cycles, to surround
each removed vertex/edge with 2 cycles separating it from the terminals, thus showing that it is
irrelevant to the solution S. If the (T1 , T2 )-flow is less than 4 after removing S, then S must contain
sufficiently many vertices in the considered subgraph so they may be “charged” to pay for adding to
S a (T1 , T2 )-separator in GhCi, which again allows is to apply the planarity criterion. In the latter
case the lifting algorithm increases the size of the solution by a factor 31 .
    To justify the previous argument we have assumed the value of (T1 , T2 )-flow in GhCi to be at
least 4. However, it might be the case that there exists a long sequence of (T1 , T2 )-separators, each
of size less than 4. In this case, we cannot decompose GhCi into a bounded number of subgraphs to
which the given reduction applies. However, we can then locate a large subset A ⊆ C so that A
contains no terminals and NG (A) is of size O(1), so NG [A] induces a large planar subgraph of G
with small boundary. To deal with such subgraphs, we take advantage of the technique known as
protrusion replacement.

Protrusion replacement For a graph G and X ⊆ V (G), we define the boundary of X, denoted
∂G (X), as the set of vertices from X adjacent to some vertex outside X. An r-protrusion in a
graph G is a set X ⊆ V (G) so that |∂G (X)| ≤ r and the treewidth of G[X] is at most r. The
standard protrusion replacement technique [BFL+ 16] is aimed at replacing a large r-protrusion
with a subgraph of size at most γ(r), where γ is some function, while preserving the optimum value
of the instance for the considered optimization problem. The function γ might be growing very
rapidly, so we can apply this technique only for constant r. Since we want to perform lifting of a
potentially non-optimal solution, we use the lossless variant of the technique [FLMS12], introduced
for the sake of designing approximation algorithms for F-minor-free deletion for families F
   1
     The factor 3 is obtained by choosing the constants more carefully. We omit the details here for the sake of keeping
the outline simple.



                                                           8
containing a planar graph, which provides us with such a mechanism.
    We are interested in compressing a planar subgraph G[X] of boundary r = O(1) which may
however have large treewidth. To make it amenable to protrusion replacement, we first need to
reduce the treewidth of G[X] to a constant. It is easy to show that for any optimal planar modulator
S it holds that |S ∩ X| ≤ r, as otherwise the solution (S \ X) ∪ ∂G (X) would be smaller. By an
argument based on grid minors, if tw(G[X]) is larger than some function of r, then X contains
a vertex irrelevant for any optimal solution. As we work with solutions which are not necessarily
optimal, we show that the lifting algorithm can perform a preprocessing step which still allows us
to assume that |S ∩ X| ≤ r and the argument above remains valid.

 Solution preservers At this point of the algorithm we can assume that for each connected
 component C of G − X the boundaried graph GhCi has radial diameter bounded by k O(1) . Towards
 the final goal of reducing each component GhCi to size k O(1) , we take a two-step approach. First,
we mark a vertex set SC ⊆ C of size k O(1) so that we can assume that there is an α-approximately
 optimal planar modulator S such that S ∩ C ⊆ SC , where α is some constant. Such a set SC is
 called an α-preserver for C. For example, if |NG (C)| ≤ α, then ∅ is an α-preserver for C because we
 can replace any solution S with |S ∩ C| ≥ 1 with a solution (S \ C) ∪ NG (C). Afterwards, we will
 compress the subgraphs within C \ SC for which we know that the approximately optimal solution
 does not remove any vertices inside them.
      We show how to reduce the task of constructing a solution preserver for C, given an embedding
 of GhCi with bounded radial diameter, to the case where in the embedding of GhCi all the terminals
 lie on the outer face. Such a boundaried plane graph is called single-faced. Bounded radial diameter
 in a plane graph H implies that any pair of vertices can be radially connected by a curve that
 intersects only a bounded number of vertices of the drawing and does not intersect any edges. Using
 this property, given a set of terminals T ⊆ V (H) we can mark a bounded-size set of to-become
 terminals T 0 ⊇ T such that any pair of vertices in T 0 can be connected by a sequence of vertices
 of T 0 such that successive vertices in the sequence lie on a common face. This implies that there
 is a single face in the embedding of H − T 0 that contains the images of all boundary vertices T 0 .
A boundaried plane graph with this property is called circumscribed. There is a subtle difference
 between circumscribed and single-faced boundaried plane graphs (see Figure 2 on page 11). If H is
 circumscribed, then the edges incident to the boundary of H may separate some boundary vertices
 from the outer face of H. We decompose H, by marking some vertices as to-become terminals,
 into boundaried subgraphs adjacent to at most two terminals of H. We want to say that such a
 boundaried subgraph becomes single-faced after discarding these two special vertices. This is done
 by exploiting properties of inclusion-wise minimal separators in a plane graph. Such a separator can
 be represented by a closed curve intersecting some vertices. By removing one side of this separator
 and treating the separator as a boundary for the other side, we obtain a single-faced boundaried
 plane graph. In order to avoid tedious topological arguments, we give a contraction-based criterion
 to show that a given boundaried graph admits a single-faced embedding.
      This construction may require removal of at most two vertices from the obtained boundaried
 subgraph GhC 0 i to make it single-faced. However, if S is a solution and S ∩ C 0 is non-empty we can
“charge” this part of the solution to pay for the removal of the two vertices, turning an α-preserver
 into an (α + 2)-preserver.

Single-faced boundaried graphs and inseparability By the arguments above, it suffices to
give a construction of an α-preserver for C in the case where GhCi is equipped with a single-faced
embedding. This is the crucial part of the proof. We introduce the notion of c-inseparability for


                                                  9
boundaried graphs and a decomposition into c-inseparable parts. A c-separation in a boundaried
graph H is a partition of V (H) into sets (A, S, B) such that S is an (A, B)-separator and each
of A ∪ S, B ∪ S contains at least c · |S| terminals. A boundaried graph H is c-inseparable if it
admits no c-separation. This can be compared to the concept of (s, c)-unbreakable graphs and the
(s, c)-unbreakable decomposition [CCH+ 16, LRSZ18]. A graph G is (s, c)-unbreakable if there is
no partition of V (G) into sets (A, S, B) such that S is an (A, B)-separator, |S| ≤ s and each of
A, B contains at least c vertices. The main difference is that c-inseparability concerns separators
of arbitrarily large size as long as both sides of the separation contain relatively many terminals.
Moreover, this framework works particularly well with single-faced boundaried plane graphs.
     Suppose that we are given a set C ⊆ V (G) so that GhCi is c-inseparable for some constant c > 1
and GhCi admits a fixed single-faced embedding. Let S be some solution in G and X = S ∩ C. If
the set X separates some subsets of terminals (that is, vertices from NG (C)) in GhCi then, due to
c-inseparability, one of these subsets has less than c · |X| terminals. If we only cared about preserving
separations, we could add these terminals to the solution instead of using X. As mentioned before,
just preserving separations is not enough because we also care about sets which “almost separate”
some terminals. Let us consider the set X 0 given by all the vertices in GhCi within a reach of three
internal faces from some vertex from X. We show that the behavior of X 0 is similar to a separator
of size O(|X|) and there must be one large connected component of GhCi − X 0 containing all but
O(|X|) terminals. We define a new solution S 0 by adding to S all vertices from NG (C) that do
not belong to the large component. Next, we argue that vertices from X can be removed from S 0
without invalidating the solution. To justify this, we show for each x ∈ X the existence of three
nested connected sets in X 0 \ X that separate x from the terminals not contained in S 0 . This suffices
to apply the planarity criterion and to show that S 0 \ X is a planar modulator in G implying that
there is an O(1)-approximate solution disjoint from C.
     To apply the approach for c-inseparable graphs described above, we need to decompose a single-
faced boundaried plane graph H into c-inseparable parts. We show that whenever H admits some
(2c)-separation, then there must exist a c-separation (A, S, B) which separates the set of terminals
into two connected segments along the outer face. The number of choices for such a separation
is quadratic in the number of terminals, so it can be found in polynomial time. Furthermore, by
exploiting the minimality of the separator S we show that S splits H into two smaller single-faced
boundaried plane graphs H1 , H2 contained respectively in A ∪ S and B ∪ S. We proceed by marking
the vertices from S as additional terminals and decomposing H1 , H2 recursively. A priori this
construction may mark a large number of vertices so we need some kind of a measure to ensure
that the number of splits will be only k O(1) . Let t be the number of terminals in H, s be the size
of the separator S, and t1 , t2 be respectively the number of terminals in H1 and H2 . Because we
work with a c-separation we have that c · s ≤ min(t1 , t2 ). This implies that even though t1 + t2 > t,
these quantities are in some sense balanced. It turns out that it suffices to take c = 4 to obtain an
inequality t21 + t22 < t2 . We consider a semi-invariant given by the sum of squares of the boundary
sizes in the family of constructed boundaried graphs and prove that this measure decreases at
every split, providing us with the desired guarantee. After marking k O(1) vertices, we decompose
H into single-faced boundaried plane graphs which are 8-inseparable (due to the 2-approximation
for finding separations). By the arguments from the previous paragraph, we prove that the set of
marked vertices forms a 168-preserver for C. This leads to a 170-preserver for the general case.

Compressing the negligible components After collecting the solution preservers, we obtain
a planar modulator X 0 ⊆ G with the following property: there exists a 170-approximate solution S 0
such that S 0 ⊆ X 0 . In the final step of the algorithm we want to compress each connected component


                                                   10
C of G − X 0 . By the arguments given so far we can assume that the boundaried graphs GhCi are
circumscribed. Note that whenever there exists a cycle C 0 within the circumscribed embedding of
GhCi which separates NG (C) from some vertices of C, we can modify the C 0 -bridges disjoint from
NG (C) without violating the solution S 0 which is disjoint from C. We cannot however just contract
these C 0 -bridges because we need to also provide the backward safeness: we should ensure that no
new size-(≤ k) solutions S 6⊆ X 0 are introduced which cannot be lifted back to solutions in G. Let
B be a C 0 -bridge so that V (B) ∩ NG (C) = ∅. We show how to replace B with a well of depth O(k)
and perimeter k O(1) in a safe way. In order to advocate safeness, we prove a new criterion for an
edge e to be k-irrelevant, applicable when e is surrounded by k + 3 cycles, separating e from the
non-planar part of the graph but intersecting each other at some vertex. We show that we can
identify a bounded number of subgraphs in C, such that after applying the described modification
to each of them we can mark k O(1) vertices in C to split it into subgraphs of neighborhood size O(1).
These subgraphs can be compressed using protrusion replacement, which concludes the algorithm.




              G − NG [A]




                                                                                         t




Figure 2: Illustration of the various notions of boundaried graphs. On the left, a plane boundaried
graph GhAi is drawn, together with a schematic representation of the remaining graph G−V (GhAi) =
G−NG [A]. The squares represent the vertices of NG (A), which form the boundary of the boundaried
graph GhAi and interact with the rest of the graph as indicated by the dotted blue lines. The circles
(either red or black) represent vertices of A. By treating the red vertices as additional terminals, the
boundaried plane graph decomposes further into connected components formed by black vertices.
Two are highlighted on the right, together with their neighborhoods which form their boundaries.
The one on the top right is single-faced since all boundary vertices lie on the outer face. The one the
bottom right is not, since t does not lie on the outer face. However, this boundaried graph is still
circumscribed since the images of all terminals lie in the infinite region of the plane graph obtained
by removing the terminals. The term circumscribed comes from the fact that there exists a curve
intersecting the drawing only at edges incident on the boundary, with all boundary vertices on one
side and all remaining vertices on the other side. Such a curve always exists for a circumscribed
plane graph. One is depicted in the figure, in gray.




                                                  11
3    Preliminaries
    Lossy kernelization We give the definitions forming the framework of lossy kernelization.
Following [LPRS17], we define a parameterized minimization problem Π as a computable function
Π : Σ∗ × N × Σ∗ → R ∪ {∞}. For an instance (I, k) ∈ Σ∗ × N, a solution is a string of length at
most |I| + k. The value of a solution s ∈ Σ∗ equals Π(I, k, s). The objective is to find a solution
s ∈ Σ∗ minimizing Π(I, k, s). We define OPTΠ (I, k) = mins∈Σ∗ , |s|≤|I|+k Π(I, k, s).
Definition 3.1 ([LPRS17]). Let α > 1 be a real number and Π be a parameterized minimization
problem. An α-approximate polynomial-time pre-processing algorithm A for Π is a pair of
polynomial-time algorithms. The first one is called the reduction algorithm and computes a map
RA : Σ∗ × N → Σ∗ × N. Given as input an instance (I, k) of Π, the reduction algorithm outputs
another instance (I 0 , k 0 ) = RA (I, k).
    The second algorithm is called the solution lifting algorithm. This algorithm takes as input
an instance (I, k) ∈ Σ∗ × N of Π, the output pair (I 0 , k 0 ) = RA (I, k) of the reduction algorithm, a
solution S 0 to (I 0 , k 0 ), and outputs a solution S to (I, k) such that

                                     Π(I, k, S)     Π(I 0 , k 0 , S 0 )
                                                ≤α·                     .
                                    OPTΠ (I, k)     OPTΠ (I 0 , k 0 )
Definition 3.2 ([LPRS17]). Let α > 1 be a real number, Π be a parameterized minimization
problem and f : N → N be a function. An α-approximate kernelization of size f is an α-approximate
polynomial-time pre-processing algorithm A for Π, such that if (I 0 , k 0 ) = RA (I, k) then |I 0 | + k 0 ≤
f (k).

     Formalization of the problem In general, the role of the parameter k is to measure the
difficulty of the optimization task. Similarly as in the standard kernelization theory, we are often
interested in detecting solutions of size at most k. A natural way to implement this concept is to
treat the solutions to (I, k) of value larger than k as equally bad, assigning them value k + 1 in
the function Π. We refer to [LPRS17, §3.2] for an extended discussion on “capping the objective
function at k + 1”.
     Following this convention, we define a parameterized minimization problem Πvp . Let G be a
graph, k be an integer, and S ⊆ V (G). We assume an arbitrary string encoding of graphs and sets
and define Πvp (G, k, S) = min(|S|, k + 1) if G − S is planar, and Πvp (G, k, S) = ∞ otherwise.

    Graph theory The set {1, . . . , p} is denoted by [p]. For a finite set S and non-negative
integer i we use Si to denote the collection of size i subsets of S. We consider simple undirected
graphs without self-loops. A graph G has vertex set V (G) and edge set E(G) ⊆ V (G)
                                                                                            
                                                                                         2    . We
use shorthand n = |V (G)| and m = |E(G)|. For (not necessarily disjoint) A, B ⊆ V (G), we
define EG (A, B) = {uv | u ∈ A, v ∈ B, uv ∈ E(G)}. The open neighborhood of v ∈ V (G) is
NG (v) := {u | uv ∈ E(G)}, where we omit the subscript G if it is clear from S
                                                                             context. For a vertex
set S ⊆ V (G) the open neighborhood of S, denoted NG (S), is defined as v∈S NG (v) \ S. The
closed neighborhood of a single vertex v is NG [v] := NG (v) ∪ {v}, and the closed neighborhood
of a vertex set S is NG [S] := NG (S) ∪ S. The boundary of a vertex set S ⊆ V (G) is the set
∂G (S) = NG (V (G) \ S). For A ⊆ V (G), the graph induced by A is denoted by G[A] and we say that
the vertex set A is connected in G if the graph G[A] is connected. For v ∈ V (G), S ⊆ V (G) \ {v},
let RG (v, S) be the set of vertices reachable from v in G − S, and RG [v, S] = RG (v, S) ∪ S. We
sometimes omit the subscript when it is clear from context. We use shorthand G − A for the graph
G[V (G) \ A]. For v ∈ V (G), we write G − v instead of G − {v}. For A ⊆ E(G) we denote by G \ A

                                                     12
the graph with vertex set V (G) and edge set E(G) \ A. For e ∈ E(G) we write G \ e instead
of G \ {e}. If e = uv, then V (e) = {u, v}.
     For two sets X, Y ⊆ V (G), a set S ⊆ V (G) is an unrestricted (X, Y )-separator if no connected
component of G − S contains a vertex from both X \ S and Y \ S. Note that such a separator
may intersect X ∪ Y . Equivalently each (X, Y )-path (that is, a path with one endpoint in X and
the other one in Y ) contains a vertex of S. By Menger’s theorem, the minimum cardinality of
such a separator is equal to the maximum cardinality of a set of pairwise vertex-disjoint (X, Y )-
paths. A restricted (X, Y )-separator S is an unrestricted (X, Y )-separator which additionally
satisfies S ∩ (X ∪ Y ) = ∅. By default, by an (X, Y )-separator we mean a restricted (X, Y )-separator.
Again by Menger’s theorem, the minimum cardinality of such a separator for non-adjacent X, Y
is equal to the maximum cardinality of a set of pairwise internally vertex-disjoint (X, Y )-paths.
A restricted (resp. unrestricted) (X, Y )-separator S is called minimal if no proper subset of S
is a restricted (resp. unrestricted) (X, Y )-separator. If X = {x}, Y = {y}, we simply refer to
(x, y)-paths and (x, y)-separators.
     A tree is a connected graph that is acyclic. A rooted tree T is a tree together with a distinguished
vertex r ∈ V (T ) that forms the root. A (rooted) forest is a disjoint union of (rooted) trees. In tree
T with root r, we say that t ∈ V (T ) is an ancestor of t0 ∈ V (T ) (equivalently t0 is a descendant of
t) if t lies on the (unique) path from r to t0 . A vertex set A ⊆ V (G) is an independent set in G if
EG (A, A) = ∅. A graph G is bipartite if there is a partition of V (G) into two independent sets A, B.
For an integer q, the graph Kq is the complete graph on q vertices. For integers p, q, the graph
Kp,q is the bipartite graph (A ∪ B, E), where |A| = p, |B| = q, and uv ∈ E whenever u ∈ A, v ∈ B.
A Hamiltonian path (resp. cycle) in a graph G is a path (resp. a cycle) whose vertex set equals
V (G). The diameter of a connected graph is the maximum distance between a pair of vertices,
where the distance is given by the shortest path metric. For a graph G, we define CC(G) to be the
family of subsets of V (G) which induce the connected components of G.

Definition 3.3. The fragmentation of a set X ⊆ V (G) is defined as max(|X|, `), where ` is the
number of connected components of G − X with at least 3 neighbors in X.

    Contractions and minors The operation of contracting an edge uv ∈ E(G) introduces a new
vertex adjacent to all of NG ({u, v}), after which u and v are deleted. The result of contracting
uv ∈ E(G) is denoted G/uv. For A ⊆ V (G) such that G[A] is connected, we say we contract A if
we simultaneously contract all edges in G[A] and introduce a single new vertex. We say that H is a
contraction of G, if we can turn G into H by a (possibly empty) series of edge contractions. We
can represent the result of such a process with a mapping Π : V (H) → 2V (G) , such that the sets
(Π(h))h∈V (H) form a partition of V (G), induce connected subgraphs of G, and EG (Π(h1 ), Π(h2 )) 6= ∅
if and only if h1 h2 ∈ E(H). This mapping is called a contraction-model of H in G and the sets Π(h)
are called branch sets.
    We say that H is a minor of G, if we can turn G into H by a (possibly empty) series of
edge contractions, edge deletions, and vertex deletions. The result of such a process is given by a
minor-model, i.e., a mapping Π : V (H) → 2V (G) , such that the branch sets (Π(h))h∈V (H) are pairwise
disjoint, induce connected subgraphs of G, and h1 h2 ∈ E(H) implies that EG (Π(h1 ), Π(h2 )) 6= ∅.

   Planar graphs and modulators A plane embedding of graph G is given by a mapping from
V (G) to R2 and a mapping that associates with each edge uv ∈ E(G) a simple curve on the plane
connecting the images of u and v, such that the curves given by two distinct edges can intersect
only at the image of a vertex that is a common endpoint of both edges. A plane graph is a graph



                                                   13
with a fixed planar embedding, in which we identify the set of vertices with the set of their images
on the plane.
    A face in a plane embedding of a graph G is a maximal connected subset of the plane minus the
image of G. We say that a vertex or an edge lies on a face f if its images belongs to the closure
of f . In every plane embedding there is exactly one face of infinite area, referred to as the outer
face. All other faces are called interior. Let F denote the set of faces in a plane embedding of G.
For a plane graph G, we define the radial graph G      b as a bipartite graph with the set of vertices
V (G) = V (G) ∪ F and edges given by pairs (v, f ) where v ∈ V (G), f ∈ F , and v lies on the face f .
    b
    Given a plane graph G and two vertices u and v, we define the radial distance dG (u, v) between
u and v in G to be one less than the minimum length of a sequence of vertices that starts at
u, ends in v, and in which every two consecutive vertices lie on a common face. We define
R`G (v) = {u ∈ V (G) | dG (u, v) ≤ `}, that is, the ball of radius ` around v. The radial diameter
of a plane graph G equals maxu,v∈V (G) dG (u, v). We also define the weak radial distance wG (u, v)
between u and v to be one less than the minimum length of a sequence of vertices that starts at
u, ends in v, and in which every two consecutive vertices either share an edge or lie on a common
interior face. If u, v lie in different connected components of G then wG (u, v) = ∞. Observe that
wG (u, v) ≥ dG (u, v). We define WG   ` (v) = {u ∈ V (G) | w (u, v) ≤ `}.
                                                            G
    A graph is called planar if it admits a plane embedding. Planarity of an n-vertex graph can
be tested in time O(n) [HT74]. If a graph G is planar and H is a minor of G, then H is also
planar. By Wagner’s theorem, a graph G is planar if and only if G contains neither K5 nor K3,3 as a
minor. A graph G is planar if and only if every biconnected component in G induces a planar graph.
A planar modulator in G is a vertex set X ⊆ V (G) such that G − X is planar. The minimum vertex
planarization number of G, denoted mvp(G), is the minimum size of a planar modulator in G.

Definition 3.4. A vertex set X ⊆ V (G) in G is called a strong planar modulator in G if for every
connected component C of G − X the subgraph induced by NG [C] is planar. A planar modulator X is
called r-strong if additionally for every connected component C of G − X it holds that |NG (C)| ≤ r.

    Treewidth and the LCA closure A tree decomposition of graph G is a pair (T, χ) where T
is a rooted tree, and χ : V (T ) → 2V (G) , such that:

   1. For each v ∈ V (G) the nodes {t | v ∈ χ(t)} form a non-empty connected subtree of T .

   2. For each edge uv ∈ E(G) there is a node t ∈ V (G) with {u, v} ⊆ χ(t).

The width of a tree decomposition is defined as maxt∈V (T ) |χ(t)| − 1. The treewidth of a graph G,
denoted tw(G), is the minimum width of a tree decomposition of G.
                                                       node t ∈ V (T ), we use Tt denote the subtree
    For a tree decomposition (T, χ) of a graph G and a S
                                 0                 0
of T rooted at t. For a subtree T of T , we use χ(T ) = t∈V (T 0 ) χ(t). We use the following standard
properties of tree decompositions.

Observation 3.5. If (T, χ) is a tree decomposition of a graph G and t ∈ V (T ), then the set χ(t) is
an unrestricted (χ(Tt ), V (G) \ χ(Tt ))-separator.

Observation 3.6. If (T, χ) is a tree decomposition of a graph G and H is a connected subgraph
of G, then the nodes {t ∈ V (T ) | χ(t) ∩ V (H) 6= ∅} form a connected subtree of T .

   The following lemma, originating in the work on protrusion decompositions of planar graphs [BFL+ 16],
shows how a vertex set whose removal bounds the treewidth of a planar graph can be used to divide
the graph into pieces whose neighborhood-size can be controlled.


                                                 14
Lemma 3.7 ([FLSZ19, Lem. 15.13]). Suppose that graph G is planar, S ⊆ V (G), and tw(G−S) ≤ η.
Then there exists Y ⊆ V (G) \ S, such that2

    • |Y | ≤ 4(η + 1) · |S|,

    • each connected component of G − (S ∪ Y ) has at most 2 neighbors in S and at most 2η
      neighbors in Y .

Furthermore, given G, S, and a tree decomposition of G − S of width η, such a set Y can be computed
in polynomial time.

    We also use the least common ancestor closure and its properties.

Definition 3.8. Let T be a rooted tree and S ⊆ V (T ) be a set of vertices in T . We define the least
common ancestor of (not necessarily distinct) u, v ∈ V (T ), denoted as LCA(u, v), to be the deepest
node x which is an ancestor of both u and v. The LCA closure of S is the set

                                        LCA(S) = {LCA(u, v) : u, v ∈ S}.

Lemma 3.9 ([FLSZ19, Lem. 9.26, 9.27, 9.28]). Let T be a rooted tree, S ⊆ V (T ), and M = LCA(S).
All of the following hold.

   1. Each connected component C of T − M satisfies |NT (C)| ≤ 2.

   2. |M | ≤ 2 · |S| − 1.

   3. LCA(M ) = M .

Boundaried graphs A boundaried graph is a pair (G, T ), where G is a graph and T ⊆ V (G) is
the set of the boundary vertices. When H = (G, T ) is a boundaried graph, we write V (H) = V (G)
and ∂(H) = T . A labeled boundaried graph is a triple (G, T, λ), where (G, T ) is a boundaried graph
and λ : [|T |] → T is a bijection assigning an integer label to each boundary vertex. A boundaried
graph H is called r-boundaried if |∂(H)| = r. Note that in some other papers working with
boundaried graphs, the term r-boundaried graph is used to refer to what we would call a labeled
r-boundaried graph. A boundaried graph H is called (≤ r)-boundaried if it is r0 -boundaried for
some r0 ≤ r.
    Given two labeled r-boundaried graphs H1 = (G1 , T1 , λ1 ) and H2 = (G2 , T2 , λ2 ), we can glue the
graphs along their boundaries to form a (non-boundaried) graph H = H1 ⊕ H2 . The gluing operation
takes the disjoint union of G1 and G2 and identifies, for each i ∈ [r], vertex λ1 (i) with λ2 (i). If there
are vertices u1 , v1 ∈ T1 and u2 , v2 ∈ T2 so that u1 , u2 are identified and v1 , v2 are identified, then they
are adjacent in H1 ⊕ H2 if u1 v1 ∈ E(G1 ) or u2 v2 ∈ E(G2 ). If two r-boundaried graphs H1 , H2 are
subgraphs of a common graph G with ∂(H1 ) = ∂(H2 ) = V (H1 ) ∩ V (H2 ), then we can glue them by
picking an arbitrary λ : [r] → ∂(H1 ) = ∂(H2 ), resulting in the graph (H1 , ∂(H1 ), λ) ⊕ (H2 , ∂(H2 ), λ).
Since the result is independent of the choice of λ, we simply denote the graph resulting from this
gluing process as H1 ⊕ H2 .

Definition 3.10. For A ⊆ V (G) we denote by G∂ [A] = (H, T ) the boundaried graph induced by A
where H = G[A] and T = ∂G (A). Furthermore we define GhAi = (H, T ) as the boundaried graph
given by H = G[NG [A]] and T = NG (A).
    2
      In the original statement of the lemma, Y is a superset of S but we choose this formulation, with a slightly weaker
size guarantee, for our convenience.


                                                           15
   For a vertex set A ⊆ V (G) we use G∂ [A] as a shorthand for G∂ [V (G) \ A]. Observe that for any
A ⊆ V (G) it holds that G = GhAi ⊕ G∂ [A].
   Consider a graph G, a subset A ⊆ V (G), and the boundaried graph H = GhAi. When
B ⊆ V (H) \ ∂(H) = A, then HhBi = GhBi since NH [B] = NG [B]. Following the convention for
(non-boundaried) graphs, we define a boundaried plane graph as a pair (G, T ), where G is a plane
graph and T ⊆ V (G). We will be interested in boundaried graphs admitting well-behaving plane
embeddings, in which the boundary vertices are lying “on the outside”.

Definition 3.11. A boundaried plane graph H is called circumscribed if the graph H − ∂(H) is
connected and all vertices of ∂(H) are embedded in the outer face of H − ∂(H).

Definition 3.12. A connected boundaried plane graph H is called single-faced if ∂(H) is non-empty
and all the vertices from ∂(H) lie on the outer face of H. A disconnected boundaried plane graph H
is called single-faced if each connected component of H is single-faced. A boundaried graph is called
single-faced if it admits an embedding as a single-faced boundaried plane graph.

    Note that a connected boundaried plane graph H can be circumscribed but not single-faced,
which happens if edges between vertices of ∂(H) separate a vertex of ∂(H) from the outer face. We
use the fact that one can always augment a plane graph by inserting a new vertex within some face
and making it adjacent to all vertices lying on that face.

Observation 3.13. A boundaried graph is single-faced if and only if the graph H,
                                                                               b obtained from
H by adding a new vertex uH adjacent to each vertex in ∂(H), is planar and connected. The graph
H
b is called the closure of H.

Planarity criteria Let G be a graph, v ∈ V (G), and S ⊆ V (G) \ {v}. We say that S planarizes v
or S is v-planarizing if RS [v, S] induces a planar subgraph of G.
    Let C be a cycle in graph G. A C-bridge in G is a subgraph of G which is either a chord of C,
or a connected component B of G − V (C) together with all edges between B and C, and their
endpoints. If B is a C-bridge, then the vertices V (B) ∩ V (C) are the attachments of B. Two
C-bridges B1 , B2 overlap if at least one of the following conditions is satisfied: (a) B1 and B2 have
at least three attachments in common, or (b) the cycle C contains distinct vertices a, b, c, d (in this
cyclic order) such that a and c are attachments of B1 , while b and d are attachments of B2 .

Observation 3.14. Let G be a plane graph and C be a cycle in G. If two C-bridges in G overlap,
then one of them is embedded entirely in the interior of C and the other one is embedded entirely in
the exterior of C.

    For a graph G with a cycle C, the corresponding overlap graph O(G, C) has the C-bridges in G
as its vertices, with an edge between two bridges if they overlap. The following characterization of
planar graphs will be essential to our arguments.

Lemma 3.15 ([DETT99, Thm. 3.8]). A graph G with a cycle C is planar if and only if the following
two conditions hold:

   • For each C-bridge B in G, the graph B ∪ C is planar.

   • The overlap graph O(G, C) is bipartite.

   Although the preceding lemma was originally stated only for biconnected graphs, it is easily
seen to be true for all graphs.


                                                  16
    Similarly as in previous work [JLS14], we will use Lemma 3.15 to argue that a vertex v which
is surrounded by Ω(k) disjoint separators, each of whose removal leaves v in a planar connected
component, is irrelevant with respect to planar deletion sets of size k. The exact type of separators
employed will differ from earlier work, though. We introduce some terminology to formalize these
concepts.
    In a graph G we say that a sequence of pairwise disjoint vertex sets (S1 , . . . , Sm ) is nested with
respect to v if for each i ∈ [m S − 1] the set Si is a restricted (v, Si+1 )-separator. Note that this is
equivalent to stating that v ∈ / m i=1 Si and RG (v, Si ) ⊆ RG (v, Si+1 ) for each i ∈ [m − 1].
    Similarly, for ` ∈ N and two vertices v0 , v`+1 in a graph G, a sequence of vertex-disjoint
restricted (v0 , v`+1 )-separators (Si )`i=1 is nested if Si is a (Si−1 , Si+1 )-separator for each i ∈ [`],
interpreting S0 = {v0 } and S`+1 = {v`+1 }. This implies that (S1 , . . . , Sm ) is nested with respect
to v0 , while the reverse sequence is nested with respect to v`+1 .
    The following two planarization criteria show how the planarity of subgraphs formed by reacha-
bility sets of nested separators can ensure planarity of the entire graph. The first one was already
used in prior work [JLS14]; the second one is new. Their proofs are deferred to Section 10.
Lemma 3.16 (Cf. [JLS14]). Let v0 , v3 ∈ V (G) and let S1 , S2 ⊆ V (G) be disjoint nested restricted
(v0 , v3 )-separators in a connected graph G, so that G[Si ] has a Hamiltonian cycle for each i ∈ [2]. If
RG [v0 , S2 ] and RG [v3 , S1 ] induce planar graphs, then G is planar.

Lemma 3.17. Let v0 , v4 ∈ V (G) and let S1 , S2 , S3 ⊆ V (G) be disjoint nested restricted (v0 , v4 )-
separators in a connected graph G, so that G[Si ] is connected for each i ∈ [3]. If RG [v0 , S3 ] and
RG [v4 , S1 ] induce planar graphs, then G is planar.
   As a corollary of the two lemmas above, we get that when v ∈ V (G) is separated from some
other vertex by either 2 cyclic or 3 connected nested v-planarizing separators and G − v is planar,
then G is planar as well. This corollary is sufficient for our purposes but we provide the more
general proofs for completeness.
   We will also use the following observation to argue for planarity of a graph.
Observation 3.18. Let G be a graph and let v ∈ V (G). Then G is planar if and only if for each
connected component Ci of G − v, the graph G[V (Ci ) ∪ {v}] is planar.
    Intuitively, planar drawings of the graphs G[V (C) ∪ {v}] can be merged into a planar drawing
of G by identifying the drawings of v.

Irrelevant and necessary vertices Let G be a graph. We say that a vertex v ∈ V (G) (resp.
an edge e ∈ E(G)) is k-irrelevant in G if for every vertex set S ⊆ V (G) of size at most k, we have
that G − S is planar if and only if (G − v) − S (resp. (G \ e) − S) is planar.
   The proofs of the following criteria are postponed to Section 10.
Lemma 3.19. Let G be a connected graph, k ∈ N, v ∈ V (G), and S1 , S2 , . . . , Sk+3 ⊆ V (G) \ {v}
be disjoint, connected, nested (with respect to v), and v-planarizing. Then v is k-irrelevant in G
and every edge incident to v is k-irrelevant in G.
    Finally, we introduce a variant of the previous criterion based on a sequence of vertex sets which
are disjoint except intersecting at a single vertex t.
Definition 3.20. Let G be a graph and v ∈ V (G). We say that a sequence of vertex sets
(S1 , S2 , . . . , Sm ) from V (G) is a pseudo-nested sequence of cycles with respect to v if there ex-
ists a vertex t ∈ V (G) such that the following conditions hold:

                                                    17
    1. for every i ∈ [m] we have that v 6∈ Si and the graph G[Si ] contains a Hamiltonian cycle,

    2. for every 1 ≤ i < j ≤ m it holds that RG (v, Si ) ∩ Sj = ∅,

    3. Si ∩ Sj = {t} for all i 6= j ∈ [m].

Lemma 3.21. Let G be a connected graph containing v ∈ V (G), let k ∈ N and let (S1 , S2 , . . . , Sk+3 )
be a pseudo-nested sequence of cycles with respect to v, such that each set Si is v-planarizing. Then
v is k-irrelevant in G and every edge incident to v is k-irrelevant in G.

   We say that a vertex v ∈ V (G) is k-necessary in G if for every planar modulator S in G of size
at most k it holds that v ∈ S. Note that when mvp(G) > k, then there are no such modulators,
and according to the definition every vertex in G is k-necessary.


4     Treewidth reduction
The first step of the algorithm aims at reducing the treewidth of the input graph to be k O(1) or
concluding that mvp(G) > k. While the treewidth is large we are going to find a vertex that is
either k-irrelevant or k-necessary. Such a vertex can be safely removed from the graph and we can
continue this process until no such vertex can be found anymore. We take advantage of the fact
that a graph with large treewidth must contain a large grid as a minor. However, instead of working
with grid minors directly, it will be more convenient to work with contraction models of graphs
obtained from a grid by adding edges. First, we define two types of triangulated grids: k and Γk ,
where Γk has additional edges “outside” the grid.

Definition 4.1. Let k ∈ N. The triangulated grid k is a graph with the vertex set V = [k] × [k]
and the edge set E defined by the following rules:

    1. if 1 ≤ i < k, 1 ≤ j ≤ k, then (i, j)(i + 1, j) ∈ E,

    2. if 1 ≤ i ≤ k, 1 ≤ j < k, then (i, j)(i, j + 1) ∈ E,

    3. if 1 ≤ i < k, 1 < j ≤ k, then (i, j)(i + 1, j − 1) ∈ E.

The graph Γk is obtained from k by connecting the vertex (k, k) to all vertices (i, j) ∈ [k] × [k] for
which i ∈ {1, k} or j ∈ {1, k}.

    We say that H is an extension of k if V (H) = [k] × [k] and E(k ) ⊆ E(H). The graph H can
be represented as k ] H,
                        b where H   b is another graph on vertex set [k] × [k] and E(k ) ∩ E(H)       b = ∅.
    We say that a vertex (i, j) ∈ [k] × [k] is internal if {i, j} ∩ {1, 2, k − 1, k} = ∅, i.e., it does not lie
in the two outermost layers of k . We denote the set of internal vertices in k by Int(k). For an
internal vertex x ∈ [k] × [k], we define T [x] to be the set of 25 elements from [k] × [k] forming a
5 × 5 grid around x.

4.1    Irrelevant vertices in a grid minor
The reason why working with contraction models is more convenient than working with minor
models is that a contraction model preserves separation properties of a graph.

Observation 4.2. Let Π be a contraction model of H in G. If x, y ∈ V (H), u ∈ Π(x), v ∈ Π(y),
and S ⊆ V (H) is a restricted (x, y)-separator in H, then Π(S) is a restricted (u, v)-separator in G.

                                                     18
    Let H = λ ] H  b be an extension of λ , where λ = Ω(k 3 ) is sufficiently large compared to
k. When given a contraction model of H in G, ideally we would like to find a subgrid of size
(2k + 7) × (2k + 7) which is not incident to any edges from H.  b The quantity 2k + 7 is chosen to
ensure that the central grid vertex is surrounded by k + 3 layers. If this subgrid represents a planar
subgraph of G, then Observation 4.2 implies that there exists a vertex v ∈ V (G) surrounded by
k + 3 connected v-planarizing separators in G, so v is k-irrelevant. However, it might be the case
that every (2k + 7) × (2k + 7)-subgrid is incident to some edge from H.b We show that this imposes
strong conditions on any potential planar modulator of small size.

Lemma 4.3. Let λ > k ∈ N, H = λ ] H      b be an extension of λ , and Π be a contraction model of
H in G. Suppose there are 4 · 31 · (k + 2)4 internal vertices which are non-isolated in H.
                                  2                                                        b Then
either mvp(G) > k or G contains a k-necessary vertex. Furthermore, there is a polynomial-time
algorithm that either finds a k-necessary vertex or correctly concludes that mvp(G) > k.

   Although the lemma is formulated for any integers λ > k, its preconditions give an implicit lower
bound on λ in terms of k. Before proving Lemma 4.3 we show how it helps in finding irrelevant or
necessary vertices.

Lemma 4.4. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a graph G, an integer k, and a minor
model Π of λ in G, where λ = 312 ·(2k +7)3 +4, either outputs a k-necessary vertex or a k-irrelevant
vertex, or correctly concludes that mvp(G) > k.

Proof. We can assume that G is connected, as otherwise we just consider the connected component
of G containing the branch sets of Π. We turn Π into a contraction model of an extension of λ as
follows. Initialize H = λ . While there is a vertex v ∈ V (G) not contained in any branch set but
adjacent to one, we insert it into this branch set. Since G is connected, when this process terminates
then the union of the branch sets is V (G). Next, if there are vertices u, v ∈ V (G), uv ∈ E(G),
belonging to branch sets of x, y, xy 6∈ E(H), insert xy into H. After handling all edges in G, we
turn Π into a contraction model of H, being an extension of λ . Let us keep the variable Π to
denote this contraction model and represent H as λ ] H.    b
    We partition Int(λ) into the vertex sets of 31 · (2k + 7)4 > 4 · 312 · (k + 2)4 + k many disjoint
                                                     4

(2k + 7) × (2k + 7)-subgrids Ai ⊆ [λ] × [λ]. Each subgrid contains k + 3 layers surrounding a
central vertex. For each of these subgrids, we check whether Π(Ai ) induces a planar subgraph of G
using the classic linear-time algorithm [HT74]. If at least k + 1 of these subgraphs are non-planar,
then clearly mvp(G) > k and we can terminate the algorithm. Next, we check if the number of
internal vertices which are non-isolated in H b is at least 4 · 312 · (k + 2)4 . If so, we use Lemma 4.3
to either find a k-necessary vertex or conclude that mvp(G) > k. Otherwise, there is at least one
(2k + 7) × (2k + 7)-subgrid A ⊆ [λ] × [λ] which (1) is not incident to any edge from H          b and for
which (2) Π(A) induces a planar subgraph of G. Let x ∈ A be the central vertex in A and v be
any vertex from Π(x). Next, let SiH be the (k + 4 − i)-th outermost layer of A for i ∈ [k + 3], so
we count the layers starting from x. From (1) we get that RH (x, SiH ) ⊆ RH (x, Si+1    H ) for i ∈ [k + 2]
              H ] ⊆ A. Since Π is a contraction model, the separation properties can be lifted
and RH [x, Sk+3
from H to G (see Observation 4.2). Therefore RG (v, Π(SiH )) ⊆ RG (v, Π(Si+1      H )) for i ∈ [k + 2] and
            H )] ⊆ Π(A). We have thus constructed a sequence of k + 3 sets which are disjoint,
RG [x, Π(Sk+3
connected, and nested with respect to v. By (2) these sets are v-planarizing. Finally Lemma 3.19
implies that v is k-irrelevant.

    In order to prove Lemma 4.3 we need several observations about how inserting additional edges
into k affects its susceptibility to planarization. First we show that under some conditions inserting


                                                    19
an edge into a subgraph of k makes it non-planar. It is an adaptation of an argument from
[CFK+ 15, §7.8].

Lemma 4.5. Let H be an extension of k and let U ⊆ [k] × [k] induce a connected subgraph of k .
Suppose that there exist distinct x, y ∈ U such that x is internal, T [x] ⊆ U , and xy ∈ E(H) \ E(k ).
Then H[U ] is not planar.

Proof. We will construct a K5 -minor within H[U ]. Let x = (i, j). The first branch set B1 is
just {x}. Next, we divide the neighborhood of x in k into sets B2 = {(i, j − 1), (i + 1, j − 1)},
B3 = {(i + 1, j), (i, j + 1)}, B4 = {(i − 1, j), (i − 1, j + 1)}. Each Bi for i ∈ [4] induces a connected
subgraph of k and each pair of them is connected by an edge from E(k ). Let B1,2,3,4 = 4i=1 Bi
                                                                                                     S
and B50 = T [x] \ B1,2,3,4 . Then B50 is adjacent in k to B2 , B3 , B4 , but not to B1 . Since xy 6∈ E(k ),
the vertex y is not contained in B1,2,3,4 . Furthermore, B50 is an unrestricted (y, B1,2,3,4 )-separator
in k . By assumption k [U ] is connected, so there exists a path P within U connecting y to B50 ,
which is disjoint from B1,2,3,4 . This path can be a singleton when y ∈ B50 . We set B5 = B50 ∪ V (P ).
Then EH (B1 , B5 ) 6= ∅ because xy ∈ E(H). Therefore B1 , B2 , B3 , B4 , B5 form branch sets of a minor
model of K5 in H[U ].

Lemma 4.6. Let S ⊆ [k] × [k] for some k ∈ N. Then the graph k − S has at most |S| + 1 connected
components.

Proof. If follows from the definition that k admits a Hamiltonian path; let P denote such a path.
Removing |S| vertices can divide the path P into at most |S| + 1 connected components. The graph
P − S can be turned into k − S by adding edges and this operation can only decrease the number
of connected components, which implies the claim.

    Next, we show that if some branch set of a contraction model of an extension of some ` contains
a connected subgraph C with edges to sufficiently many other branch sets, which are represented by
internal vertices from the grid, then any solution of size at most k must intersect C. This will imply
a criterion for the necessity of a vertex.

Lemma 4.7. Let k, λ ∈ N, H be an extension of λ , and Π be a contraction model of H in G.
Furthermore, let S ⊆ V (G) be of size at most k. Suppose there exists x ∈ V (H) and a vertex set
C ⊆ Π(x) such that G[C] is connected, C ∩ S = ∅ and there are ` = 30(k + 2) distinct internal
vertices x1 , . . . , x` from V (H) such that xi 6= x and NG (C) ∩ Π(xi ) 6= ∅ for each i ∈ [`]. Then G − S
is not planar.

Proof. Let HS ⊆ [λ] × [λ] be the vertices that contain a vertex from S in their branch sets, together
with x. Clearly |HS | ≤ k + 1, where the additive term accounts for x. Let IS = {y ∈ Int(λ) |
T [y] ∩ HS =6 ∅}. Since any vertex z ∈ [λ] × [λ] can belong to at most 25 different sets T [y], we
have |IS | ≤ 25 · (k + 1). Let X = {x1 , . . . , x` } \ IS . We have |X| ≥ 5(k + 2). By Lemma 4.6, the
graph λ − HS has at most k + 2 connected components, so there is a set U ⊆ [λ] × [λ] inducing
a connected component of λ − HS which contains at least 5 vertices from X. Note that x ∈            /U
since x ∈ HS . Since the graph λ does not contain K5 as a subgraph, there exists distinct vertices
x1 , x2 ∈ X ∩ U such that x1 x2 6∈ E(λ ). Note that T [x1 ], T [x2 ] ⊆ U by definition of U and IS . By
assumption, there exist vertices v1 ∈ Π(x1 ), v2 ∈ Π(x2 ), contained in NG (C). The last argument is
based on contracting C into x1 , which creates the edge x1 x2 if it does not already exist. Let us
consider a graph H 0 obtained from H by inserting the edge x1 x2 (if this edge is present in H, then
H 0 = H). Since C ∩ S = ∅, x 6∈ U , and C ⊆ Π(x), the graph H 0 [U ] is a minor of G − S. From
Lemma 4.5 we get that H 0 [U ] is not planar and the same holds for G − S.


                                                     20
    We now use the lemma above to argue that if some branch set Π(x) of a contraction model of an
extension of some ` contains a star-like structure of paths leading to neighbors in Π(x) of vertices
in different branch sets, the central vertex of this star is k-necessary.

Lemma 4.8. Let k, λ ∈ N, H be an extension of λ , and Π be a contraction model of H in G.
Suppose that x ∈ V (H), v ∈ Π(x), and there exists a family of ` = 31(k + 2) paths P1 , P2 , . . . , P`
in G, such that

   1. for each i ∈ [`], Pi is a (v, vi )-path, where vi ∈ Π(xi ) for some internal xi 6= x, and all interior
      vertices of Pi are contained in Π(x),

   2. for each i 6= j ∈ [`] it holds that xi 6= xj and V (Pi ) ∩ V (Pj ) = {v}.

Then v is k-necessary.

Proof. Consider any vertex set S ⊆ V (G) \ v of size at most k. We are going to show that G − S
cannot be planar. Since the paths P1 , P2 , . . . , P` are vertex-disjoint except for v, the set S can
intersect at most k of them. Let C ⊆ Π(x) be the union of the interiors of the paths not intersecting
S, together with v. Then G[C] is connected, C ∩ S = ∅ and there are ` − k ≥ 30(k + 2) different
internal vertices x0i for which NG (C) ∩ Π(x0i ) 6= ∅. Therefore the assumptions of Lemma 4.7 are
satisfied and thus G − S is not planar.

    When a vertex in H has sufficiently many internal neighbors, then its branch set contains a tree
spanning vertices adjacent to their branch sets, which is difficult to disconnect by any solution of
size at most k. The next lemma shows that in this case either mvp(G) > k or some vertex meets
the condition of Lemma 4.8.

Lemma 4.9. Let k, λ ∈ N, ` = 2 · 312 · (k + 2)3 , H be an extension of λ , and Π be a contraction
model of H in G. Suppose that there exists distinct vertices x0 , x1 , . . . , x` in [λ] × [λ] such that
for each i > 0 vertex xi is internal and x0 xi ∈ E(H). Then either mvp(G) > k or G contains a
k-necessary vertex. Furthermore, there is a polynomial-time algorithm that either finds a k-necessary
vertex or correctly concludes that mvp(G) > k.

Proof. By assumption there is a mapping ρ : [`] → Π(x0 ) such that for i ∈ [`] we have NG (ρ(i)) ∩
Π(xi ) 6= ∅, i.e., ρ(i) is a neighbor of Π(xi ) in Π(x0 ). Let R = {ρ(1), . . . , ρ(`)}.
    Since G[Π(x)] is connected, there exists a tree T in G[Π(x)] connecting vertices from R such
that each leaf of T belongs to R. Such a tree can be computed in polynomial time as follows. We
initialize T = G[Π(x)] and while there is an edge or a vertex from Π(x) \ R whose removal maintains
connectivity of T , we remove it. While T is not a tree with leaves in R, then we can always find a
removable edge or vertex.
    Suppose there exists a vertex v ∈ R such that ρ(i) = v for at least 31(k + 2) indices i ∈ [`]. Then
v trivially satisfies the conditions of Lemma 4.8 and hence v is k-necessary. Suppose now there
exists a vertex v ∈ V (T ) such that the degree of v in T is at least 31(k + 2). Since every leaf of T
belongs to R, there at 31(k + 2) paths in G[Π(x)] starting at v and ending at distinct vertices from
R, so that these paths are vertex-disjoint except for their starting point v. Since each such path
can be extended with an edge from R to a unique branch set xi , this again meets the conditions of
Lemma 4.8, so v is k-necessary.
    Suppose none of the previous two cases hold and consider any vertex set S ⊆ V (G) \ {v} of
size at most k. Since we have |ρ−1 (u)| ≤ 31(k + 2) for each u ∈ R, there are at least ` − 31 ·
k(k + 2) ≥ 312 · k(k + 2)2 indices for which ρ(i) 6∈ S. Next, observe that removing k vertices from
a tree of maximal degree bounded by 31(k + 2) can split it into at most 31 · k(k + 2) connected

                                                    21
components. Therefore, there is a vertex set C inducing a connected component of T − S, such that
               2 ·k(k+2)2
|ρ−1 (C)| ≥ 3131·k(k+2)   > 30(k + 2). In particular this means that G[C] is connected, C ∩ S = ∅ and
NG (C) ∩ Π(xi ) 6= ∅ for at least 30(k + 2) distinct vertices xi . We take advantage of Lemma 4.7 to
infer that G − S is not planar. Since the choice of S was arbitrary, this implies that mvp(G) > k.

   We are ready to prove Lemma 4.3 (restated below) and thus finish the proof of Lemma 4.4.
When there is a vertex in H with sufficiently many internal neighbors then the proof reduces to
Lemma 4.9. Otherwise, as H  b contains many non-isolated internal vertices, removing any k of them
cannot hit all the edges in H.
                             b Therefore any potential solution of size at most k leaves out some
subgraph to which Lemma 4.5 is applicable and thus it cannot be a planar modulator.

Lemma 4.3. Let λ > k ∈ N, H = λ ] H      b be an extension of λ , and Π be a contraction model of
H in G. Suppose there are 4 · 31 · (k + 2)4 internal vertices which are non-isolated in H.
                                  2                                                        b Then
either mvp(G) > k or G contains a k-necessary vertex. Furthermore, there is a polynomial-time
algorithm that either finds a k-necessary vertex or correctly concludes that mvp(G) > k.

Proof. We denote by A ⊆ Int(λ) the set of internal vertices which are non-isolated in H.       b If there is
a vertex x ∈ [λ] × [λ] (not necessarily internal) which is adjacent in H to at least ` = 2 · 312 · (k + 2)3
                                                                          b
vertices from A, then we arrive at the case considered in Lemma 4.9, so we are done. Suppose for
the rest of the proof that there is no such vertex and consider any vertex set S ⊆ V (G) of size at
most k. We are going to show that G − S is not planar, implying mvp(G) > k.
    We proceed similarly as in the proof of Lemma 4.7. Let HS ⊆ [λ]×[λ] be the vertices that contain
a vertex from S in their branch set. Clearly |HS | ≤ k. Let IS = {x ∈ Int(λ) | T [x] ∩ HS 6= ∅}.
Since any vertex y ∈ [λ] × [λ] can belong to at most 25 different sets T [x], we have |IS | ≤ 25 · k.
Let AS = A \ (IS ∪ NHb [HS ]). Because we have assumed an upper bound on |NHb (x) ∩ A| for
each x ∈ [λ] × [λ], we have |AS | ≥ 4 · 312 · (k + 2)4 − 25 · k − k · (` + 1) ≥ 312 · (k + 2)4 > 5 · (k + 1)2 .
Note that every vertex x ∈ AS is internal, T [x] ∩ HS = ∅, and if xy ∈ E(H),      b then y 6∈ HS .
    By Lemma 4.6, the graph λ − HS has at most k + 1 connected components, so there is a set
U ⊆ [λ] × [λ] inducing a connected component of λ − HS containing at least 5(k + 1) vertices
from AS . This gives 5(k + 1) vertices from U ∩ AS adjacent in H         b to vertices from [λ] × [λ] \ HS .
We distinguish two cases, based on whether there is a H-neighbor
                                                             b             of U ∩ AS that lies in the same
component U or not. Suppose first that there are vertices x1 , x2 ∈ U such that x1 ∈ AS and
x1 x2 ∈ E(H).
            b By the assumption, E(k ) ∩ E(H)      b = ∅ so x1 x2 6∈ E(k ). As T [x1 ] ⊆ U , this meets
the conditions of Lemma 4.5, which means that H[U ] is not planar and, since it is a minor of G − S,
the graph G − S is also not planar.
    In the remaining case, each vertex of U ∩ AS has a neighbor in H        b that does not lie in U . Since
there are at least 5(k + 1) vertices having such a neighbor and at most k + 1 components in ` − HS ,
by a counting argument there is a vertex set U 0 ⊆ [λ] × [λ] inducing another connected component
of λ − HS and at least 5 vertices in U ∩ AS adjacent in H         b to U 0 . Since the graph λ does not
contain K5 as a subgraph, there must be a pair of them which is non-adjacent in λ . Therefore,
there exist vertices x1 , x2 ∈ U ∩ AS , y1 , y2 ∈ U 0 such that x1 , x2 are distinct and internal, y1 , y2
are not necessarily internal nor distinct, x1 x2 6∈ E(λ ), x1 y1 , x2 y2 ∈ E(H).b Our final argument is
                          0                                      0
based on contracting U into x1 . Let us consider a graph H obtained from H by inserting the edge
x1 x2 . As (U ∪ U 0 ) ∩ HS = ∅, we get that H 0 [U ] is a minor of G − S. By the definition of AS we
have that T [x1 ] ⊆ U , so we can use Lemma 4.5 to conclude that H 0 [U ] (and so G − S) is not planar.
The claim follows.




                                                      22
4.2   Finding a large grid minor
In order to take advantage of Lemma 4.4, we need a way to find a large triangulated grid minor when
the input graph has large treewidth. Since the triangulated grid k is a minor of a O(k) × O(k)-grid,
for this purpose it suffices to find a large grid minor. It is known that any graph G excluding a
k × k-grid minor has treewidth bounded by k O(1) . The best known bound on the exponent at k is
9 (modulo polylogarithmic factors) [CT21]. Furthermore, there is a randomized polynomial-time
algorithm that outputs either a minor model of a k × k-grid in G or a tree decomposition of width
O(k 98 (log k)O(1) ) [CC16]. However, we would like to avoid randomization and instead we show that
in our setting we can rely on the deterministic algorithm finding a large grid minor in a planar
graph of large treewidth [GT12, FLSZ19]. For our convenience we state a version of the planar
grid theorem that already provides us with a triangulated grid (and even with a contraction model
which will come in useful in further applications). All other algorithms summoned in this section
are also deterministic.
Proposition 4.10 ([FLSZ19, Thm. 14.58]). There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a
connected planar graph G and an integer t > 0, outputs either a tree decomposition of G of width
27 · t or a contraction model of Γt in G.
    In the original statement the guarantee on the decomposition width is 27
                                                                           2 · (t + 1), but for the
sake of keeping the formulas simple, we trivially upper bound t + 1 by 2t.
    A concept more general than a grid minor is a bramble [ST93] which is, similarly as a grid
minor, an object dual to a tree decomposition. Kreutzer and Tazari [KT10] introduced the notion
of a perfect bramble which enjoys some interesting properties. First,
                                                                 √ if a graph G admits a perfect
bramble of order k, then tw(G) ≥ d k2 e − 1, and if tw(G) = Ω(k 4 log k) then G admits a perfect
bramble of order k. What is particularly interesting for us, the union of subgraphs constituting
a perfect bramble forms a subgraph of maximal degree 4. This allows us to find a subgraph of
constant degree whose treewidth is still large.
Theorem 4.11 ([KT10, Thm. 5.1(c), Cor. 5.1]). There is a constant c1 > 0 and a polynomial-time
algorithm that, given a graph G with tw(G) ≥ c1 · t7 , finds a subgraph H of G, such that the maximal
degree in H is at most 4 and tw(H) ≥ t.
     Given an n-vertex subgraph H of constant degree, we can take advantage of the approximation
algorithm for Vertex planarization by Kawarabayashi and Sidiropoulos [KS19] whose approxi-
mation factor depends on the maximal degree in H and log n, which we will later bound by k O(1) .
We state it below in a form with two possible outcomes which is convenient for our application. The
first algorithm of this kind was given by Chekuri and Sidiropoulos [CS18] but with larger exponents
in the approximation factor. If we conclude that mvp(H) > k and H is a subgraph of G, then also
mvp(G) > k and we can terminate the algorithm. Otherwise, by adjusting the constants, we can
find another (possibly large) subgraph that is planar and has large treewidth. This allows us to use
the planar grid theorem on this subgraph to find a grid minor, which is also a grid minor in the
original graph G.
Theorem 4.12 ([KS19, Cor. 1.2]). There is a constant c2 > 0 and a polynomial-time algorithm
that, given an n-vertex graph G of maximum degree ∆ and an integer k, either correctly concludes
                                                                                7
that mvp(G) > k or returns a planar modulator of size at most c2 · ∆3 · (log n) 2 · k.
    If the treewidth of G is not too large, we would like to efficiently find a tree decomposition
of moderate width. To this end, we will use the polynomial-time approximation algorithm for
treewidth by Feige et al. [FHL08].

                                                 23
Theorem 4.13 ([FHL08, Thm. 6.4]). There is a polynomial-time algorithm
                                                                   √        that, given a graph G
such that tw(G) ≤ t, outputs a tree decomposition of G of width O(t log t).

   We wrap up these ingredients into the following algorithm.

Lemma 4.14. Let d > 0 be any integer constant. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given
an n-vertex graph G and integer k > 0 such that log n ≤ k log k, either outputs a tree decomposition
of G of width O(k 36 ), or outputs a minor model of λ , where λ = d · k 5 , or correctly concludes that
mvp(G) > k.

Proof. We refer to constants c1 , c2 from
                                  7          √ Theorems 4.11 and 4.12. Let d1 = 28 · d and d2 be
a constant for which (log k) 2 ≤ d2 · k holds for all k ≥ 1. We begin with Theorem 4.13 for
t = c1√· (43 · c2 · d2 + d1 )7 · k 5·7 . If tw(G) ≤ t, we obtain a tree decomposition of G of width
O(k 5·7 log k) = O(k 36 ) and we are done. Otherwise tw(G) > c1 · (c2 · 43 · d2 + d1 )7 · k 5·7 and we
can use the algorithm from Theorem 4.11 to find a subgraph H of G, such that the maximal degree
in H is ∆ ≤ 4 and tw(H) ≥ (c2 · 43 · d2 + d1 ) · k 5 . As the next step, we execute the algorithm from
Theorem 4.12 for the graph H with ∆ ≤ 4. In the first case, it concludes that mvp(H) > k, which
implies that mvp(G) > k and we are done. Otherwise it returns a planar modulator SH ⊆ V (H) of
size at most
                                         7                          7
                      c2 · ∆3 · (log n) 2 · k ≤ c2 · 43 · (k log k) 2 · k ≤ c2 · 43 · d2 · k 5 .
The graph H 0 = H − SH is planar and tw(H 0 ) ≥ tw(H) − |SH | ≥ d1 · k 5 > 27 · d · k 5 because removing
a single vertex can decrease the treewidth by at most one. For the graph H 0 we can take advantage
of the planar grid theorem. If it is disconnected, we focus on the connected component having large
treewidth. We use Proposition 4.10 with t = λ = d · k 5 and, since treewidth of H 0 is sufficiently
large, the algorithm must return a contraction model of Γλ in H 0 . Since H 0 is a subgraph of G, we
can turn it into a minor model of λ in G.

   Finally, we need to justify the assumption that log n is small. If log n is larger than k log k, then
the exponential term of the form 2O(k log k) becomes polynomial. In such a case, we can use the
known FPT algorithm for Vertex planarization.

Theorem 4.15 ([JLS14]). There is an algorithm that, given an n-vertex graph G and an integer k,
runs in time 2O(k log k) · n and either correctly concludes that mvp(G) > k or outputs a planar
modulator of size mvp(G) ≤ k.

    After a large grid minor is identified, we invoke Lemma 4.4 to find either a necessary vertex or
an irrelevant vertex. Once such a vertex is located we can remove it from the graph and proceed
recursively. In the end, we either solve the problem or arrive at the case where treewidth is bounded.

Proposition 4.16. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a graph G and an integer k,
either

   1. outputs a planar modulator in G of size mvp(G) ≤ k, or

   2. correctly concludes that mvp(G) > k, or

   3. outputs a graph G0 together with a tree decomposition of width O(k 36 ) and an integer k 0 ≤ k,
      such that if mvp(G) ≤ k, then mvp(G0 ) = mvp(G) − (k − k 0 ). Furthermore, there is a
      polynomial-time algorithm that, given G, k, G0 , and a planar modulator S 0 in G0 of size at
      most k 0 , outputs a planar modulator S in G such that |S| = |S 0 | + (k − k 0 ).


                                                  24
Proof. First, we check if k log k < log n. If yes, then the running time 2O(k log k) ·n from Theorem 4.15
becomes polynomial. In this is the case, we take advantage of the exact FPT algorithm to either
conclude that mvp(G) > k or find a planar modulator of size mvp(G) ≤ k. Otherwise log n ≤ k log k
and we can execute the algorithm from Lemma 4.14. We choose a sufficiently large constant d to
ensure that 312 · (2k + 7)3 + 4 ≤ d · k 5 for all k ≥ 1. If the algorithm returns a tree decomposition of
width O(k 36 ) or concludes that mvp(G) > k, we are done. Otherwise we obtain a minor model of
λ in G, where λ = 312 · (2k + 7)3 + 4 (if the returned grid is larger, we can easily truncate the
minor model). We supply the computed minor model to the algorithm from Lemma 4.4. It either
outputs a k-irrelevant or k-necessary vertex v, or concludes that mvp(G) > k. In the first case we
recurse on the instance (G − v, k), in the second case we recurse on (G − v, k − 1), and on the last
case we terminate the algorithm.
    If v is k-irrelevant then any planar deletion set of size at most k in G − v is also valid in G.
This entails that whenever mvp(G) ≤ k then mvp(G − v) = mvp(G). If v is k-necessary then
mvp(G) ≤ k implies mvp(G − v) = mvp(G) − 1 and so mvp(G − v) > k − 1 implies mvp(G) > k.
Furthermore, for any planar deletion set S in G − v, clearly S ∪ {v} is a planar deletion set in G.
    Let (G0 , k 0 ) be the instance on which the recursion has stopped. Observe that when we are given
a planar modulator S 0 in G0 of size at most k 0 then by inserting the removed necessary vertices to S 0
we can turn it into a planar modulator in G of size |S 0 | + (k − k 0 ). If the algorithm has terminated
with a planar modulator in G0 of size mvp(G0 ) ≤ k 0 then we turn it into a planar modulator in G
of size mvp(G0 ) + (k − k 0 ) = mvp(G). If we received a message that mvp(G0 ) > k 0 then it implies
that mvp(G) > k. Finally, if the algorithm terminated with a tree decomposition of G0 of width
O((k 0 )36 ) we can return it and whenever the lifting algorithm receives a planar modulator S 0 in G0
of size mvp(G0 ) ≤ k 0 , it can be turned into a planar modulator in G of size |S 0 | + (k − k 0 ).


5     Constructing a strong modulator
In this section we work with a given tree decomposition of G of width k O(1) . We are going to process
such a decomposition several times and so we begin with presenting a general procedure which scans
the tree decomposition bottom-up and detects subgraphs with certain properties. The procedure is
based on the well-known covering/packing duality for connected subgraphs of a bounded treewidth
host graph (cf. [RT17, Lemma 3.10]). While such arguments are typically applied to pack and cover
cycles or minor models, we will need it in a slightly more general form. In the lemma below, we
therefore work with a family F of vertex subsets of G which is hereditary (so that F is closed under
taking subsets), requiring only a polynomial-time subroutine to recognize whether a set belongs
to F or not.

Lemma 5.1. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a graph G, a tree decomposition (T, χ)
of G, an integer k, and a polynomial-time subroutine that tests membership of vertex subsets S ⊆ V (G)
in a hereditary family F ⊆ 2V (G) , returns one of the following:
                                                                                S
   1. a subset T0 ⊆ V (T ) of size at most k, such that every set C ⊆ V (G) \ t∈T0 χ(t), for which
      G[C] is connected, belongs to F, or

    2. a collection of k + 1 disjoint vertex subsets (Vi )k+1
                                                          i=1 , such that each G[Vi ] is connected and
       Vi 6∈ F.

Proof. Recall that notation Tt stands for the subtree of T rooted at t ∈ V (T ). Observe that for
a given set U ⊆ V (G), we can check if all its connected subsets belong to F by checking if each
connected component of G[U ] belongs to F.

                                                   25
     We consider an iterative process: in each step we identify a node t ∈ V (T ) whose bag separates
some connected subsets which belong to F from the rest of the graph but their union together with
the bag of t contains a connected subset which does not belong to F.
     Initialize S0 = ∅ and U0 = ∅. In the i-th step, i ≥ 1, we consider the induced subgraph G − Ui−1 .
For t ∈ V (T ), let χi (t) = χ(t) \ Ui−1 . The pair (T, χi ) is a tree decomposition of G − Ui−1 . We
choose ti ∈ V (T ) to be a deepest node (breaking ties arbitrarily) so that χi (Tti ) contains a connected
vertex set which does not belong to F – let us refer to this set as Vi . Let Ui = Ui−1 ∪ χi (Tti )
and Si = Si−1 ∪ χi (ti ). By Observation 3.5, the set χi (ti ) separates G − Ui−1 into V (G) \ Ui and
χi (Tti ) \ χi (ti ). By the choice of ti , we know that all the connected subsets of χi (Tti ) \ χi (ti ) belong
to F. We continue this process until all connected subsets of V (G) \ Ui belong to F, so there is no
way to choose ti+1 .
     If we have performed at least k + 1 iterations, we return the sets V1 , V2 , . . . , Vk+1 . Since Vi ⊆ Ui
and Vj ∩ Ui = ∅ for j > i, these sets are disjoint. Furthermore, each of them is connected and does
not belong to F.
     If we have terminated in at most ` ≤ k iterations, then the set S` is a union of ` sets χi (ti ) and
χi (ti ) ⊆ χ(ti ). Observe that V (G) \ U` and sets χi (Tti ) \ χi (ti ), i ∈ [`], are pairwise separated by S`
in G. These sets contain only connected subsets from F. In this case we return the set of nodes
{t1 , . . . , t` }.

5.1    Planarizing small neighborhoods
In this section we work towards proving Lemma 5.4, which essentially gives a reduction to problem
instances with a tidy planar modulator U such that each component of G − U remains planar even
when reinserting two arbitrary vertices from U . To get there, we need two ingredients.
    The following simple lemma uses the fact that obstructions to planarity are connected together
with covering/packing duality in a tree decomposition to either find a planar modulator of bounded
size or conclude that any planar modulator must be large.

Lemma 5.2. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a graph G with a tree decomposition
of width t − 1 and an integer k, either returns a planar modulator in G of size at most k · t or
correctly concludes that mvp(G) > k.

Proof. We apply Lemma 5.1 for the family F of vertex subsets which induce planar subgraphs of
G. This property is hereditary and decidable in polynomial time [HT74], so the conditions of the
lemma are satisfied. In the first scenario, the algorithm returns a set of at most k nodes, so that the
union of their bags is a planar modulator of size at most k · t. Otherwise, the algorithm returns
k + 1 vertex-disjoint non-planar subgraphs. This testifies that every planar modulator must have at
least k + 1 vertices.

    The next ingredient needed for Lemma 5.4 is the following encapsulation of Lemma 5.1.

Lemma 5.3. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a graph G, sets X0 ⊆ X ⊆ V (G),
such that G − X is planar, a tree decomposition of G − X of width t − 1, and integer k, returns one
of the following:

   1. a set Y ⊆ V (G) \ X of size at most k · t, such that for each vertex set C ⊆ V (G) \ (X ∪ Y ),
      for which G[C] is connected, the graph G[C ∪ X0 ] is planar, or

   2. a collection of k + 1 disjoint vertex subsets (Vi )k+1
                                                         i=1 such that Vi ⊆ V (G) \ X, G[Vi ] is connected,
      and G[Vi ∪ X0 ] is non-planar.


                                                      26
Proof. We apply Lemma 5.1 for the graph G − X and family F of its vertex subsets defined as
follows: C ∈ F if G[C ∪ X0 ] is planar. In the first case, the union of bags of the returned nodes has
size at most k · t and satisfies condition (1). Otherwise, we obtain k + 1 disjoint connected vertex
sets that do not belong to F.

    Using these ingredients we now present the lemma that reduces an instance to one with a suitably
tidy modulator, or detects a small vertex set that allows an approximation-preserving reduction to
a smaller graph.
Lemma 5.4. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a graph G, a set X ⊆ V (G) of
size m, such that G − X is planar, a tree decomposition of G − X of width t − 1, and an integer k,
returns one of the following:
  1. a set U ⊇ X of size at most 23 · m2 · k 3 · t3 , such that for each vertex set C ⊆ V (G) \ U ,
     for which G[C] is connected, and for each X0 ⊆ U of size at most 2, the graph G[C ∪ X0 ] is
     planar, or

  2. a set X0 ⊆ V (G) of size at most 2, such that mvp(G) ≤ k implies mvp(G − X0 ) ≤ mvp(G) − 1.
Proof. For every x ∈ X we apply Lemma 5.3 with X0 = {x} and remaining parameters as in the
statement of this lemma.
     Suppose that for at least one call we obtain answer (2): a collection of k + 1 disjoint vertex
subsets (Vi )k+1
             i=1 such that Vi ⊆ V (G) \ X and G[Vi ∪ {x}] is non-planar. Assume that G admits
a planar modulator S of size ` ≤ k. Then for some i ∈ [k + 1] it holds that Vi ∩ S = ∅. Since
G[Vi ∪ {x}] is non-planar, we have x ∈ S. Therefore S \ {x} is a planar modulator for G − {x} of
size ` − 1 and the set {x} satisfies condition (2).
     Suppose otherwise, that for each x ∈ X we computed a set Yx ⊆ V (G) \ X of size at most
k · t, such that for each vertex Sset C ⊆ V (G) \ (X ∪ Yx ), for which G[C] is connected, the graph
G[C ∪ {x}] is planar. Let Y = x∈X Yx . For each x ∈ X it holds that every connected component
of G − (X ∪ Y ) is contained in some connected component of G − (X ∪ Yx ). Therefore for each
x ∈ X and each C ⊆ V (G) \ (X ∪ Y ), for which G[C] is connected, the graph G[C ∪ {x}] is planar.
     Next, we iterate over all subsets X0 ⊆ X ∪ Y of size 2 and for each we apply Lemma 5.3 to
the tree decomposition of G − (X ∪ Y ) and sets X0 , X ∪ Y . Note that we can easily turn a tree
decomposition of G − X into a tree decomposition of G − (X ∪ Y ) without increasing the width.
     Again, suppose that for at least one call we obtain answer (2): a collection of k + 1 disjoint
vertex subsets (Vi )k+1
                     i=1 such that Vi ⊆ V (G) \ X and G[Vi ∪ X0 ] is non-planar. Assume that G
admits a planar modulator S of size ` ≤ k. Then for some i ∈ [k + 1] it holds that Vi ∩ S = ∅. Since
G[Vi ∪ X0 ] is non-planar, we have X0 ∩ S 6= ∅. Therefore S \ X0 is a planar modulator for G − X0
of size at most ` − 1 and the set X0 satisfies condition (2).
     In the remaining case, for each considered X0 = {x, y} we have obtained a set Z{x,y} ⊆
V (G) \ (X ∪ Y ) of size at most k · t, such that for each vertex set
                                                                  S C ⊆ V (G) \ (X ∪ Y ∪ Z{x,y} ), which
is connected in G, the graph G[C ∪ {x, y}] is planar. Let Z = {x,y}⊆X∪Y Z{x,y} and U = X ∪ Y ∪ Z.
For each set {x, y} ⊆ X ∪ Y it holds that every connected component of G − U is contained in
some connected component of G − (X ∪ Y ∪ Z{x,y} ). Therefore for each {x, y} ⊆ X ∪ Y and each
C ⊆ V (G) \ U , which is connected in G, the graph G[C ∪ {x, y}] is planar.
     To argue that the constructed set U satisfies condition (2), it remains to handle pairs {x, y} ⊆ U ,
which are not contained in X ∪ Y . Let C ⊆ V (G) \ U be a vertex set connected in G. If x, y ∈ Y ∪ Z,
then C ∪ {x, y} ⊆ V (G) \ X and this set induces a planar graph because G − X is planar by the
assumption. The remaining case is when x ∈ X and y ∈ Z. If y ∈ NG (C), then C ∪ {y} is a
connected subset of V (G) \ (X ∪ Y ) and it remains planar with x attached due to the first round

                                                   27
of the construction. If y 6∈ NG (C), then G[C ∪ {x}] is planar by the same argument as above and
adding a vertex which has degree 1 or is isolated preserves planarity.
    We established that attaching any pair of vertices from U to any connected component of G − U
preserves its planarity. It follows that the same holds if we consider attaching just a single vertex
from U . Finally, we estimatethe size of U . The set Y is a union of m sets Yx and so |Y | ≤ m · k · t.
The set Z is a union of X∪Y 2    ≤ (2|Y |)2 ≤ 4 · (m · k · t)2 many sets Z{x,y} and so |Z| ≤ 4 · m2 · k 3 · t3 .
As |X ∪ Y | ≤ |Z|, the upper bound follows.

5.2    Reducing the neighborhood of planar components
Using Lemma 5.4 we can reduce to an instance which has a tidy planar modulator U such that
each component of G − U remains planar when reinserting two vertices from U . In this section we
work towards obtaining even stronger properties for components outside the modulator as described
in Definition 3.4, so that each component outside the modulator induces a planar subgraph when
taken together with its entire neighborhood.
    The following lemma is inspired by existing tools to compute protrusion decompositions for
problems on planar graphs (cf. [FLSZ19, Lemma 15.13]). It is used to either build an enhanced
modulator which gives a bound on the size of the neighborhood of each remaining component,
or identify a triple of vertices that allows an approximation-preserving graph reduction step by
detecting three vertices which are part of many minor models of K3,3 .

Lemma 5.5. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a graph G, set X ⊆ V (G) of size m
such that G − X is planar, a tree decomposition (T, χ) of G − X of width t − 1, and an integer
k > 0, returns one of the following:

   1. a set Y ⊆ V (G) \ X of size at most 23 · m3 · k · t, such that for each connected vertex set C of
      G − (X ∪ Y ) it holds that |NG (C) ∩ X| ≤ 2 and |NG (C) ∩ Y | ≤ 2t,

   2. a triple {v1 , v2 , v3 } ⊆ X and a collection of k + 3 disjoint vertex subsets (Vi )k+1
                                                                                            i=1 such that
      Vi ⊆ V (G) \ X, G[Vi ] is connected, and E(Vi , vj ) 6= ∅ for all i ∈ [k + 3], j ∈ [3].

Proof. We apply Lemma 5.1 for the graph G − X, parameter k 0 = m3 · (k + 2) and family F of its
vertex subsets defined as follows: C ∈ F if |NG (C) ∩ X| ≤ 2.
    In the first scenario, the algorithm returns                       0
                                            S a set S of at most k nodes from V (T ), so that for
each connected component C of G − (X ∪ t∈S χ(t)) it holds that |NG (C) ∩ X| ≤ 2,     S which implies
the same statement for each connected vertex set C. Let M = LCA(S) and Y = t∈M χ(t)). By
Lemma 3.9, point (b), |M | ≤ 2|S| − 1 and so |Y | ≤ 2 · m3 · (k + 2) · t. We upper bound k + 2 with
3k ≤ 22 k to get the formulated estimation. By Lemma 3.9, point (a), for each connected vertex set
C of G − (X ∪ Y ) (which is contained in a union of bags from a connected subtree of T − M by
Observation 3.6) the set NG (C) ∩ Y is contained in at most 2 bags, hence |NG (C) ∩ Y | ≤ 2t. We
have M ⊇ S, so it also holds that |NG (C) ∩ X| ≤ 2.
    In the second scenario, we obtain a collection of m3 · (k + 2) + 1 disjoint vertex sets Vi which
induce connected subgraphs of G and do not belong to F. Each Vi contains some triple from X in
its neighborhood and, since there are m         3
                                        3 ≤ m distinct triples from X, one triple has to appear in
the common neighborhood of at least (k + 3) sets Vi . It can be identified in polynomial time by
enumerating all the triples from X.

   Using the preceding lemma, the next algorithm makes progress towards obtaining a strong
modulator by ensuring planarity for each connected component outside the modulator, even when
taken together with its neighborhood.

                                                      28
Lemma 5.6. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a graph G, set X ⊆ V (G) of size m
such that G − X is planar, a tree decomposition of G − X of width t − 1, and an integer k > 0,
returns one of the following:
   1. a set Z ⊇ X of size at most 213 · m6 · k 10 · t10 , such that for each connected vertex set C in
      G − Z the graph G[NG (C)] is planar and |NG (C) ∩ Z| ≤ 2t + 2, or

   2. a set X0 ⊆ V (G) of size at most 3, such that mvp(G) ≤ k implies mvp(G − X0 ) ≤ mvp(G) − 1.
In particular, when G is planar (so mvp(G) = 0) then the algorithm must return answer (1).
Proof. We apply Lemma 5.4 for the same arguments as in the statement of this lemma. We either
obtain a set X0 ⊆ V (G) of size at most 2, which satisfies condition (2) or a set U ⊇ X of size
at most 23 · m2 · k 3 · t3 , such that each connected vertex set C ⊆ V (G) \ U remains planar after
attaching any vertex or a pair of vertices from U . In the first case we are done and in the second
case, we proceed with Lemma 5.5 by substituting X ← U . We distinguish two cases, depending on
the outcome of Lemma 5.5.
    Suppose first that we have obtained a triple {v1 , v2 , v3 } ⊆ U and a collection of k + 3 disjoint
vertex subsets (Vi )k+1      i=1 such that Vi ⊆ V (G) \ U , G[Vi ] is connected, and E(Vi , vj ) 6= ∅ for all
i ∈ [k + 3], j ∈ [3]. Assume that G admits a planar modulator S of size ` ≤ k. Then for
some {i1 , i2 , i3 } ∈ [k + 3] it holds that Vij ∩ S = ∅ for j ∈ [3]. If {v1 , v2 , v3 } ∩ S = ∅, then
{v1 , v2 , v3 , Vi1 , Vi2 , Vi3 } would form branch sets of a K3,3 minor in G − S, which is not possible.
Hence, {v1 , v2 , v3 } ∩ S 6= ∅ and S \ {v1 , v2 , v3 } is a planar modulator in G − {v1 , v2 , v3 } of size at
most ` − 1. We can thus return X0 = {v1 , v2 , v3 } to satisfy condition (2).
    Now suppose that the algorithm from Lemma 5.5 terminated with scenario (1). We have obtained
a set Y of size at most 23 · |U |3 · k · t ≤ 212 · m6 · k 10 · t10 . Let Z = U ∪ Y , which satisfies the claimed
size bound since |U | ≤ |Y |. For each connected vertex set C of G − (U ∪ Y ) Lemma 5.5 guarantees
that |NG (C) ∩ U | ≤ 2 and |NG (C) ∩ Y | ≤ 2t, so |NG (C) ∩ Z| ≤ 2t + 2. The set NG [C] \ U is a
connected vertex subset of V (G) \ U and by the properties of U guaranteed by Lemma 5.4 for
X0 = NG (C) ∩ U , this implies that G[(NG [C] \ U ) ∪ (NG (C) ∩ U )] is planar, and so G[NG [C]] is
planar.

   We are ready to state and prove the main result of this subsection, which encapsulates the
previous reduction steps using the notion of strong modulators (Definition 3.4). In addition, it gives
a bound on the number of connected components with at least three neighbors which occur outside
the new modulator X 0 , using the terminology of fragmentation (Definition 3.3).
Proposition 5.7. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a graph G with a tree decompo-
sition of width t − 1, and an integer k > 0, either correctly concludes that mvp(G) > k, or outputs a
graph G0 with a (2t + 2)-strong planar modulator X 0 , and an integer k 0 ≤ k, so that:
   1. if mvp(G) ≤ k, then mvp(G0 ) ≤ mvp(G) − (k − k 0 ),

   2. the fragmentation of X 0 in G0 is O(k 49 t48 ),

   3. given a planar modulator S 0 in G0 , one can turn it into a planar modulator in G of size at
      most |S 0 | + 3 · (k − k 0 ) in polynomial time.
Proof. We begin with Lemma 5.2 to either find a planar modulator X of size at most λ = k · t or
conclude that mvp(G) > k. In the first case, we can easily turn the given tree decomposition of G
into a tree decomposition of G − X of no greater width. We keep the values of t, λ intact within
this proof, while k is a free variable in the recursion.

                                                      29
    We present the graph modification as a recursive process in which we are given a tuple
(G, X, T, χ, k) where X is a planar modulator in G of size at most λ and (T, χ) is a tree de-
composition of G − X of width at most t. We either conclude that (G, X, k) satisfies the claim or
recurse on some tuple (G0 , X 0 , k − 1, T 0 , χ0 ) so that |X 0 | ≤ |X|. In order to prove the forward safeness
we will show that when mvp(G) ≤ k then mvp(G0 ) ≤ mvp(G) − 1. To prove the backward safeness
we show that when given a planar modulator S 0 in G0 we can turn in into a planar modulator in G
of size at most |S 0 | + 3.
    Given a tuple (G, X, T, χ, k), we apply Lemma 5.6. If we get the outcome (2), we obtain a set
X0 ⊆ V (G) of size at most 3 such that mvp(G) ≤ k implies mvp(G − X0 ) ≤ mvp(G) − 1: this yields
the forward safeness. The backward safeness follow from the fact that when S is a planar modulator
in G − X0 then S ∪ X0 is a planar modulator in G. Since G − (X ∪ X0 ) is a subgraph of G − X, we
can turn (T, χ) into a tree decomposition of G − (X ∪ X0 ) of no greater width.
    If we get the outcome (1) from Lemma 5.6, we obtain a (2t + 2)-strong planar modulator Z ⊇ X.
We have |Z| ≤ 213 · |X|6 · k 10 · t10 ≤ 213 · k 16 · t16 . We stop the recursion at this point.
    In order to bound the fragmentation of Z, let us consider another recursive process, in which we
process a triple (G, Z, k) where Z is a (2t + 2)-strong planar modulator in G. Whenever we recurse
on (G0 , Z 0 , k − 1) we demand |Z 0 | ≤ |Z| and consider the same safeness conditions as before: (a)
mvp(G) ≤ k implies mvp(G0 ) ≤ mvp(G) − 1, and (b) when given a planar modulator S 0 in G0 we
can turn in into a planar modulator in G of size at most |S 0 | + 3.
    Given a triple (G, Z, k) we enumerate all size-3 subsets of Z and look for a subset Z0 :=
{v1 , v2 , v3 } ⊆ Z, such that for at least k + 3 connected components (Ci )k+3      i=1 in CC(G − Z) we have
Z0 ⊆ NG (Ci ). Consider any planar modulator S in G of size ` ≤ k. Analogously as in Lemma 5.3,
we observe that for some {i1 , i2 , i3 } ∈ [k + 3] it must hold that Cij ∩ S = ∅ for each j ∈ [3]. If
Z0 ∩ S = ∅, then {v1 , v2 , v3 , Ci1 , Ci2 , Ci3 } would form branch sets of a K3,3 minor in G − S, which
is not possible. Hence, Z0 ∩ S 6= ∅ and S \ Z0 is a planar modulator in G − Z0 of size at most
` − 1. In such a scenario, we recurse on (G − Z0 , Z \ Z0 , k − 1). We have mvp(G) ≤ k implies
mvp(G − Z − 0) ≤ mvp(G) − 1. Again, when S is a planar modulator in G − Z0 then S ∪ Z0 is a
planar modulator in G. Furthermore, Z \ Z0 is a (2t + 2)-strong planar modulator in G − Z0 .
    When we can no longer find such a set Z0 ⊆ Z, we stop the recursion and return G and X 0 = Z.
By a counting argument, the number of connected components in G − Z with at least 3 neighbors
cannot be larger than |Z|3 · (k + 2) = O(k 49 t48 ), which gives a bound on the fragmentation of Z.


6     Reducing the radial diameter
From now on we work with an extended modulator so that GhCi is planar for each connected
component C of G − X. We will consider a boundaried plane graph H given by a plane embedding
of GhCi; we begin with an arbitrary embedding. We can describe modifications to the graph G
by modifications to H as every vertex or edge in H represents a vertex or edge in G. To make
the arguments clear, we avoid modifying vertices from ∂(H) or edges incident to ∂(H), so no such
modification to H affects other parts of the graph G outside C.
    In order to replace H with a smaller boundaried graph H 0 , which approximately preserves its
structure, we are going to reduce the task to the case where the vertices of ∂(H) are embedded in a
convenient way. In particular, we are interested in the case there ∂(H) is located on a single face
of H. As a step in this direction, we first reduce the radial diameter of H to k O(1) . One obstacle
towards this is given by the existence of a large subset X ⊆ V (H) \ ∂(H), with a small (constant)
boundary, that separates some vertices from ∂(H) in H. We are going to compress such subsets
using the technique of protrusion replacement. This technique will also come in useful in the final


                                                      30
part of the proof.

6.1   Protrusion replacement
An r-protrusion in a graph G is a vertex set X ⊆ V (G), such that |∂G (X)| ≤ r and tw(G[X]) ≤ r.
For a vertex set X ⊆ V (G) with |∂G (X)| = r, a bijection λ : [r] → ∂G (X), and a labeled r-
boundaried graph H, the act of replacing X by H through λ means (1) creating labeled r-boundaried
graphs H X = (G[X], ∂G (X), λ), H V (G)\X = (G[(V (G) \ X) ∪ ∂G (X)], ∂G (X), λ), and (2) replacing
G = H V (G)\X ⊕ H X by G0 = H V (G)\X ⊕ H. The graph H X is introduced above only for the sake
of giving a more detailed view on the process. We say that G0 is obtained from G by replacing a set
X ⊆ V (G) if there exist H, λ so that X is replaced by H through λ.
    The standard protrusion replacement technique [BFL+ 16, FLMS12] is aimed at reducing large
r-protrusions, where r = O(1), while preserving the optimum value of the instance for the considered
optimization problem. Since we want to perform lifting of a potentially non-optimal solution, we
use the lossless variant of the technique which provides us with such a mechanism. The definition
below can be instantiated for any min-CMSO (or max-CMSO) vertex subset problem Π. In such a
problem we are given a graph G and the objective is to find a set S ⊆ V (G) minimizing |S| such that
the predicate PΠ (G, S), expressible in Counting Monadic Second-Order (CMSO) logic, is satisfied.
For our purposes it is only relevant that this definition captures the Vertex planarization
problem. We specify the labeling λ directly in the definition whereas the formulation in [FLMS20]
assumes an implicit labeling on the boundary of X.

Definition 6.1 (Lossless Protrusion Replacer [FLMS12, FLMS20]). A lossless protrusion replacer
for a min-CMSO vertex subset problem Π is a family of algorithms, with one algorithm for every
constant r. The r-th algorithm has the following specifications. There exists a constant γ(r) such that
given an instance G and an r-protrusion X in G containing at least γ(r) vertices, |∂G (X)| = r0 ≤ r,
the algorithm runs in polynomial time and outputs an instance G0 with the following properties.

   • G0 is obtained from G by replacing (G[X], ∂G (X)) by a labeled r0 -boundaried graph H with
     less than γ(r) vertices, through some labeling λ : [r0 ] → ∂G (X), and thus V (G0 ) < V (G).

   • OPT(G0 ) ≤ OPT(G).

   • There is an algorithm that runs in polynomial time and, given a feasible solution S 0 to G0 ,
     outputs a set X ∗ ⊆ X such that S = (S 0 \ V (H)) ∪ X ∗ is a feasible solution to G and
     |S| ≤ |S 0 | + OPT(G) − OPT(G0 ).

    In the original statement, the lossless protrusion replacer is defined to run in time O(|X|). This
is important if we aim at optimizing the running time of the algorithm but requires some care with
specifying the data structures for maintaining the decomposition into r-protrusion. For the sake
of keeping the presentation simple, we have chosen a weaker specification with just a polynomial
running time guarantee.

Lemma 6.2. The Vertex planarization problem admits a lossless protrusion replacer. Moreover,
the choice of the replacement H and the transposition value mvp(G) − mvp(G0 ) depends only on the
labeled boundaried graph (G[X], ∂G (X), λ).

Proof. The Vertex planarization problem is a special case of F-Minor Deletion for the
family of forbidden minors F = {K5 , K3,3 }. Fomin et al. [FLMS12, FLMS20] have shown that
every min-CMSO vertex subset problem Π that is strongly monotone admits a lossless protrusion
replacer. Without going into details, both conditions hold for F-Minor Deletion for every family

                                                  31
F composed of connected graphs [BFL+ 16, Lem. 8.4]. We remark that the proof of the strong
monotonicity property in [BFL+ 16] is formulated for the case where the family F contains at least
one planar graph, but this condition is not used in this particular proof. Finally, by examining the
proof of [FLMS20, Thm. 9] it follows that the choice of the replacement H and the transposition
value OPT(G) − OPT(G0 ) = mvp(G) − mvp(G0 ) depends only on the labeled boundaried graph
(G[X], ∂G (X), λ) and is indifferent to the structure of G − X.

    In our applications, we need to replace a vertex set X ⊆ V (G), such that G[X] is planar and
|∂G (X)| ≤ r for constant r, but the treewidth of G[X] is not necessarily bounded. It is easy to
show that for any minimum planar modulator S it holds that |S ∩ X| ≤ r, as otherwise the solution
(S \ X) ∪ ∂G (X) would be smaller. By an argument based on grid minors, if tw(G[X]) is larger
than some function of r, then X contains a vertex irrelevant for minimum solutions. As we work
with solutions which are not necessarily optimal, we need an additional argument that allows us to
assume that |S ∩ X| ≤ r.

Definition 6.3. We say that a planar modulator S in G is r-locally optimal if there are no sets
S 0 ⊆ S and S ∗ ⊆ V (G) \ S such that |S 0 | > r, |S ∗ | ≤ r, and (S \ S 0 ) ∪ S ∗ is also a planar modulator.

Lemma 6.4. Given an n-vertex graph G with a planar modulator S ⊆ V (G), and an integer r, one
can find, in time nO(r) , an r-locally optimal planar modulator Sb of size at most |S|.

Proof. Suppose that S is not r-locally optimal, so there are sets S 0 ⊆ S and S ∗ ⊆ V (G) \ S such
that |S 0 | > r, |S ∗ | ≤ r, and (S \ S 0 ) ∪ S ∗ is also a planar modulator. Let S 00 be an arbitrary subset of
S 0 of size r + 1. Then (S \ S 00 ) ∪ S ∗ is a superset of (S \ S 0 ) ∪ S ∗ , so it is also a planar modulator, and
it is smaller than S. The algorithm checks all O(nr+1 ) candidates for S 00 , and all O(rnr ) candidates
for S ∗ . If for any pair (S 00 , S ∗ ), the set (S \ S 00 ) ∪ S ∗ is also a planar modulator (this can be checked
in time O(n + m) [HT74]), we set S ← (S \ S 00 ) ∪ S ∗ and repeat the algorithm. In every step we
decrease the size of S, so after at most n steps the process must terminate. Since at this moment we
cannot find any pair (S 00 , S ∗ ) that would provide further refinement, the obtained planar modulator
must be r-locally optimal.

   Consider a set X = GhAi for some A, for which |NG (A)| ≤ r. The lifting algorithm can use
Lemma 6.4 to find a solution S satisfying |S ∩ X| ≤ r. Therefore any vertex v ∈ X which can be
surrounded by r + 3 connected (v, ∂G (X)) separators is irrelevant for S. We follow the standard
argument based on a grid contraction to find such a vertex whenever tw(G[X]) is large.

Lemma 6.5. Let G be a graph, A ⊆ V (G), and GhAi be a (≤ r)-boundaried connected planar graph.
If tw(GhAi) > 27(2r + 7)(r + 1), then there exists a vertex v ∈ A and a sequence of r + 3 connected
pairwise-disjoint (v, NG (A))-separators in GhAi. Such a vertex v can be found in polynomial time,
when given G and A. Furthermore, given G, A, v, and a planar modulator S in G − v, one can find,
in time nO(r) , a planar modulator in G of size at most |S|.

Proof. We apply Proposition 4.10 for t = (2r + 7)(r + 1). As the treewidth of GhAi is larger than
27 · t, we can find, in polynomial time, a contraction model of Γt in GhAi. We have (r + 1)2 > r
trivially, so this contraction model contains a (2r + 7) × (2r + 7)-subgrid without vertices from NG (A).
A (2r + 7) × (2r + 7)-subgrid contains r + 3 nested connected separators S10 , . . . , Sr+3
                                                                                         0   between the
central branch set and the rest of the grid. Let v be any vertex from the central branch set of this
subgrid and Si be the union of vertices contracted into Si0 for i ∈ [r + 3]. By Observation 4.2, the
sets S1 , . . . , Sr+3 are nested connected (v, NG (A))-separators. Therefore each set Si , i ∈ [r + 3], is
v-planarizing.


                                                        32
     Suppose now that one is given a planar modulator S in G − v. By Lemma 6.4, one can find,
in time nO(r) , an r-locally optimal planar modulator S 0 in G − v of size at most |S|. Observe that
|S 0 ∩ A| ≤ r because otherwise (S 0 \ A) ∪ NG (A) would be a smaller planar modulator, contradicting
S 0 being r-locally optimal. Therefore there exists distinct indices i1 , i2 , i3 ∈ [r + 3] such that
Si1 , Si2 , Si3 are disjoint from S 0 . For each j ∈ [3] we have that RG−S 0 [v, Sij ] ⊆ A induces a planar
subgraph of G − S 0 . By the assumption G − S 0 − v is planar, so together, by Lemma 3.17, G − S 0
is planar. We have thus shown how to efficiently turn a planar modulator in G − v into a planar
modulator in G.

   Once we are able to reduce the treewidth of a planar subgraph with a small (constant) boundary,
we can use protrusion replacement to reduce its size. The setting in which we work implies some
convenient corollaries about the result of the replacement act, of which we make note in the following
lemma.

Lemma 6.6. Let γ be the function from Definition 6.1 for the Vertex planarization problem,
r be a constant and r0 = 27(2r + 7)(r + 1). There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given an
n-vertex graph G, a vertex set A ⊆ V (G), such that GhAi is planar and connected, NG (A) = r and
|A| ≥ γ(r0 ), outputs a graph G0 so the following hold.

   1. G0 is obtained from G by replacing NG [A] with some labeled r-boundaried graph H through
      some bijection λ : [r] → NG (A).

   2. H has less than γ(r0 ) vertices.

   3. mvp(G0 ) = mvp(G).

   4. For any vertex set X ⊆ V (G) \ NG [A], if G − X is planar and connected then G0 − X is planar
      and connected.

   5. Given G, G0 and a planar modulator S 0 in G0 one can, in time nO(r) , turn it into a planar
      modulator in G of size at most |S 0 |.

Proof. First, we reduce the treewidth of GhAi to be at most r0 using Lemma 6.5. While tw(GhAi) >
r0 , we can find a vertex v ∈ A such that any planar modulator S in G − v can be turned, in time
nO(r) , into a planar modulator in G of size at most |S|. Hence, removing v is safe and we can
continue the process on the graph G − v. Furthermore, there is at least one connected restricted
(v, NG (A))-separator in GhAi so removal of v does not disconnect any vertices from NG (A) within
GhAi. If some vertices get disconnected from NG (A) then they form a planar connected component
in G, which can be discarded. Therefore, we maintain connectivity of the graph GhAi. Let G0 be
obtained from G after the exhaustive application of Lemma 6.5 and A0 ⊆ A be obtained from A by
removing the irrelevant vertices. Then the set NG0 [A0 ] forms an r0 -protrusion. We can treat G0 as
obtained from G by replacing A. Note that mvp(G0 ) = mvp(G) because the lifting algorithm can
lift any solution losslessly. If |NG0 [A0 ]| < γ(r0 ), then we are done.
      Suppose that |NG0 [A0 ]| ≥ γ(r0 ). By Lemma 6.2, the Vertex planarization problem admits a
lossless protrusion replacer, so we can replace NG0 [A0 ] with a labeled r-boundaried graph H, with
at most γ(r0 ) vertices, through some labeling λ, obtaining a graph G0 . From the definition of a
lossless protrusion replacer we have that mvp(G0 ) ≤ mvp(G0 ) = mvp(G) and any planar modulator
S 0 in G0 can be turned, in polynomial time, into a planar modulator S0 in G0 of size at most
|S 0 | + mvp(G0 ) − mvp(G0 ). Thanks to Lemma 6.5, we can compute a planar modulator S in G of
size at most |S0 |, in time nO(r) .


                                                    33
     We argue that actually mvp(G0 ) = mvp(G0 ). From Lemma 6.2 we know that the choice of the
replacement H and the transposition value mvp(G0 ) − mvp(G0 ) depends only on the boundaried
graph GA    0
              0 ,λ
                   = (G0 [NG0 [A0 ]], NG0 (A0 ), λ). Let Ir be a labeled r-boundaried graph with only the
boundary vertices and no edges. Consider graphs J0 , J 0 obtained by gluing Ir to respectively
GA0
    0 ,λ
         and H (equivalently, one can regard this operation as taking the underlying non-boundaried
graphs). The graph J0 is planar so mvp(J0 ) = 0. Because mvp(J 0 ) ≤ mvp(J0 ) we get that
mvp(J 0 ) = mvp(J0 ). Since the transposition value depends only on GA          0
                                                                                  0 ,λ
                                                                                       we infer that mvp(G0 ) −
          0                            0
mvp(G ) = mvp(J0 ) − mvp(J ) = 0. If the graph H contains a connected component disconnected
from ∂(H) then the argument above implies that this component must be planar. Therefore if such
a component appears, it can be safely removed as a planar component in G0 .
     Finally we show that for any vertex set X ⊆ V (G) \ NG [A], if G − X is planar and connected
then G0 − X is planar and connected. The first modification step does not affect these conditions
so G0 − X is planar and connected. Let J0X be the labeled boundaried graph for which it holds
G0 − X = J0X ⊕ GA         0
                            0 ,λ
                                   and G0 − X = J0X ⊕ H. Similarly as before, we use the fact that the
                       A0 ,λ
relation between G0             and H is indifferent to the boundaried graph being glued to them. Therefore
mvp(G0 − X) = mvp(G0 − X) = 0, so G0 − X is planar. Now suppose that G0 − X is not connected.
Because we have removed all the connected components of H with empty intersection with ∂(H),
this means that there exist u, v ∈ NG0 (A0 ) = ∂(H) which are connected in G0 hA0 i but not in H.
Let K  c5 denote the graph K5 with one edge removed. Consider graphs R0 , R0 obtained by gluing
K5 to respectively GA
c
                            0
                              0 ,λ
                                    and H so that the vertices u, v are glued to the non-adjacent pair in K c5 .
Since there is a (u, v)-path in GhAi, the graph R0 contains K5 as a minor. On the other hand, u, v
belong to different connected components of H, so every biconnected component of R0 is planar and
so R0 is planar. We get that mvp(R0 ) > mvp(R0 ) = 0, which contradicts the assumption that such
vertices u, v exist. The claim follows.

6.2    Outerplanar decomposition
In order to conveniently analyze plane graphs with large radial diameter we take advantage of the
concept of a decomposition into outerplanarity layers used by Jansen et al. [JPvL19] in their work
on kernelization for Multiway cut on planar graphs. We refer to the definitions from the full
version [JPvL18] of this article.

Definition 6.7 ([JPvL18, Definition 5.1]). Let G be a plane graph. The outerplanarity layers of G
form a partition of V (G) into L1 , . . . , Lm defined recursively. The vertices incident with the outer
face of G belong to layer L1 . If v ∈ V (G) lies on the outer face of the plane subgraph obtained
from G by removing L1 , . . . , Li , then v belongs to layer Li+1 . For a vertex v ∈ V (G), the unique
index i ∈ [m] for which v ∈ Li is the outerplanarity index of v and denoted idxG (v).

   A plane graph is k-outerplanar if this process partitions it into exactly k non-empty layers. A
graph is k-outerplanar if it admits a k-outerplanar embedding.

Definition 6.8 ([JPvL18, Definition 5.2]). For a plane graph G, let T be the simple graph obtained
by simultaneously contracting all edges uv whose endpoints belong to the same outerplanarity layer,
discarding loops and parallel edges. For a node u ∈ V (T ), let κ(u) ⊆ V (G) denote the vertex set
of G whose contraction resulted in u. Let idxG (u) denote the outerplanarity index that is shared by
all nodes in κ(u).

    We make note of several properties of this definition.



                                                      34
Lemma 6.9 ([JPvL18, Lemma 5.3]). For a connected plane graph G and its outerplanar decompo-
sition (T, κ) based on the outerplanarity layers L1 , . . . , Lm , the following holds:

   1. T is a tree.

   2. For any node u ∈ V (T ), the graph G[κ(u)] is connected.

   3. If x, y are distinct vertices of T , then for any internal node z of the unique (x, y)-path in T ,
      the set κ(z) is a restricted (κ(x), κ(y))-separator in G.

   4. There is a unique node x1 ∈ V (T ) such that κ(x1 ) = L1 .

   5. Root T at vertex x1 . If u ∈ V (T ) is a child of p ∈ V (T ), then idxG (u) = 1 + idxG (p).

    We call the pair (T, κ), where T is the tree rooted at x1 accordingly to Lemma 6.9, the outerplanar
decomposition of G. Note that it is uniquely defined for a given connected plane graph G. Let
δT denote the shortest path distance on the tree T . For distinct x, y ∈ V (T ) we define Tx,y P to be

the unique (x, y)-path in T and for non-adjacent x, y ∈ V (T ) we define Tx,y to be the connected
component of T − {x, y} containing the internal vertices of Tx,y  P . For a subtree T 0 of T we use the
              0                                           0
notation κ(T ) to denote the union of {κ(t) | t ∈ V (T )}. Note that NG (κ(Tx,y )) ⊆ κ(x) ∪ κ(y).

Observation 6.10 ([JPvL18, Observation 5.4]). Let G be a connected plane graph and (T, κ) be
its outerplanar decomposition. If u, v ∈ V (G) share a face, then either there is x ∈ V (T ) such that
u, v ∈ κ(x) or there are x, y ∈ V (T ) which are adjacent in T and u ∈ κ(x), v ∈ κ(y). Conversely, if
x is a child of y in T and v ∈ κ(x), then there exists u ∈ κ(y), so that u, v share a face.

    This observation allows us to make a link between the depth of the outerplanar decomposition
and the radial diameter of the graph. We define the depth of a rooted tree as the longest root-leaf
distance plus 1 (so a singleton tree has depth 1).

Lemma 6.11. Let G be a connected plane graph and (T, κ) be its outerplanar decomposition. If the
maximal depth in T is d, then the radial diameter of G is at most 2d − 1.

Proof. By Observation 6.10 any vertex in Li+1 shares a face with a vertex from Li . Let u, v ∈ V (G)
be any pair of vertices. We have idxG (u), idxG (v) ≤ d so they are at radial distance at most d − 1
from some vertices from L1 which are at radial distance 1, hence dG (u, v) ≤ 2d − 1.

   Since T is a contraction of G, when a set S ⊆ V (G) separates κ(x) from κ(y), it also separates
κ(x) from the image of the entire subtree behind y. We make note of this observation for the case
where we separate κ(x) from two directions at once.

Observation 6.12. Let G be a connected plane graph and (T, κ) be its outerplanar decomposition.
Let x, y, z ∈ V (T ) be distinct pairwise non-adjacent vertices such that z lies on the unique (x, y)-path
in T . Suppose that S ⊆ V (G) is a restricted (κ(z), κ(x) ∪ κ(y))-separator. Then the connected
component of G − S containing κ(z) is contained in κ(Tx,y ).

   We also state a strengthening of Lemma 6.9(3) which says that the separators within outerpla-
narity layers are in fact cycles.

Observation 6.13. Let G be a connected plane graph, (T, κ) be its outerplanar decomposition, and
x, y, z ∈ V (T ) be distinct. If z lies on the unique (x, y)-path in T , then there is a cycle C in G such
that V (C) ⊆ κ(z) and one of κ(x), κ(y) lies entirely in the interior of C and the other one in the
exterior of C.

                                                   35
6.3    Outerplanarity layers and vertex-disjoint paths
We will be working with an outerplanar decomposition (T, κ) of a plane graph G and families of
internally vertex-disjoint paths connecting two outerplanarity layers, so that one is drawn inside the
other one. First we show that paths in such a family can be assumed to cross each intermediate
outerplanarity layer only once.

Lemma 6.14. Let G be a connected plane graph, L1 be the set of vertices lying on the outer face of
G, and F ⊆ V (G) \ L1 induce a connected subgraph of G. Suppose that u, v ∈ L1 are non-adjacent
and connected by a path P with all its internal vertices disjoint from (L1 ∪ F ). Then there exists a
(u, v)-path P 0 such that V (P 0 ) ⊆ L1 and the internal vertices of P 0 belong to a connected component
of G − V (P ) which is disjoint from F .

Proof. As u, v are non-adjacent, the interior of P is non-empty. Since G[L1 ] is connected, there is
a (u, v)-path within L1 , which is internally disjoint from P . Therefore u, v belong to a common
biconnected component B of G and the subgraph B contains a cycle C1 such that V (C1 ) = L1 ∩V (B).
Removing non-adjacent u, v from C1 separates V (C1 ) into two non-empty sets S 1 , S 2 , which end up
in different connected components of G − V (P ) since u and v lie on the outer face. Since G[F ] is
connected, it is fully contained in one such component. We can thus use either S 1 or S 2 to make
the desired path P 0 .

    For a path P and a vertex set X, a segment of P in X is an inclusion-wise maximal subpath P 0
of P such that V (P 0 ) ⊆ X. We define S(P, X) to be the set of segments of P in X.

Lemma 6.15. Consider a connected plane graph G, its outerplanar decomposition (T, κ), and non-
adjacent x, y ∈ V (T ) such that x is an ancestor of y. Suppose we are given a family of internally
vertex-disjoint (κ(x), κ(y))-paths P. Then we can compute, in polynomial time, a family P 0 of
internally vertex-disjoint (κ(x), κ(y))-paths such that |P 0 | = |P| and for each P ∈ P 0 and z ∈ Tx,y
                                                                                                   P it

holds that |S(P, κ(z))| = 1.

Proof. By replacing each P ∈ P by the (κ(x), κ(y))-subpath between the last visit to κ(x) and
the first visit to κ(y), we can assume that the internal vertices of the paths in P belong to
P x,y ).PFor a family of internally vertex-disjoint κ(x), κ(y)-paths P we define the measure µ(P) =
κ(T
   P ∈P       P |S(P, κ(z))|. While P does not satisfy the claim, we are going to refine some path
          z∈Tx,y
from P to decrease the measure µ(P).
    Let x0 ∈ V (T ) be the vertex on Tx,yP which is closest to x among those for which there exists

a path P ∈ P so that |S(P, κ(x ))| > 1. Note that x0 is an ancestor of y. Let us consider a plane
                                  0

graph G0 obtained by removing from G all the vertices from κ(z) over all z ∈ V (T ) outside the
subtree of T rooted at x0 . Note that G0 is connected and κ(x0 ) is the set of vertices lying on the
outer face of G0 . By the choice of x0 , for each P ∈ P there is exactly one segment of P in V (G0 ):
otherwise some path would have multiple segments in κ(x00 ), for x00 being a parent of x0 , which is a
superset of NG (V (G0 )). Let P 0 denote this segment of P .
    Let P ∈ P be a path for which |S(P, κ(x0 )| > 1. Then there exist vertices u, v ∈ V (P 0 ) ∩ κ(x0 )
and a (u, v)-subpath Pu,v of P 0 whose internal vertices do not belong to κ(x0 ). If u, v are adjacent,
then we can shortcut P by replacing Pu,v with the edge (u, v) thus decreasing µ(P). Suppose that
u, v are non-adjacent. We apply Lemma 6.14 to the graph G0 with the outer face lying on κ(x0 ),
vertices u, v, path Pu,v , and F = κ(y), which induces a connected subgraph of G0 . We obtain a
              0
(u, v)-path Pu,v                 0 ) ⊆ κ(x0 ) and the internal vertices of P 0
                  such that V (Pu,v                                         u,v belong to a connected
component of G − V (Pu,v ) which is disjoint from κ(y). Since all the other paths from {P 0 | P ∈ P}
                 0

connect κ(x0 ) to κ(y) in G0 , they cannot have any vertices in this component of G0 − V (Pu,v ).

                                                  36
Therefore by replacing Pu,v with Pu,v  0   in P we obtain a new family of internally vertex-disjoint
(κ(x), κ(y))-paths of the same size for which the measure µ is lower than µ(P).
    We apply this refinement exhaustively as long as there exist P ∈ P and z ∈ Tx,y         P with

|S(P, κ(z))| > 1. It is clear that the refinement step can be performed in polynomial time. At each
step the value of µ decreases so at some point the process terminates and gives the desired path
family.

    It is important that the sets considered in Lemma 6.15 are given by the consecutive outerplanarity
layers. For other choice of connected separators, such a claim might not be true.
    By inspecting the outerplanar decomposition (T, κ) of an r-boundaried plane graph H, we can
find the set of nodes in T whose images cover the boundary ∂(H), and then mark the LCA closure
of this set (recall Definition 3.8), thus marking at most 2r nodes. We consider the nodes which
were not marked and we want to compress the graph whenever there is a long path of non-marked
nodes. This translates to a situation where one group T1 of relevant vertices (that is, located in a
marked bag) lies on one outerplanarity layer, there is a deep well of nested outerplanarity layers,
and another group T2 of relevant vertices is located inside the well. We want to say that only the
O(k) layers closest to T1 and O(k) layers closest to T2 are important and the middle layers can be
compressed.
    Let S be some solution and suppose that there at least 4 internally vertex-disjoint (T1 , T2 )-paths
in H − S. We need an argument that in this case, for any vertex v in the middle layers that does
not lie on any of these four paths, we can draw two vertex-disjoint cycles around v that separate v
from all the relevant vertices, and in particular from ∂(H). We begin with a topological argument
that such cycles exist. We do not rely on Lemma 6.15 and give the argument in a general form.
Lemma 6.16. Let G be a plane graph, C1 , . . . , C6 be vertex-disjoint cycles in G, so that Ci+1 is
drawn inside Ci for i ∈ [5],Sand let PA , PB , PC , PD be vertex-disjoint (C1 , C6 )-paths. Suppose that a
vertex v ∈ V (G) with v 6∈ i∈[4] V (Pi ) lies in the intersection of the proper interior of C3 and the
proper exterior of C4 . Then there exist two vertex-disjoint cycles in G which are nested with respect
to v and separate v from V (C1 ) ∪ V (C6 ).
Proof. Without loss of generality, by shortcutting the paths if needed, we may assume that the
paths PA , . . . , PD do not contain any vertex from V (C1 ) ∪ V (C6 ) in their interior.
    For subsets of indices I ⊆ [6] and J ⊆ {A, B, C, D}, let GJI be the plane subgraph of G obtained
by restricting the drawing of G to only the vertices and edges which lie on a cycle Ci with i ∈ I or
a path PX with X ∈ J. For ease of presentation, we abbreviate {A, B, C, D} by [D].
    Since v does not lie on any of the four paths, while it lies in the intersection of the proper interior
                                                                                                        [D]
of C3 and proper exterior of C4 , it follows that the image of v does not intersect the drawing of G3,4 .
      [D]                       [D]                                           [D]                      [D]
Let F3,4 denote the face of G3,4 containing the image of v. The face F3,4 is bounded since G3,4
                                                                                                       [D]
contains C3 which has v in its proper interior, and due to the nesting of the cycles no vertex on F3,4
                                                                                     [D]
belongs to C5 or C6 . Similarly, since v lies in the proper exterior of C4 , face F3,4 does not contain
                                  [D]
any vertex of C1 or C2 . Since G3,4 is a connected graph that does not have any articulation points,
                         [D]
the boundary of face F3,4 is a simple cycle C 0 which contains v in its proper interior. As observed
                                                                     [D]
above, C 0 is disjoint from C1 ∪ C2 ∪ C5 ∪ C6 . Note that since G3,4 contains cycles C3 and C4 , the
nesting of the cycles and placement of v in the interior of C3 and exterior of C4 ensures that V (C 0 )
separates v from V (C1 ) ∪ V (C6 ).
                                                [D]                  [D]
   From the observations above, we get that F3,4 is also a face in G[6] . Suppose that the boundary
    [D]
of F3,4 intersects at least three paths PX , PY , PZ ∈ {PA , . . . , PD }. Note that one can always add

                                                    37
                                                                    PA



                              PD


                                                            C6 C5        C3 C2 C1
                            PC


                                                                v



                                    PB


                                                      [D]                                  [D]
Figure 3: Schematic representation of the graph G[6] . In this example, the face of G3,4 containing v
is highlighted with dashed white lines. Its boundary cycle forms C 0 when applying the lemma for v.
                                                                                      [A,C]
It contains segments of C3 , C4 , and the single path PB . Additionally, the face of G2,5 containing v
is shaded. It is bounded by segments of C2 , C5 , and the paths PA and PC . Its boundary cycle
forms C 00 when applying the lemma for v.


a vertex to a drawing inside some face and make it adjacent to all vertices on the boundary of
                                                    [D]
this face. Consider a plane graph G0 obtained from G[6] by inserting three new vertices v1 , v6 , vF
                                                          [D]
adjacent respectively to all vertices of C1 , C6 and F3,4 . The sets V (PX ), V (PY ), V (PZ ), {v1 }, {v6 },
{vF } would form a minor model of K3,3 which gives a contradiction. Therefore the boundary
     [D]
of F3,4 intersects at most two paths PX , PY ∈ {PA , . . . , PD }; see Figure 3 for an illustration. Note
that it is possible that the boundary intersects only a single path. Let PR , PS be two paths not
                                 [D]
intersecting the boundary of F3,4 .
    In the graph GR,S             R,S                                                  00
                  2,5 , the face F2,5 containing the image of v is again bounded. Let C denote
                    R,S
the cycle bounding F2,5 , which is simple since GR,S
                                                 2,5 is connected and has no articulation points.
By the nesting of the cycles, C 00 is disjoint from C1 and C6 . By definition of the graph GR,S
                                                                                            2,5 , the
cycle C 00 is disjoint from V (C3 ) ∪ V (C4 ), and therefore V (C 0 ) ∩ V (C 00 ) = ∅. Since GR,S
                                                                                              2,5 contains
cycles C2 and C5 , while the nesting and placement of v ensures that v is in the proper interior of C2
and proper exterior of C5 , it follows that C 00 separates v from V (C1 ) ∪ V (C6 ). Since both C 0 and C 00
have v in their interior and C1 in they exterior, they are nested. This concludes the proof.

6.4    Compressing the outerplanarity layers
We focus on the case where x, y ∈ V (T ) are some marked vertices, x is an ancestor of y and Tx,y
contains no marked vertices (and thus its image contains no boundary vertices). If δT (x, y) is large,
we want to preserve just O(k) outerplanarity layers closest to κ(x), O(k) layers closest to κ(y),
and in the middle layers we want to preserve only the maximal family internally of vertex-disjoint
(κ(x), κ(y))-paths, discarding the remaining vertices and edges.
    We need to argue for the backward safeness of such a graph modification. Consider a solution S
such that |S ∩ κ(Tx,y )| ≤ k. If H − S contains at least 4 internally vertex-disjoint (κ(x), κ(y))-paths,


                                                     38
we can surround the modified areas with two cycles using Lemma 6.16 and argue that inserting
them back does not affect planarity. Otherwise we want to say that S ∩ κ(Tx,y ) is sufficiently large
so we can charge these vertices to “pay” for additional vertex removals which separate κ(x) from
κ(y) in H. The following statement remains correct if we assume the existence of just 4 internally
vertex-disjoint (κ(x), κ(y))-paths, instead of 6, but with a worse approximation factor of the lifting
algorithm. On the other hand, factor 2 can be improved to (1 + ε) if we assume that even more
paths exist but for the sake of keeping the presentation clear we do not optimize this constant.

Lemma 6.17. Let G be a graph, A ⊆ V (G), H be a connected boundaried plane graph given by
some plane embedding of GhAi, (T, κ) be the outerplanar decomposition of H, and k be an integer.
Consider vertices x, y ∈ V (T ) such that x is an ancestor of y, δT (x, y) > 4k + 11, κ(Tx,y ) ∩ ∂(H) = ∅,
and there are 6 internally vertex-disjoint (κ(x), κ(y))-paths in the graph Hhκ(Tx,y )i. There is a
polynomial-time algorithm that, given all the above, returns a vertex set VD ⊆ κ(Tx,y ) and an edge
set ED ⊆ EG (κ(Tx,y ), κ(Tx,y )) so that the following hold.

   1. For each vertex v ∈ κ(y) there exists a vertex u ∈ κ(x) so that the radial distance between u
      and v in H 0 = (H \ ED ) − VD is at most 4k + 11.

   2. The boundaried graph H 0 = (H \ ED ) − VD is connected.

   3. Given a planar modulator S 0 in G0 = (G \ ED ) − VD , such that |S 0 ∩ κ(Tx,y )| ≤ k, one can turn
      it, in polynomial time, into a planar modulator S in G such that |S| ≤ |S 0 | + 2 · |S 0 ∩ κ(Tx,y )|
      and S \ κ(Tx,y ) = S 0 \ κ(Tx,y ).

Proof. We set D = κ(Tx,y ), T1 = κ(x), T2 = κ(y), and J be the boundaried plane graph given by
the subgraph of H induced by D ∪ T1 ∪ T2 and the boundary T1 ∪ T2 . Note that NG (D) ⊆ T1 ∪ T2
and T1 , T2 are non-adjacent. Let d be the minimum size of a restricted (T1 , T2 )-separator in J. By
Menger’s theorem there exist d internally vertex-disjoint (T1 , T2 )-paths in J: P1 , . . . Pd . By the
assumption d ≥ 6. Furthermore, by Lemma 6.15 we can assume that each path Pi has only one
segment in each κ(z) for z ∈ Tx,y  P .

     Let q1 ∈ V (T ) be the vertex on path Tx,y P with distance δ (x, q ) exactly 2k + 5. Similarly,
                                                                       T     1
q2 ∈ V (T ) is the vertex on path Tx,y P with distance δ (y, q ) exactly 2k + 5. We define Q = T
                                                            T     2                                    q1 ,q2 .
By the assumption Q is non-empty. Let VQ = κ(Q); then VQ is a restricted (T1 , T2 )-separator in H
and also in J. We define ED to be the set of edges with at least one endpoint in VQ , which do not
belong to any path Pi for i ∈ [d]. The set VD is the set of vertices in VQ which become isolated in
H \ ED . See Figure 4 for an illustration. Let G0 , H 0 , J 0 denote the graphs obtained respectively from
G, H, J after removing the edges from ED and vertices from VD . We have that G0 = G∂ [A] ⊕ H 0 .
Note that H 0 is connected and J 0 still admits d internally vertex-disjoint (T1 , T2 )-paths.
     We will show that any planar modulator S 0 in G0 with bounded intersection with D can be lifted
to a planar modulator in G, by possibly increasing its size slightly. We consider two cases. First,
if removing vertices from S 0 ∩ D preserves at least 4 internally vertex-disjoint (T1 , T2 )-paths in J 0 ,
then we show that any region in which the graph modifications occurred can be surrounded by 2
cycles separating this region from the boundary of H. Then the planarity criterion can be applied
to argue that S 0 remains a planar modulator after undoing the graph modifications. Otherwise, the
set S 0 ∩ D is sufficiently large so we can charge it with adding to S 0 a restricted (T1 , T2 )-separator
in J. Then each leftover connected component in J is disconnected from either T1 or T2 , which
again allows us to apply the planarity criterion to justify undoing the graph modifications.
Claim 6.18. Let S 0 be a planar modulator in G0 such that |S 0 ∩ D| ≤ k and the minimum size of a
restricted (T1 , T2 )-separator in J 0 − (S 0 ∩ D) is at least 4. Then S 0 is also a planar modulator in G.

                                                     39
Figure 4: Schematic view of the proof of Lemma 6.17. The orange paths connect vertices from T1
(on the outside) with vertices from T2 (inside). The middle layer corresponds to the area between
κ(q1 ) and κ(q2 ). The paths can be assumed to cross the middle layer only once due to Lemma 6.15.
All the edges and vertices marked gray in the middle layer are being removed; these are the sets ED
and VD .


Proof. By Menger’s theorem, there exist 4 internally vertex-disjoint (T1 , T2 )-paths in J 0 − (S 0 ∩ D):
R1 , R2 , R3 , R4 . We will transform the graph J 0 − S 0 back into J − S 0 by undoing the vertex and
edge removals so that G0 − S 0 is transformed into G − S 0 , while maintaining planarity of the graph.
First, inserting an isolated vertex from VD does not affect planarity of a graph. Now consider a
single insertion of an edge e ∈ ED . If both endpoints of e are disconnected from (T1 ∪ T2 ) \ S 0
in J 00 − S 0 then this connected component of G00 after the modification is contained in D, which
induces a planar graph by the assumption (recall that we assumed that D ∩ ∂(H) = ∅).
      Suppose otherwise. Let v ∈ VQ \ S 0 be an endpoint of e. Since |S 0 | ≤ k, there exist vertices
q1 , . . . , q60 ∈ V (T ) lying on this order on the path Tx,y
 0                                                         P such that q 0 , q 0 , q 0 appear before Q (counting
                                                                            1 2 3
from x) and q40 , q50 , q60 appear after Q such that κ(qj0 ) ∩ S 0 = ∅ for j ∈ [6]. By Observation 6.13 for
each j ∈ [6] there is a cycle Cj0 ⊆ κ(qj0 ), so that Cj+10   lies in the interior of Cj0 in J 0 − S 0 . Furthermore,
v lies in the intersection of the proper interior of C3 and the proper exterior of C4 in J 0 − S 0 and each
of the paths Ri , i ∈ [4], contains a (C10 , C60 )-subpath Ri0 so that these subpaths are vertex-disjoint
(not just internally vertex-disjoint). This setting allows us to apply Lemma 6.16 to obtain that there
exist cycles C1 , C2 in J 0 − S 0 which are nested with respect to v and separate v from C10 ∪ C60 and
thus from T1 ∪ T2 . Therefore RH 0 −S 0 [v, Ci ] ∩ ∂(H) = ∅ for i ∈ [2] and these cycles are v-planarizing.
By Lemma 3.16 we infer that if (G0 − S 0 ) \ e is planar then also G0 − S 0 is planar. This allows us to
insert back all the edges from ED into G0 − S 0 while maintaining the planarity of the graph and
show that G − S 0 is planar. The claim follows.                                                                  J

Claim 6.19. Let S 0 be a planar modulator in G0 such that |S 0 ∩ D| ≤ k and there exists a restricted
(T1 , T2 )-separator in J 0 − (S 0 ∩ D) of size at most 3. Let R be a minimum-size restricted (T1 , T2 )-
separator in J. Then S = S 0 ∪ R is also a planar modulator in G and |S| ≤ |S 0 | + 2 · |S 0 ∩ D|.

Proof. Recall that we have preserved the paths P1 , . . . , Pd during the graph modification and J 0 still


                                                        40
admits d ≥ 6 internally vertex-disjoint (T1 , T2 )-paths. The size of S 0 ∩ D is at least d − 3 ≥ 3 because
removing one vertex from D can decrease the flow between T1 and T2 (which are disjoint from D) by
at most one. We have |R| = d ≤ |S 0 ∩ D| + 3 ≤ 2 · |S 0 ∩ D| and so |S| ≤ |S 0 | + |R| ≤ |S 0 | + 2 · |S 0 ∩ D|,
as intended. Also, |S| ≤ |S 0 | + |R| ≤ |S 0 | + |S 0 ∩ D| + 3 ≤ 2k + 3. By the definition of Q, there exist
vertices q10 , q20 , q30 , q40 ∈ V (T ) lying in this order on the path Tx,y
                                                                         P such that q 0 , q 0 appear before Q
                                                                                      1 2
(counting from x) and q3 , q4 appear after the subpath Q such that κ(qj0 ) ∩ S = ∅ for j ∈ [4].
                                  0   0

     We will transform the graph J 0 − S back into J − S by undoing the vertex and edge removals so
that G0 − S is transformed into G − S, while maintaining planarity of the graph. First, inserting an
isolated vertex from VD does not affect planarity of a graph. Now consider a single insertion of an
edge e ∈ ED and let J 00 , G00 denote the graph obtained respectively from J 0 , G0 after the insertions
done so far, and assume inductively that S is a planar modulator in G00 \ e. We are going to prove
that S is a planar modulator in G00 . If both endpoints of e are disconnected from (T1 ∪ T2 ) \ S in
J 00 − S then this connected component of G00 being modified is contained in D, which induces a
planar graph by assumption.
     Suppose otherwise. Let v ∈ VQ be an endpoint of e. Since R is a restricted (T1 , T2 )-separator
in J (and so in J 00 ) and R ⊆ S, v can be connected to at most one of T1 , T2 in J 00 − S. Suppose
w.l.o.g. that v is connected to some vertex from T1 in J 00 − S but none from T2 . By the definition
of VQ , every (T1 , v)-path in J must intersect κ(q10 ) and κ(q20 ). These sets are disjoint from S and
by Observation 6.13 there are two cycles separating v in G00 from any vertex from T1 \ S. By
Lemma 3.16 we conclude that G00 − S is planar. After undoing all the edge deletions we obtain that
G − S is planar. The claim follows.                                                                           J

     In the first case we do not change the size of the planar modulator and in the second case we
have |S| ≤ |S 0 | + 2 · |S 0 ∩ D|. Therefore the lifting algorithm can turn any solution to G0 into a
solution to G within the guarantees of the lemma.
     Finally, let us examine the radial distances in H 0 . By Observation 6.10 we have that whenever
x1 , x2 ∈ V (T ) are such that x1 is parent to x2 and v ∈ κ(x2 ) then there exists u ∈ κ(x1 ) so that u, v
share a face. Let us fix a vertex vy ∈ κ(y). By the observation above, there is a vertex v2 ∈ κ(q2 )
so that dH 0 (vy , v2 ) = dH (vy , v2 ) ≤ 2k + 5. As each path Pi , i ∈ [d], has only one segment in κ(q1 )
and one in κ(q2 ), it also has only one segment in VQ . The region between κ(q1 ) and κ(q2 ) in H 0
comprises d subdivided edges between κ(q1 ) and κ(q2 ). Hence, there is a vertex v1 ∈ κ(q1 ) which
shares a face with v2 in H 0 . By the same argument as before, there is a vertex vx ∈ κ(x) at radial
distance 2k + 5 from v1 in H 0 . This implies that dH 0 (vy , vx ) ≤ (2k + 5) + 1 + (2k + 5) = 4k + 11 and
concludes the proof.

    Our strategy is to mark the set of nodes in T whose images cover the boundary ∂(H) together
with its LCA closure. Suppose that x, y ∈ V (T ) were marked, x is an ancestor of y, and Tx,y contains
no marked vertices. If δT (x, y) is large and there are 6 internally vertex-disjoint (κ(x), κ(y))-paths,
we can use Lemma 6.17 to compress the middle layers. If the (κ(x), κ(y))-flow is less than 6, there
is a restricted (κ(x), κ(y))-separator of size at most 5. If the number of such separators is small,
we could just mark some more nodes in T . We cannot do this however if there is a long sequence
of small (κ(x), κ(y))-separators. But in this case the subgraph of H between the first and the last
separator is disjoint from ∂(H) and has boundary of size at most 10. Recall that the Vertex
planarization problem admits a lossless protrusion replacer (Lemma 6.2) which allows us to
compress planar subgraphs of small boundary (Lemma 6.6). We use this tool in a preprocessing
step to ensure that the distance between the first and last small separator cannot be too large.

Lemma 6.20. Let γ be the function from Definition 6.1 for the Vertex planarization problem.
There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a graph G, integers k, r, a set A ⊆ V (G), such

                                                      41
that GhAi is planar, G[A] is connected, and r = |NG (A)|, returns an r-boundaried plane graph H 0
so the following hold.
   1. The radial diameter of H 0 is at most 2 · (4k + γ(8019) + 12) · (6r + 5) and the graph H 0 \ ∂(H 0 )
      is connected.
   2. mvp(G0 ) ≤ mvp(G), where G0 is the graph obtained from G after replacing NG [A] with H 0 .
   3. Let A0 = V (H 0 ) \ ∂(H 0 ) denote the set of the new vertices inserted in place of A. There is
      a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a planar modulator S 0 in G0 such that |S 0 ∩ A0 | ≤ k,
      outputs a planar modulator S in G such that |S| ≤ |S 0 | + 2 · |S 0 ∩ A0 | and S \ A = S 0 \ A0 .
Proof. Let H denote a boundaried plane graph obtained by an arbitrary plane embedding of GhAi.
We shall perform a series of modifications of H which does not affect the boundary set. First, we
get rid of planar subgraphs with small boundary. We iterate over all sets X0 ⊆ V (H) \ ∂(H) of size
at most 10 and inspect whether there is a connected component C of H − X0 which (a) does not
contain any vertex from ∂(H), (b) has at least γ(8019) vertices. If we detect such a component C,
we invoke Lemma 6.6 for r = |NH (C)| ≤ 10 and replace NG [C] with a boundaried subgraph on less
than γ(27 · 27 · 11) = γ(8019) vertices. This does not affect the minimum vertex planarization number
and allows to perform lossless solution lifting in polynomial time. We perform such a replacement
exhaustively until we cannot find a pair (X0 , C) satisfying the requirements. By Lemma 6.6(4)
for X = V (G) \ A such a replacement does not affect planarity of the graph GhAi. By the same
argument for X = V (G) \ NG [A] we get that the replacement cannot disconnect the graph G[A]. In
each step, the size of the graph decreases, so at some point there are no more such pairs (X0 , C).
After this process terminates, we know that there is no separator of size at most 10, which would
disconnect a subgraph of H which does not touch the boundary and has at least γ(8019) vertices.
We keep the variable H to denote the graph after this modification.
      Let us now consider the outerplanar decomposition (T, χ) of H. For each v ∈ ∂(H) we mark
the node x ∈ V (T ) such that v ∈ κ(x). Let Y0 denote the set of marked nodes plus the root node,
|Y0 | ≤ r + 1, and Y1 = LCA(Y0 ) (recall Definition 3.8). By Lemma 3.9 we know that |Y1 | ≤ 2r + 2
and every connected component of T − Y1 has at most 2 neighbors. Furthermore, there can be
at most 2r + 1 such components with exactly 2 neighbors because contracting them forms a tree
on 2r + 2 vertices. Consider such a component TC ∈ CC(T − Y1 ), NT (TC ) = {x, y}. Then one of
the vertices x, y is an ancestor of the other one. Note that the path Tx,y               P is contained in N [T ].
                                                                                                              T C
          0       P
Let x ∈ Tx,y be the furthest (from x) vertex on the (x, y)-path for which there are 6 internally
vertex-disjoint (κ(x), κ(x0 ))-paths in the graph Hhκ(Tx,x0 )i. It might be the case that x0 = y or
x0 = x. Next, let y 0 ∈ Tx,y   P be the furthest (from y) vertex on the (x0 , y)-path for which there are 6

internally vertex-disjoint (κ(y), κ(y 0 ))-paths in the graph Hhκ(Ty,y0 )i. If x0 = y then y 0 = y.
      If x0 , y 0 are distinct, we want to show that their distance δT (x0 , y 0 ) cannot be larger than some
constant. Suppose that δT (x0 , y 0 ) > 3. Let x00 , y 00 be the neighbors of x, y, respectively, on the path
TxP0 ,y0 . By the definition of x0 , y 0 there are no 6 internally vertex-disjoint (κ(x), κ(x00 ))-paths in the
graph H[κ(Tx,x00 )]. The sets κ(x), κ(x00 ) are non-adjacent in H so by Menger’s theorem there exists
a restricted (κ(x), κ(x00 ))-separator Sx in H of size at most 5. Analogous observations hold for
y, y 00 and there exists a restricted (κ(y), κ(y 00 ))-separator Sy in H of size at most 5. Consider the
set X0 = Sx ∪ Sy of size at most 10 and the connected component of H − X0 containing the set
κ(Tx00 ,y00 ). By Observation 6.12, it is disjoint from ∂(H) (as ∂(H) is contained in the κ-image of Y0 )
so thanks to the preprocessing procedure we can conclude that it has less than γ(8019) vertices.
This implies that |Tx00 ,y00 | < γ(8019) and so δT (x0 , y 0 ) = |Tx0 ,y0 | = |Tx00 ,y00 | + 2 ≤ γ(8019) + 1.
      Let Y2 be the union of Y1 and all vertices marked as x0 , y 0 in the previous step. We have
|Y2 | ≤ |Y1 | + 2 · (2r + 1) ≤ 6r + 4. Each connected component TC ∈ CC(T − Y2 ) with exactly

                                                       42
two neighbors, NT (TC ) = {x, y}, satisfies one of the following: (a) δT (x, y) ≤ γ(8019) + 1, or (b)
there are 6 internally vertex-disjoint (κ(x), κ(y))-paths in the graph Hhκ(Tx,y )i. Furthermore, one
of the vertices x, y is an ancestor of the other one. In order to reduce the depth of T we will
apply Lemma 6.17 to the components of type (b). Let TC1 , TC2 , . . . , TC` , NT (TCi ) = {xi , y i }, be some
ordering of the type (b) components of T − Y2 for which δT (xi , y i ) > 4k + 11. We have Txi ,yi = TCi
and these sets are pairwise disjoint. By applying Lemma 6.17 to xi , y i , TCi we obtain a set of vertices
VDi ⊆ κ(TCi ) and a set of edges ED    i ⊆ E (κ(T i ), κ(T i )) to be removed. Let G , H be obtained from
                                             G     C       C                        0     0
respectively G, H by removing the edges from all ED       i and the vertices from all V i . Furthermore, let
                                                                                         D
Gi , i ∈ [`], be obtained from G by performing only the removals from VDj , ED         j
                                                                                           for j > i. Clearly
mvp(G0 ) ≤ mvp(G) as G0 is a subgraph of G. Let A0 = V (H0 ) \ ∂(H0 ) be the set of vertices that
form a replacement for A.
     First, we argue that a solution to G0 can be lifted into a solution to G with moderate additional
cost. Let S0 ⊆ V (G0 ) be a planar modulator in G0 such that |S0 ∩ A0 | ≤ k. We construct a series of
sets S1 , . . . , S` where Si is a refinement of Si−1 with respect to TCi so that Si is a planar modulator
in Gi . This holds for i = 0. Let us consider i ≥ 1 and suppose that the claim holds for i − 1. By
Lemma 6.17(3) we can compute a planar modulator Si in Gi of size at most |Si−1 | + 2 · |Si−1 ∩ κ(TCi )|
and Si \ κ(TCi ) = Si−1 κ(TCi ). The latter condition guarantees that Sj ∩ κ(TCi ) = S0 ∩ κ(TCi ) for j < i
because in the j-step we only add new vertices from κ(TCj ) and these sets are disjoint. Therefore
|S` | ≤ |S0 | + `i=1 2 · |S0 ∩ κ(TCi )| ≤ |S0 | + 2 · |S0 ∩ A0 | and S` \ A = S0 \ A0 . As S` is a planar
                   P
modulator in G` = G, the solution lifting algorithm works as intended.
     Now, we analyze the radial diameter of H0 . Let v ∈ ∂(H0 ) = ∂(H) and y ∈ Y2 be such that
v ∈ κ(y). Since the root node x1 belongs to Y2 and |Y2 | ≤ 6r +4, there a sequence y = y1 , . . . , ym = r
of at most m ≤ 6r + 4 vertices from Y2 so that yi+1 is an ancestor of yi and Tyi ,yi+1 ∩ Y2 = ∅. If
Tyi ,yi+1 is a component of type (b) then by Lemma 6.17(1) we know that for each u ∈ κ(yi ) there is
u0 ∈ κ(yi+1 ) such that their radial distance in H0 is at most 4k + 11. If Tyi ,yi+1 is a component of
type (a), then by Observation 6.10 we get the analogous property but with upper bound γ(8019) + 1.
Therefore v is at radial distance at most (4k + γ(8019) + 12) · (6r + 4) from some vertex on the
outer face.
     To analyze the situation for vertices from V (H0 ) \ ∂(H0 ) let us consider the outerplanar
decomposition (T0 , κ0 ) of H0 . By the estimation above, if v ∈ ∂(H0 ) = ∂(H) then idxH0 (v) ≤
(4k + γ(8019) + 12) · (6r + 4). Suppose there is a vertex u ∈ V (H0 ) \ ∂(H0 ) for which idxH0 (u) >
(4k + γ(8019) + 12) · (6r + 4) + k + 3. Then there are at least k + 3 outerplanarity layers around u
whose interiors are free of any boundary vertices. Consider the sequence u1 , u2 , . . . , uk+3 ∈ V (T0 ) of
the first ancestors of u in T0 . By Lemma 6.9(2) each set κ(ui ) induces a connected subgraph of G0 .
If v ∈ ∂(H0 ), then idxH0 (v) < idxH0 (qi ) and by Lemma 6.9(3) κ(ui ) is a restricted (u, v)-separator
in H0 . Hence, these sets form a nested sequence of (u, ∂(H0 ))-separators in H0 and thus these are
(u, NG0 (A))-separators in G0 . We infer that these sets are u-planarizing and by Lemma 3.17 the
vertex u is k-irrelevant. While such a vertex u exists we can safely remove it; let H 0 be the graph
obtained from H0 after these removals. The depth of the outerplanar decomposition tree of H 0 is
bounded by (4k + γ(8019) + 12) · (6r + 4) + k + 3 and the claim follows from Lemma 6.11.

    We will apply Lemma 6.20 to each connected component C ∈ CC(G − X) where X is a strong
planar modulator supplied by Proposition 5.7. We obtain some replacement HC for the boundaried
graph GhCi equipped with a plane embedding of moderate diameter. Because the lifting algorithm
from Lemma 6.20 increases the size of a solution only locally in C and does not affect the solution
outside C, we can perform the lifting iteratively, increasing the size of the solution only by a constant
factor in the end.



                                                     43
Proposition 6.21. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a graph G with an r-strong
planar modulator X of fragmentation s, and integer k, outputs a graph G0 together with a r-strong
planar modulator X 0 of fragmentation s and a family of plane embeddings of G0 hC 0 i for each
connected component C 0 ∈ CC(G0 − X 0 ), so that
    1. mvp(G0 ) ≤ mvp(G),
    2. for each connected component C 0 ∈ CC(G0 − X 0 ), the computed plane embedding has radial
       diameter O(kr),
    3. given G, G0 , and a planar modulator S 0 in G0 of size at most k, one can find, in polynomial
       time, a planar modulator S in G of size at most 3 · |S 0 |.
Proof. Let C1 , C2 , . . . , C` be some ordering of the connected components C ∈ CC(G − X). We
process each GhCi i with Lemma 6.20 iteratively. Namely, let G0 = G and Gi be obtained from Gi−1
by applying Lemma 6.20 to Gi−1 hCi i, for i ∈ [`]. We set G0 = G` . Let Ci0 be the set of new vertices
inserted in place of Ci and Hi0 denote the plane graph given by the computed embedding of Gi hCi0 i.
We have mvp(Gi ) ≤ mvp(Gi−1 ) so mvp(G` ) ≤ mvp(G). Furthermore, the radial diameter of Hi0
is O(kr) and we are guaranteed that the graphs Gi [Ci0 ] = Hi0 \ ∂(Hi0 ) are connected so we do not
increase the fragmentation of the modulator. As |NGi (Ci0 )| = |NGi−1 (Ci )| the modulator remains
r-strong.
    It remains to prove the solution lifting property. Let S` ⊆ V (G` ) be a planar modulator in G`
of size at most k. We construct a series of sets S0 , . . . , S`−1Swhere Si is a modification of Si+1 so
that Si is a planar modulator in Gi of size at most |S` | + `j>i 2 · |S` ∩ Cj0 |. Moreover, we show
inductively that Si ∩ Cj0 = S` ∩ Cj0 for j ≤ i, which holds for i = `.
    We use the lifting algorithm from Lemma 6.20 to turn Si+1 into a planar modulator Si in Gi of
                                      0 | so that S \ C
size at most |Si+1 | + 2 · |Si+1 ∩ Ci+1                                   0
                                                   i    i+1 = Si+1 \ Ci+1 . The latter condition implies
that we do not alter the solution j 6= i + 1 and shows the invariant Si ∩ Cj0 = S` ∩ Cj0 for j ≤ i.
Therefore |Si+1 ∩ Ci+10 | = |S ∩ C 0 | ≤ k as required by the lifting algorithm. We estimate the final
                                 `   i+1
size of the planar modulator in G0 as |S` | + `i=1 2 · |Si ∩ Ci0 | = |S` | + `i=1 2 · |S` ∩ Ci0 | ≤ 3 · |S` |.
                                               P                            P


7     Solution preservers
After the application of Proposition 6.21, we can assume that the considered graph G has a strong
planar modulator X ⊆ V (G) of fragmentation k O(1) and for each C ∈ CC(G − X) we are given a
plane embedding of GhCi with radial diameter k O(1) . In order to further simplify GhCi we take a
two-step approach. First, we mark a vertex set SC ⊆ C so that for any solution S we can replace the
set S ∩ C with a subset of SC ∪ NG (C) by paying a constant cost for each replacement. In particular,
we get that there is an O(1)-approximately optimal planar modulator S such that S ∩ C ⊆ SC .
Afterwards, in Section 8, we compress the subgraphs within C \ SC for which we know that the
approximately optimal solution does not remove any vertices inside them. We begin with formalizing
the concept of marking vertices to cover an approximate solution.
Definition 7.1. For a vertex set A ⊆ V (G), we say that SA ⊆ A is an α-preserver for A, if for
any planar modulator S in G there exists a planar modulator S 0 ⊆ (S \ A) ∪ NG (A) ∪ SA such that
S 0 \ NG [A] = S \ NG [A] and |S 0 | ≤ |S| + α · |S ∩ A|.
    We are going to construct these solution preservers recursively by reducing the task to more
structured boundaried graphs. We analyze this process by decomposing a boundaried graph H into
a set Y which can be regarded as an augmentation of the boundary ∂(H) and a family of smaller
boundaried graphs whose boundary lies on ∂(H) ∪ Y .

                                                     44
Definition 7.2. A boundaried decomposition of a boundaried graph H is a pair (Y, C), where
Y ⊆ V (H) \ ∂(H) and C is a partition of V (H) \ (∂(H) ∪ Y ), such that for each C ∈ C it holds that
NH (C) ⊆ ∂(H) ∪ Y .
    For example, when C = CC(H − (∂(H) ∪ Y )) is given by the connected components of H −
(∂(H) ∪ Y ) then (Y, C) is a boundaried decomposition of H. For our convenience, we will also
consider cases when some elements of C are disconnected. Usually, we begin with finding a set Y
that imposes some properties on boundaried graphs HhCi for C ∈ C. In order to bound the number
of subcases to recurse on, we would like to upper bound the maximal size of C in terms of Y . This
is not always possible, but at least we can bound the number of sets C ∈ C with more than two
neighbors.
Lemma 7.3 ([FLSZ19, Lem. 13.3]). Let G be a planar graph, X ⊆ V (G), and let N3 be a set of
vertices from V (G) \ X such that every vertex from N3 has at least three neighbors in X. Then,
|N3 | ≤ 2 · |X|.
   For a vertex set X ⊆ V (G) in a planar graph G, consider the graph obtained from G by
contracting each connected component of G − X into a single vertex. Since contractions preserve
planarity, we get the following corollary using the definition of fragmentation (Definition 3.3).
Lemma 7.4. For a planar graph G and a vertex set X ⊆ V (G), the fragmentation of X in G is at
most 2 · |X|.
    The following lemmas provide us with a framework to compute solution preservers recursively
using boundaried decompositions. The property S 0 \ NG [A] = S \ NG [A] in Definition 7.1 plays a
role in the second lemma because by modifying a solution locally we do not affect its intersection
with other parts of the decomposition.
Lemma 7.5. Consider a graph G and vertex sets A, Y ⊆ V (G). If SA ⊆ A is an α-preserver for
A, for some α ≥ 1, then SA ∪ Y is an α-preserver for A ∪ Y .
Proof. Let S ⊆ V (G) by any planar modulator in G. By the definition of an α-preserver, there
exists a planar modulator S 0 ⊆ V (G) such that S 0 ⊆ (S \ A) ∪ NG (A) ∪ SA , S 0 \ NG [A] = S \ NG [A],
and |S 0 | ≤ |S| + α · |S ∩ A| ≤ |S| + α · |S ∩ (A ∪ Y )|. The first property can be restated as
S 0 ⊆ (S \ (A ∪ Y )) ∪ NG (A ∪ Y ) ∪ (SA ∪ Y ) because inserting Y at the end covers all the modifications
to the first two terms. Since NG [A] ⊆ NG [A ∪ Y ] we get S 0 \ NG [A ∪ Y ] = S \ NG [A ∪ Y ]. This
satisfies all the three conditions of an α-preserver for A ∪ Y .

Lemma 7.6. Consider a graph G and vertex sets A, B ⊆ V (G), such that NG [A] ∩ B = ∅. If
SA ⊆ A, SB ⊆ B are α-preservers for respectively A, B, for some α ≥ 1, then SA ∪ SB is an
α-preserver for A ∪ B.
Proof. Let S ⊆ V (G) by any planar modulator in G. By the definition of an α-preserver, there
exists a planar modulator S1 ⊆ V (G) such that S1 ⊆ (S \ A) ∪ NG (A) ∪ SA , S1 \ NG [A] = S \ NG [A],
and |S1 | ≤ |S| + α · |S ∩ A|. The second property implies that S1 ∩ B = S ∩ B. Next, we apply
the definition for the set B and solution S1 . We obtain a planar modulator S2 ⊆ V (G) such
that S2 ⊆ (S1 \ B) ∪ NG (B) ∪ SB , S2 \ NG [B] = S1 \ NG [B], and |S2 | ≤ |S1 | + α · |S1 ∩ B| ≤
|S| + α · |S ∩ A| + α · |S ∩ B| = |S| + α · |S ∩ (A ∪ B)|.
    We check that S1 \ B ⊆ S \ (A ∪ B) ∪ NG (A) ∪ SA and NG (B) ∩ A = NG (A) ∩ B = ∅ so
S2 ⊆ S \ (A ∪ B) ∪ NG (A ∪ B) ∪ (SA ∪ SB ).
    Finally, both NG [A], NG [B] are subsets of NG [A ∪ B] so we trivially obtain S2 \ NG [A ∪ B] =
S1 \ NG [A ∪ B] = S \ NG [A ∪ B].

                                                   45
   From these two observations, we can easily obtain the following useful lemma.
Lemma 7.7. Consider a graph G, vertex set A ⊆ V (G), and a boundaried decomposition (Y, C) of
   S Suppose that for each set C ∈ C we are given an α-preserver SC ⊆ C for C. Then the set
GhAi.
Y ∪ C∈C SC is an α-preserver for A.
Proof. We fix any ordering C1 , . . . , Cm of C. For any distinct i, j ∈ [m] we have NG [Ci ] ∩ Cj = ∅.
From Lemma 7.6 S` we obtain that SC1 ∪ SC2 is   S`an α-preserver for C1 ∪ C2 and, by repeating this
argument, that i=1 SCi is an α-preserver for i=1 Ci , for each ` ∈ [m]. Next, we apply Lemma 7.5
to `i=1 Ci and Y , to get that C∈C SC ∪ Y is an α-preserver for their union, that is A.
   S                          S

    Suppose that G is a graph, X ⊆ V (G) is a planar modulator in G, and for each component C ∈
CC(G − X) we have computed an α-preserver SC ⊆ C. We can apply Lemma 7.7 to the boundaried
graph (G, ∅) (with the
                     S empty boundary) and the boundaried decomposition (X, CC(G − X)) to
get that X 0 = X ∪ C∈CC(G−X) SC is an α-preserver for V (G). In other words, for every planar
modulator S ⊆ V (G) in G, including the optimal one, there exists a planar modulator S 0 in G such
that S 0 ⊆ X 0 and |S 0 | ≤ α · |S|. This will allow us to restrict our attention only to the approximate
solutions contained in X 0 .

7.1    Reduction to single-faced boundaried graphs
In this section, we show how to reduce the task of constructing a solution preserver for GhAi with a
given embedding of bounded diameter to the case where in the embedding of GhAi all the boundary
vertices lie on the outer face. As an intermediate step, we shall consider circumscribed boundaried
plane graphs, which are slightly more general than single-faced plane graphs. This reduction will
also come in useful in Section 8.
    As we work with boundaried plane graphs of bounded radial diameter, we can mark a bounded-
size set of faces covering the boundary and forming a connected area on the plane. Then the
remaining parts of the graph interact with their boundaries only through the outer faces. Recall the
definition of a radial graph from Section 3.
Definition 7.8. Let G be a plane graph and let Rad(G) = (V (G) ∪ F, E) be the radial graph of G.
We say that S ⊆ V (G) is radially connected if there exists F 0 ⊆ F such that Rad(G)[S ∪ F 0 ] is
connected.
    Given a set of vertices in a plane graph of moderate radial diameter we want to find its superset
that is radially connected. A bound on the radial diameter translates to a bound on the diameter of
the radial graph. We will take advantage of the following simple observation about bounded-diameter
graphs.
Lemma 7.9. Let G be a connected graph of diameter bounded by d. Then for any non-empty vertex
set S ⊆ V (G) there exists S 0 ⊇ S such that G[S 0 ] is connected and |S 0 | ≤ d · |S|. Furthermore, such
a set S 0 can be found in polynomial time when G and S are given.
Proof. We prove by induction on ` that if G[S] has ` connected components, there is a connected
superset S 0 ⊇ S of size at most |S| + `(d − 1). This proves that any set S has a connected superset
of size at most d · |S| since G[S] has at most ` ≤ |S| connected components, and therefore gives the
lemma.
    If ` = 1 then S 0 = S suffices. Otherwise, let C1 , C2 be distinct connected components of G[S] and
let v1 ∈ C1 , v2 ∈ C2 . Since the diameter of G is at most d, there is a (v1 , v2 )-path P in G of length at
most d, which has at most d−1 internal vertices I. Then S∪I has at most `−1 connected components.

                                                    46
By induction, there is a connected superset S 0 of S ∪I on at most |S ∪I|+(`−1)·(d−1) ≤ |S|+`(d−1)
vertices, which concludes the proof. The inductive argument easily turns into a recursive polynomial-
time algorithm.
Lemma 7.10. Let G be a plane graph of radial diameter bounded by d. Then for any vertex set
S ⊆ V (G) there exists S 0 ⊇ S such that S 0 is radially connected in G and |S 0 | ≤ |S| · (2d + 2).
Furthermore, the set S 0 can be found in polynomial time when G and S are given.
Proof. Let Rad(G) = (V (G) ∪ F, E) be the radial graph of G. Note that Rad(G) is always connected,
even if G is not. Consider some pair u, v ∈ V (G). By assumption dG (u, v) ≤ d and so there
exists a (u, v)-path in Rad(G) of length at most 2d, as any jump between vertices that share a
face f can be emulated in Rad(G) by visiting the vertex representing f . Furthermore, each vertex
from F is adjacent in Rad(G) to some vertex from V (G), so Rad(G) has diameter at most 2d + 2.
By Lemma 7.9, there exists a set SR ⊇ S, SR ⊆ V (Rad(G)), so that Rad(G)[SR ] is connected
and |SR | ≤ |S| · (2d + 2), and this set can be efficiently computed. The claim follows by taking
S 0 = SR ∩ V (G).
    We proceed with decomposing a boundaried plane graph of moderate diameter into circumscribed
boundaried plane graphs by augmenting the boundary to be radially connected. Recall Definition 3.11
of a circumscribed boundaried plane graph H: all vertices of ∂(H) must be embedded in the outer
face of H − ∂(H).
Lemma 7.11. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a boundaried plane graph H of
radial diameter at most d and a (possibly empty) vertex set Y ⊆ V (H) \ ∂(H), outputs a vertex set
Y 0 ⊆ V (H) \ ∂(H) of size at most (2d + 2) · (|Y | + |∂(H)|), such that for each connected component
C of H − (∂(H) ∪ Y 0 ) the boundaried plane graph HhCi is circumscribed.
Proof. We apply Lemma 7.10 for S = ∂(H) ∪ Y , to find a set S 0 ⊇ ∂(H) of size at most (2d + 2) ·
(|Y | + |∂(H)|), which is radially connected in H. Consider a connected component C of H − S 0 and
the plane embedding of H truncated to the subgraph induced by C. Suppose there are at least two
faces of H[C] containing vertices from NH (C) (which is a subset of S 0 ). Then there exists a cycle in
H − S 0 with at least one vertex of S 0 in the interior and at least one vertex of S 0 in the exterior.
This contradicts the fact that S 0 is radially connected in H. We infer that there is only one face of
H[C] which contains vertices from NH (C), hence the graph HhCi is circumscribed. Note that we
can always modify the embedding by swapping the outer face with any other chosen face. The
claim follows by taking Y 0 = S 0 \ ∂(H).
    We are already close to the case with the boundary lying on the outer face. There is however
a subtle difference between circumscribed and single-faced boundaried plane graphs. If H is
circumscribed, then the edges incident to the boundary of H may separate some vertices of ∂(H)
from the outer face of H.
    We shall employ Lemma 3.7 to decompose H into boundaried subgraphs adjacent to at most two
vertices from ∂(H). We want to say that such a boundaried subgraph HhCi becomes single-faced
after discarding these two special vertices. This is done by exploiting minimality of a particular
separator which guarantees that there exists a subgraph disjoint from NH [C], that can be made
connected without violating planarity, adjacent to each vertex in NH (C). Contracting this subgraph
gives the closure graph of HhCi and allows us to use the criterion from Observation 3.13.
    In order to use Lemma 3.7 we need a tree decomposition of width k O(1) . Such a decomposition
is computed in Section 4 but later we apply several graph modifications in Section 6, including
protrusion replacement. This might invalidate the tree decomposition and we need to compute it
anew.

                                                  47
Lemma 7.12. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given an r-boundaried circumscribed
plane graph H of radial diameter at most d, such that r ≥ 3, outputs a vertex set Y ⊆ V (H) \ ∂(H)
of size at most 18 · dr, such that for each connected component C of H − (∂(H) ∪ Y ) it holds that
   1. |NH (C) ∩ ∂(H)| ≤ 2, and
   2. the boundaried graph HhCi − (NH (C) ∩ ∂(H)) is single-faced.
Proof. The graph H has at most d outerplanarity layers, so its treewidth is at most 3d − 1 [Bod98].
We invoke the polynomial-time 32 -approximation algorithm for treewidth on planar graphs [ST94]3
to compute a tree decomposition (T, χ) of H of width at most η = 23 (3d − 1).
    We supply the computed tree decomposition to Lemma 3.7 for S = ∂(H) and obtain a vertex
set Y ⊆ V (H) \ ∂(H) such that |Y | ≤ 4(η + 1) · r ≤ 18 · dr and each connected component of
H − (∂(H) ∪ Y ) has at most 2 neighbors in ∂(H) and at most 2η neighbors in Y . The latter property
is not used in this proof.
    In order to ensure condition (2) of the lemma, we need to trim the set Y . Consider the following
reduction rule: while there exists a vertex v ∈ Y such that Y \ {v} still satisfies condition (1),
remove v from Y . Let Y 0 ⊆ Y be the set obtained by exhaustive application of the reduction rule.
Observe that Y 0 6= ∅ because otherwise the only connected component of H − ∂(H) would have
r ≥ 3 neighbors in ∂(H) which does not satisfy condition (1).
    Consider a connected component C of H − (∂(H) ∪ Y 0 ) and v ∈ NH (C) ∩ Y 0 . Since v has not
been removed in the application of the reduction rule, there is a different connected component of
H − (∂(H) ∪ Y 0 ) which is adjacent to v and to some t ∈ ∂(H). Let H 1 be obtained from H by (1)
removing NH (C)∩∂(H), and (2) replacing ∂(H)\NH (C) with a single vertex u adjacent to entire set
NH (∂(H)). This operation can be seen as inserting a vertex adjacent to a subset of vertices lying on
the outer face of H − ∂(H), so H 1 is planar. By the observation above, the set RH 1 (u, Y 0 ) is adjacent
to each v ∈ NH 1 (C) ∩ Y 0 and it is disjoint from C. Let H 2 be obtained from H 1 by contracting
the connected vertex set RH 1 (u, Y 0 ) into u. This graph contains HhCi − (NH (C) ∩ ∂(H)) as a
boundaried subgraph H 2 hCi, together with u 6∈ C adjacent to each vertex in NH 2 (C). Therefore,
H 2 is the closure graph of HhCi − (NH (C) ∩ ∂(H)) which, as H 2 is planar and connected, implies
that HhCi − (NH (C) ∩ ∂(H)) is single-faced (see Observation 3.13).

Retrieving solution preservers from boundaried decompositions We have shown how to
decompose the bounded-diameter case into the circumscribed case, and the circumscribed case into
the single-faced case. Now we want to use Lemma 7.7 to “backpropagate” these reductions and
retrieve the solution preservers. We first state a crucial proposition which allows us to construct a
solution preserver for a single-faced boundaried graph.
Proposition 7.13. Let A ⊆ V (G) be such that GhAi is a single-faced boundaried graph. Then
there exists a set SA ⊆ A of size at most |NG (A)|2 which is a 168-preserver for A. Furthermore, SA
can be computed in polynomial time.
    In order to keep the focus of the current section, we postpone the proof of Proposition 7.13 to the
end of Section 7.3 and first discuss its implications. As the case of a circumscribed boundaried graph
can be reduced to the case with a single-faced boundaried graph via Lemma 7.12, our framework
yields a construction of solution preservers for circumscribed boundaried graphs.
    This construction may require removal of at most two vertices from the obtained boundaried
subgraph GhAi to make it single-faced. This however does not impose much trouble: if S is a
  3
    The work [ST94] focuses on computing branchwidth exactly on planar graphs and the 32 -approximation for
treewidth follows from the close relation between treewidth and branchwidth.


                                                    48
solution and S ∩ A is non-empty we can “charge” this part of the solution to pay for the removal of
the two vertices, turning an α-preserver into an (α + 2)-preserver. Similarly we argue that when
|NG (A)| ≤ 2 then if S ∩ A is non-empty then we may just remove NG (A) so in this case the empty
set is a 2-preserver for A.
Lemma 7.14. Consider a graph G, a vertex set A ⊆ V (G) such that |NG (A)| = r ≥ 3, and a
circumscribed embedding of GhAi of radial diameter at most d. Then there exists a 170-preserver
SA ⊆ A for A of size O(d3 r3 ). Furthermore, SA can be computed in polynomial time when given
G, A, and the embedding of GhAi.
Proof. We apply Lemma 7.12 to compute a set Y ⊆ A of size at most 18 · dr, such that for each
connected component C of GhAi − (NG (A) ∪ Y ) there exists a set DC = NG (C) ∩ NG (A) of size at
most 2 so that the boundaried graph GhCi − DC is single-faced. Let C be the family of connected
components of GhAi − (NG (A) ∪ Y ). Then (Y, C) is a boundaried decomposition of GhAi. We
partition C into families C≤2 , comprising those components that have at most 2 neighbors, and C≥3 ,
which contains all the remaining components.
     For C ∈ C≤2 a 2-preserver is given by the empty set: for any planar modulator S ⊆ V (G)
satisfying |S ∩ C| ≥ 1 we can replace S ∩ C with NG (C). Consider now a component C ∈ C≥3 . Let
G0 = G − DC ; we have that G0 hCi = GhCi − DC is a single-faced boundaried graph. We apply
Proposition 7.13 to compute a 168-preserver SC ⊆ C for C in G0 of size at most |NH (C)|2 = O(d2 r2 ).
We claim that SC is a 170 preserver for C in G. To see this, consider a planar modulator S ⊆ V (G)
in G satisfying |S ∩ C| ≥ 1. Then S1 = S \ DC is a planar modulator in G0 . By the definition of an
α-preserver, there exists a planar modulator S2 in G0 , such that (1) S2 ⊆ (S1 \ C) ∪ NG0 (C) ∪ SC ,
(2) S2 \ NG0 [C] = S1 \ NG0 [C], and (3) |S2 | ≤ |S1 | + 168 · |S1 ∩ C|. We set S3 = S2 ∪ DC , so
|S3 | ≤ |S| + 170 · |S ∩ C|. It is a planar modulator in G and, since DC ⊆ NG (C), it is a correct
replacement for S.                                S
     By Lemma 7.7 we obtain that SA = Y ∪ C∈C≥3 SC is a 170-preserver for A. We estimate
|C≥3 | ≤ 2 · |NG (A) ∪ Y | = O(dr) with Lemma 7.4 so the total size of SA is O(d3 r3 ).

    Finally, we employ the reduction from Lemma 7.11 to extend the construction above to the case
of boundaried plane graphs with bounded diameter. The following proposition encapsulates all the
results about solution preservers into a statement to be used in the main proof.
Proposition 7.15. Consider a graph G, a vertex set A ⊆ V (G) such that |NG (A)| = r, and a
plane embedding of GhAi of radial diameter at most d. Then there exists a 170-preserver SA ⊆ A
for A of size O(d7 r4 ). Furthermore, SA can be computed in polynomial time when G, A, and the
embedding of GhAi are given.
Proof. Let H be a boundaried plane graph of radial diameter at most d given by the embedding
of GhAi. We apply Lemma 7.11 to H with Y = ∅ to compute a set Y 0 of size at most (2d + 2) · r
such that for each connected component C of H − (∂(H) ∪ Y 0 ) the boundaried plane graph HhCi
is circumscribed. Let C be the family of connected components of H − (∂(H) ∪ Y ). We partition
C into families C≤2 , comprising those components that have at most 2 neighbors, and C≥3 , which
contains all the remaining components. We proceed similarly as in Lemma 7.14.
    For C ∈ C≤2 a 2-preserver is given by the empty set: for any planar modulator S ⊆ V (G)
satisfying |S ∩ C| ≥ 1 we can replace S ∩ C with NG (C). For each component C ∈ C≥3 we have
that |NH (C)| ≤ |Y ∪ ∂(H)| = O(dr). Furthermore, the radial diameter bound from GhAi transfers
to GhCi. We take advantage of Lemma 7.14 toScompute a 170-preserver SC ⊆ C of size O(d6 r3 ).
    By Lemma 7.7 we obtain that SA = Y ∪ C∈C≥3 SC is a 170-preserver for A. We estimate
|C≥3 | ≤ 2 · |NG (A) ∪ Y | = O(dr) with Lemma 7.4 so the total size of SA is O(d7 r4 ).

                                                 49
7.2    Inseparability in single-faced boundaried graphs
This section, together with the following one, are devoted to proving Proposition 7.13. To this end, we
first develop a framework of inseparability in single-faced boundaried graphs and reduce computing
a solution preserver to the case where the given single-faced boundaried graph is inseparable. In the
next section, we will focus on the inseparable case.
     Given a single-faced boundaried plane graph H we can consider a natural cyclic ordering of
∂(H). Since the vertices of ∂(H) lie on the outer face, we can augment the embedding by inserting a
special vertex uH adjacent to all vertices in ∂(H). This operation turns H into its closure graph H      b
(see Observation 3.13). After this operation we get a unique cyclic ordering of the neighbors of the
special vertex uH , which are the vertices from ∂(H). When considering a single-faced boundaried
plane graph H, we always implicitly assume a fixed cylic ordering of ∂(H), given by some embedding
of H.b For such an ordering, we define a canonical division as a partition ∂(H) = T1 ] T2 such
that T1 , T2 are non-empty connected segments in the cyclic ordering of ∂(H). We say that sets
T1 , T2 ⊆ T are non-crossing if they are non-empty and there exists a canonical division (T10 , T20 ) such
that T10 ⊇ T1 , T20 ⊇ T2 .

Observation 7.16. Consider a single-faced boundaried plane graph H and a canonical division
(T1 , T2 ) of ∂(H). Let H 00 be obtained by adding two new vertices t1 , t2 , adjacent to T1 and T2 ,
respectively. Then H 00 is planar.

    The following definition plays a key role in this section.

Definition 7.17. A c-separation (T1 , T2 , S) in a boundaried graph H is given by an unrestricted
(T1 , T2 )-separator S, such that T1 , T2 ⊆ ∂(H) are non-empty and disjoint, and c·|S| ≤ min(|T1 |, |T2 |).
We say that a boundaried graph H is c-inseparable if it does not admit a c-separation.
     Given a single-faced boundaried plane graph H, we say that a c-separation (T1 , T2 , S) is canonical
if (T1 , T2 ) is a canonical division of ∂(H) and S is an inclusion-wise minimal unrestricted (T1 , T2 )-
separator.

    Our current goal is to reduce the task of finding solution preservers into the case when the
given single-faced boundaried graph is c-inseparable for some constant c. As long as some c-
separation exists, ideally we would like to find it and recurse on the both sides of the separator.
It is however unclear whether a c-separation can be detected in polynomial time or whether the
obtained boundaried subgraphs are always single-faced. First we show that when we can separate
some non-crossing subsets of the boundary with a small separator, we can do the same for some
canonical division.

Lemma 7.18. Let H be a single-faced boundaried plane graph and T1 , T2 ⊆ ∂(H) be non-crossing.
Suppose there exists an unrestricted (T1 , T2 )-separator S, such that c · |S| ≤ min(|T1 |, |T2 |). Then H
admits a canonical c-separation.

Proof. Let T10 ⊇ T1 , T20 ⊇ T2 be disjoint segments of ∂(H) witnessing the non-crossing property.
Let H 00 be obtained from H by adding a new vertex t1 adjacent to all v ∈ T1 and a new vertex t2
adjacent to all v ∈ T2 . Since T1 , T2 are non-crossing, H 00 is planar by Observation 7.16. We can
assume that each vertex v ∈ T10 either belongs to T1 or to R = RH 00 (t2 , S) \ {t2 }, since if neither
holds then we can add v to T1 while preserving the preconditions to the lemma.
   We introduce some terminology for the rest of the proof. Suppose V1 , V2 ⊆ T1 are two disjoint
segments of terminals. Then the set ∂(H) \ (V1 ∪ V2 ) comprises of two segments U1 , U2 (U1 possibly
empty) such that T2 ⊆ U2 . We say that a vertex v ∈ ∂(H) lies between V1 and V2 when v ∈ U1 .


                                                    50
    We divide T1 into a sequence of (maximal) segments Q1 , . . . , Qm , ordered with respect to
the embedding, such that the boundary vertices between Qi and Qi+1 belong to R. Let Ci be
the set of vertices reachable from any v ∈ Qi in H 00 without going through R or t1 , that is,
Ci = RH 00 (Qi , R ∪ {t1 }).
    We claim that the sets (Ci )m     i=1 are pairwise disjoint. Assume otherwise that Ci ∩ Cj 6= ∅ for
some i < j. Then there exist vertices v1 ∈ Qi and v3 ∈ Qj connected by a path P1,3 in V (H) − R.
Let v2 ∈ T10 ∩ R be some vertex lying between Qi and Qj . Since v2 ∈ R, there exists a path
P2,4 connecting v2 to some vertex v4 ∈ T20 such that V (P ) ⊆ R. Note that the numbering of
vertices v1 , v2 , v3 , v4 obeys the cyclic ordering of terminals given by the single-faced embedding.
Let H0 be a graph obtained from H by inserting edges v1 v2 , v2 v3 , v3 v4 , v4 v1 and a new vertex v5
adjacent {v1 , v2 , v3 , v4 }. By the choice of the ordering, H0 is planar. The path P1,3 within V (H) \ R
connecting v1 and v3 is disjoint from the path P2,4 connecting v2 and v4 within R. By contracting
the paths P1,3 , P2,4 to edges we obtain a minor model of K5 in H0 , which is a contradiction with
the assumption that Ci ∩ Cj 6= ∅.
    Using the disjointness property we finish the proof. Let Si = S ∩ Ci for i ∈ [m]. The sets (Si )m      i=1
are pairwise disjoint and the sets (Qi )m  i=1  sum  up to T1 , hence the assumption c · |S| ≤ min(|T1 |, |T2 |)
implies that c · |Si | ≤ |Qi | for some i ∈ [m]. The set Si is an unrestricted (Qi , R)-separator in H
and an unrestricted (Qi , Qj )-separator in H for each j =       6 i because Ci ∩ Cj = ∅. Therefore, Si is
an unrestricted (Qi , ∂(H) \ Qi ) separator. Since c · |Si | ≤ c · |S| ≤ |T2 | ≤ |∂(H) \ Qi |, we obtain a
canonical c-separation.

   We now show that the existence of a (2c)-separation implies the existence of a c-separation of
non-crossing subsets, which in turn implies the existence of a canonical c-separation.

Lemma 7.19. Let H be a single-faced boundaried graph, T1 , T2 ⊆ ∂(H) be disjoint and non-empty,
and S be an unrestricted (T1 , T2 )-separator, such that 2c · |S| ≤ min(|T1 |, |T2 |). Then H admits a
canonical c-separation with respect to any given single-faced embedding.

Proof. Let us fix a single-faced embedding of H. Due to Lemma 7.18, it suffices to show that S
is an unrestricted (Q1 , Q2 )-separator for some non-crossing Q1 , Q2 ⊆ ∂(H), such that c · |S| ≤
min(|Q1 |, |Q2 |).
    Since |T2 | ≥ 2c·|S|, we can find two segments of ∂(H) that each have at least c·|S| vertices from T2 .
Hence there exists a canonical division (Q01 , Q02 ) of ∂(H), such that c · |S| ≤ min(|Q01 ∩ T2 |, |Q02 ∩ T2 |).
As the segments (Q01 , Q02 ) partition T1 ⊆ ∂(H) and |T1 | ≥ 2c · |S|, we have c · |S| ≤ |Q01 ∩ T1 |
or c · |S| ≤ |Q02 ∩ T1 |. Suppose this inequality holds for Q0i , i ∈ {1, 2}. Let Q1 = Q0i ∩ T1 and
Q2 = T2 \ Q0i . Since Q1 ⊆ T1 and Q2 ⊆ T2 , the set S is an unrestricted (Q1 , Q2 )-separator.

    As the number of canonical divisions is quadratic in the size of the boundary, we can find a
canonical c-separation in polynomial time. Together with Lemma 7.19, this yields a 2-approximation
algorithm for finding separations.

Lemma 7.20. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a single-faced boundaried graph
H and an integer c > 0, either correctly concludes that H is (2c)-inseparable or finds a canonical
c-separation with respect to some single-faced embedding of H.

Proof. Let us start with constructing a single-faced embedding of H: it can be done in polynomial
time since it suffices to construct any plane embedding of the closure of H (see Observation 3.13).
By Lemma 7.19, a single-faced boundaried graph either is (2c)-inseparable or admits a canonical
c-separation with respect to any single-faced embedding. We enumerate all |∂(H)|2 -many canonical
divisions with respect to the constructed embedding. For each canonical division (T1 , T2 ) we check

                                                      51
if there exists S such that (T1 , T2 , S) is a canonical c-separation. This task reduces to adding two
new vertices t1 , t2 , adjacent respectively to T1 and T2 , and finding a minimum (t1 , t2 )-separator. If
for some canonical division (T1 , T2 ) we find S such that c · |S| ≤ min(|T1 |, |T2 |), we can return it: it
must be an inclusion-wise minimal unrestricted (T1 , T2 )-separator. Otherwise we report that H is
(2c)-inseparable.

     Whenever we find a canonical c-separation we want to augment the boundary by marking
the vertices in the separator to split the given single-faced boundaried graphs into two smaller
single-faced boundaried graphs. We will add the marked vertices to the solution preserver and we
proceed recursively. A priori this construction may mark a large number of vertices so we need
some kind of a measure to ensure that the constructed solution preserver cannot be too large. Let
t be the size of the original boundary, s be the size of the separator, and t1 , t2 be the boundary
sizes of the two smaller single-faced boundaried graphs on which we recurse. Because we work with
a canonical c-separation we have that c · s ≤ min(t1 , t2 ). This implies that even when t1 + t2 > t
these numbers are in some sense balanced. It turns out that it suffices to take c = 4 to ensure that
t21 + t22 < t2 which provides us with a measure that decreases in each step and governs the number
of possible recursive splits.

Lemma 7.21. Let s ≥ 0, t > 0, t1 > 0, t2 > 0 be integers satisfying t1 ≥ 4s, t2 ≥ 4s, t + 2s ≥ t1 + t2 .
Then t2 ≥ t21 + t22 + s + 1.

Proof. First consider the case s = 0. We have t ≥ t1 + t2 > 0 so t2 ≥ (t1 + t2 )2 = t21 + t22 + 2t1 t2 ≥
t21 + t22 + 1 because t1 , t2 are positive.
     Now consider the case s ≥ 1. As t1 + t2 − 2s ≥ 6s ≥ 0, the inequality t ≥ t1 + t2 − 2s is
maintained with both sides squared. We enroll the squared expression, rearrange the terms, and
bound 4s2 ≥ s + 1.

                  t2 ≥ (t1 + t2 − 2s)2 = t21 + t22 + 4s2 + 2t1 t2 − 4st1 − 4st2
                      = t21 + t22 + 4s2 + t1 (t2 − 4s) + t2 (t1 − 4s) ≥ t21 + t22 + s + 1.

This concludes the proof.

    Now we show that when splitting a single-faced boundaried graph along a canonical separation,
we indeed obtain two smaller single-faced boundaried graphs. We do not construct their embeddings
directly but rather refer to the convenient criterion from Observation 3.13. Note that the definition
of a single-faced boundaried graph does not require it to be connected although connectivity will
later follow from being c-inseparable.

Lemma 7.22. Let H be a single-faced boundaried plane graph and let (T1 , T2 , S) be a canonical
4-separation. Then there exist sets V1 , V2 ⊆ V (H), so that

   1. (V1 , V2 ) is a partition of V (H) \ (∂(H) ∪ S),

   2. NH (V1 ) ⊆ T1 ∪ S and NH (V2 ) ⊆ T2 ∪ S,

   3. HhV1 i, HhV2 i are single-faced boundaried graphs,

   4. |NH (V1 )|2 + |NH (V2 )|2 + |S| + 1 ≤ |∂(H)|2 .

Furthermore, the sets V1 , V2 can be found in polynomial time, when H and (T1 , T2 , S) are given.



                                                    52
Proof. If |S| = 0, then T1 , T2 are disconnected in H. We can group the vertices of H − ∂(H) into
two sets V1 , V2 , where NH (Vi ) ⊆ Ti for i ∈ {1, 2}. Since T1 , T2 are non-empty by Definition 7.17, the
numbers 0, |∂(H)|, |T1 |, |T2 |, satisfy the prerequisites of Lemma 7.21, and so |NH (V1 )|2 + |NH (V2 )|2 +
|S| + 1 ≤ |∂(H)|2 . Since H is single-faced, the same is easily seen to hold for HhV1 i and HhV2 i.
      Let us assume |S| ≥ 1 for the rest of the proof. Consider the connected components of
H − (∂(H) ∪ S). None of them can have neighbors in both T1 and T2 . Therefore we can group the
vertices of V (H) \ (∂(H) ∪ S) into two sets V1 , V2 , where Vi is the union of the components with
neighbors in Ti ∪ S. If a component has neighbors only in S, we can choose its allocation arbitrarily.
      We are going to show that HhV1 i is single-faced—the proof for HhV2 i is symmetric. Note
that NH (V1 ) ⊆ T1 ∪ S. Let H0 be obtained from H by adding two new vertices t1 , t2 adjacent to
respectively T1 and T2 . Then H0 is planar and by Definition 7.17 S is an inclusion-wise minimal
(t1 , t2 )-separator in H0 . Therefore, each vertex from S is adjacent to both RH0 (t1 , S) and RH0 (t2 , S).
Let H1 be obtained from H0 by

   1. adding an edge t1 t2 —this preserves planarity,

   2. contracting RH0 (t2 , S) into t2 ,

   3. contracting the edge t1 t2 .

The graph H1 is planar and contains HhV1 i as a boundaried subgraph H1 hV1 i, plus one additional
vertex adjacent to every vertex in T1 ∪ S ⊇ NH1 (V1 ). Also, H1 is a contraction of the closure H        b of H,
hence it is planar and connected. Finally, let us remove from H1 all the vertices of (T1 ∪ S) \ NH1 (V1 ),
which trivially preserves planarity and preserves connectivity through t1 . The resulting graph is
isomorphic to the closure of HhV1 i. We have thus obtained that the closure of HhV1 i is planar and
connected so by Observation 3.13 the boundaried graph H is single-faced.
     Finally, let us prove the inequality. Since (T1 , T2 , S) is a 4-separation, it holds that min(|T1 |, |T2 |) ≥
4 · |S|. As |T1 ∪ S| + |T2 ∪ S| ≤ |∂(H)| + 2 · |S|, the numbers |S|, |∂(H)|, |T1 ∪ S|, |T2 ∪ S| satisfy the
prerequisites of Lemma 7.21, and so |T1 ∪ S|2 + |T2 ∪ S|2 + |S| + 1 ≤ |∂(H)|2 . Since NH (Vi ) ⊆ Ti ∪ S
for i ∈ {1, 2}, the claim follows.

    We are ready to decompose a single-faced boundaried graph H into boundaried subgraphs which
are single-faced and 8-inseparable. We define a single-faced decomposition of H as a boundaried
decomposition (Y, C) of H (recall Definition 7.2), such that for each C ∈ C it holds that HhCi is
single-faced.

Lemma 7.23. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a single-faced boundaried graph H,
returns its single-faced decomposition (Y, C), so that |Y | ≤ |∂(H)|2 and for each C ∈ C it holds that
HhCi is 8-inseparable.

Proof. We decompose H recursively starting with a single-faced  decomposition (Y0 , C0 ) = (∅, {V (H)\
∂(H)}). Let us define the measure µ(Y, C) = |Y | + C∈C |NH (C)|2 . We have µ(Y0 , C0 ) = |∂(H)|2 .
                                                      P
We are going to refine the single-faced decomposition until all the boundaried graphs HhCi, for
C ∈ C, are 8-inseparable, in each step decreasing the measure µ.
    Let (Yi , Ci ) be a single-faced decomposition of H. We use Lemma 7.20 with c = 4 to either
conclude that all HhCi, for C ∈ C, are 8-inseparable (then the procedure terminates) or to find a
canonical 4-separation (T1 , T2 , S) with respect to some single-faced embedding of HhCi for some
C ∈ C. Now we apply Lemma 7.22 to HhCi and (T1 , T2 , S). We obtain sets V1 , V2 ⊆ C \ S,
which form a partition of C \ S and satisfy NH (Vi ) ⊆ NH (C) ∪ S. Furthermore, each HhVi i
is single-faced. We define a new single-faced decomposition (Yi+1 , Ci+1 ), where Yi+1 = Yi ∪ S


                                                       53
and Ci+1 is obtained from Ci by replacing C with V1 and V2 . Lemma 7.22 guarantees that
|NH (V1 )|2 + |NH (V2 )|2 + |S| + 1 ≤ |NH (C)|2 , therefore µ(Yi+1 , Ci+1 ) ≤ µ(Yi , Ci ) − 1.
    In each step the measure µ(Yi , Ci ) decreases, so the algorithm terminates after at most µ(Y0 , C0 ) =
|∂(H)|2 steps. Let (Y` , C` ) be the final single-faced decomposition. We have |Y` | ≤ µ(Y` , C` ) ≤
µ(Y0 , C0 ) = |∂(H)|2 . For each C ∈ C` , the boundaried graph HhCi is single-faced (by the invariant
of a single-faced decomposition) and 8-inseparable (because the algorithm has terminated).

7.3    From inseparability to a solution preserver
In this section we show when GhAi is single-faced and c-inseparable then the empty set forms an
O(1)-preserver for A. In other words, for any solution S each vertex from S ∩ A can be replaced by
O(1) vertices in NG (A). First we need several observation about balls in the metric given by the
weak radial distance. Recall that for a plane graph G and u, v ∈ V (G) the weak radial distance
wG (u, v) is one less than the minimum length of a sequence of vertices that starts at u, ends in v,
and in which every two consecutive vertices either share an edge or lie on a common interior face.
Recall also that WG ` (X) denotes the ball of weak radial distance at most ` around vertex set X (see

Figure 5 for an illustration). The reason why we consider the weak radial distance instead of just
the radial distance (allowing to make paths also through the outer face) becomes evident in the
following proof.

Lemma 7.24. Let H be a single-faced boundaried plane graph and let X ⊆ V (H). Suppose that
T1 , T2 ⊆ ∂(H) are non-crossing. If WH ` (X) is an unrestricted (T , T )-separator, then there exists
                                                                    1 2
X 0 ⊆ WH ` (X) such that X 0 is an unrestricted (T , T )-separator and |X 0 | ≤ (2` + 1) · |X|.
                                                  1 2

Proof. Let H 00 be obtained from H by adding a new vertex t1 adjacent to all t in T1 and a new vertex
t2 adjacent to all t in T2 . Since T1 , T2 are non-crossing, t1 , t2 can be inserted without modifying the
embedding of H, within the outer face. Let us abbreviate X i = WH          i (X). By the assumption, X ` is

a (T1 , T2 )-separator in H .00

    Consider a directed graph R with vertex set X ` defined as follows. For each x ∈ X i \ X i−1 ,
i ∈ [`], we add a single edge from x to any vertex y ∈ X i−1 such that x, y share an interior face or
xy ∈ E(H). Such vertex y always exists by the definition of the metric wH . Since any x ∈ (X ` \ X)
has out-degree 1 in R, we can define a function r : (X ` \ X) → X ` given by the arcs of R.
    Let X 0 ⊆ X ` be defined by the following procedure. Initialize X 0 = X ` and while there exists
x ∈ X 0 \ X of in-degree 0 in R, such that X 0 \ x is still a (T1 , T2 )-separator in H 00 , remove x from X 0
and from R. Let C1 , C2 be the connected components in H 00 − X 0 containing T1 and T2 , respectively.
    We shall prove that |X 0 | ≤ (2` + 1) · |X|. Let Rx ⊆ X 0 be the set of vertices y ∈ X 0 admitting
a path y → x in R, including x. Fix x ∈ X and suppose that there are 3 vertices x1 , x2 , x3 ∈ Rx ,
each of in-degree 0 in R. Since none of these 3 vertices were removed during construction of X 0 ,
each of them is connected to both C1 and C2 in H 00 . Let H0 be obtained from H 00 be adding a new
vertex uf for each interior face of H and connecting uf to all vertices lying on this face. Recall
that H 00 was obtained by adding two vertices inside the outer face, so they do not interfere with
inserting vertices within interior faces. Therefore, H0 is still a planar graph. Let Y ⊆ V (H0 ) be
obtained from Rx \ {x1 , x2 , x2 } by adding all the adjacent face-vertices. Since x and r(x) either
share an edge or an interior face, the graph H0 [Y ] is connected. The vertices x1 , x2 , x3 and the sets
Y, C1 , C2 form branch sets of a K3,3 minor in H0 , which is a contradiction to the assumption that
such vertices x1 , x2 , x3 exist.
    We infer that Rx can contain at most 2 vertices of in-degree 0 in R, and because the out-degree
in R is at most 1, we obtain that |Rx ∩ X i | ≤ 2 for i ∈ [`] and so |Rx | ≤ 2` + 1. Since the sets Rx
sum up to X 0 , it follows that |X 0 | ≤ (2` + 1) · |X|.

                                                     54
    Lemma 7.24 implies that for a set X and integer `, the set WH ` (X) behaves similarly as a set of

size (2` + 1) · |X| with respect to separating non-crossing subsets of the boundary. The following
lemma deepens this analogy: we show that in a c-inseparable boundaried plane graph H, if the
number of boundary vertices is large compared to the size of some set X and integer `, then there
must be unique component of H − WH      ` (X) that contains almost all boundary vertices and all the

other components have at most O(c · ` · d) of them.
Lemma 7.25. Let H be a c-inseparable single-faced r-boundaried plane graph, ` be a positive integer,
and let X ⊆ V (H) be of size d. Suppose that 3c · (2` + 1) · d ≤ r. Then there is a single connected
component in H − WH ` (X) containing at least r − c · (2` + 1) · d vertices from ∂(H).


Proof. Let X 0 = WH      ` (X). We will consider two cases depending on the maximal number of boundary

vertices in a single component of H − X 0 . First let us assume that each such component contains at
most c · (2` + 1) · d elements from ∂(H) or ∂(H) ⊆ X 0 . Consider the cyclic ordering of ∂(H) given
by the single-faced embedding. Let us choose an arbitrary element t1 ∈ ∂(H) and fix the ordering
t1 , . . . , tr of ∂(H) to start at this element.
      Let Si = {ti } if ti ∈ X 0 and otherwise let Si = RH (ti , X 0
                                                                 Sj) ∩ ∂(H) be the subset of ∂(H) reachable
                      0
from ti in H − X . Let j be the smallest index for which | i=1 Si | ≥ c · (2` + 1) · d. By assumption it
holds that |Sj | ≤ c·(2`+1)·d, so we have | ji=1 Si | ≤ 2c·(2`+1)·d. We define T1 = {ti | i ∈ [j]} and
                                                 S
               Sj
T2 = T \ i=1 Si . Then T1 , T2 are disjoint, non-crossing, and X 0 is an unrestricted (T1 , T2 )-separator.
Lemma 7.24 guarantees that there exists an unrestricted (T1 , T2 )-separator X 00 ⊆ X 0 of size at most
(2` + 1) · d. Note that for each i ∈ [j] satisfying ti 6∈ X 0 , the set Si is contained in a single connected
component of H − X 0 , hence it is also contained in a single                                       00
                                                                Sj connected component of H − X which is
                                     00
disjoint from T2 . Therefore X is also an unrestricted ( i=1 Si , T2 )-separator. By the construction,
| ji=1 Si | ∈ [c · (2` + 1) · d, 2c · (2` + 1) · d]. The lower bound 3c · (2` + 1) · d ≤ r implies that
 S

|T2 | = r − ji=1 Si ≥ c · (2` + 1) · d, which contradicts the assumption that H is c-inseparable.
                 S
      Suppose now that there exists a connected component C of H−X 0 so that |C∩∂(H)| > c·(2`+1)·d.
Let T1 = {t} for an arbitrary t ∈ C ∩ ∂(H) and T2 = ∂(H) \ C. Clearly X 0 is an unrestricted
(T1 , T2 )-separator and T1 , T2 are non-crossing. By Lemma 7.24 we obtain an unrestricted (T1 , T2 )-
separator X 00 such that |X 00 | ≤ (2` + 1) · d and X 00 ⊆ X 0 . The latter property implies that X 00 is
also an unrestricted (∂(H) ∩ C, T2 )-separator. Since H is c-inseparable, we have |T2 | < c · (2` + 1) · d.
Therefore |C ∩ ∂(H)| = r − |T2 | > r − c · (2` + 1) · d, and so C is the desired component.

    When GhAi is single-faced and c-inseparable, then for a solution S in G we consider the set
 3
WGhAi (S ∩ A) after fixing some single-faced embedding of GhAi. This will allow us to construct 3
connected separators between any vertex x ∈ S ∩ A and the large component from Lemma 7.25 in
order to argue for their irrelevance in the solution. To construct such separators we rely on the
following proposition. A plane triangulation is a plane graph with every face being incident to
exactly three vertices. Recall that when using the word separator without any adjective, we refer to
a restricted separator that does not intersect the elements being separated.
Proposition 7.26 ([MT01, Prop. 8.2.3]). Let u and v be distinct vertices in a plane triangulation
G. If S is a minimal (u, v)-separator, then G[S] is an induced, non-facial cycle.
   We remark that this result has been originally formulated for sets whose removal disconnect the
graph but the same argument holds for minimal (u, v)-separators.
Lemma 7.27. Let G be a connected plane graph, x ∈ X ⊆ V (G), and v ∈ V (G) \ WG         ` (X) for
                                                   `
some ` ∈ N. Then there exists either a vertex y ∈ WG (X) \ X which separates v from x or ` vertex-
                     ` (X) \ X forming a sequence of nested (v, x)-separators. In the latter case,
disjoint subsets of WG

                                                     55
each separator is inclusion-wise minimal and either induces a cycle or a path with both endpoints on
the outer face.
Proof. Consider the block-cut tree of G and the sequence of vertices u1 , u2 , . . . , um , where u1 = x,
um = v, and u2 , . . . , um−1 are the articulation points between x and v in G. If x, v belong to the
same biconnected component, then m = 2. More precisely, {ui } is a (v, x)-separator for i ∈ [2, m − 1]
and there are no more singleton (v, x)-separators in G apart from those in the sequence. Let j be
the highest index such that uj ∈ X. Note that j is well defined, as u1 = x ∈ X, and furthermore
j ≤ m − 1. If uj+1 ∈ WG    ` (X), then in particular u    6 v and we can set y = uj+1 to satisfy the
                                                      j+1 =
claim. Otherwise, let B ⊆ V (G) be the biconnected component of G containing uj and uj+1 . If
suffices to show that the claim holds for x0 = uj ∈ X and v 0 = uj+1 6∈ WG  ` (X), therefore we have

reduced the problem to the case when x, v lie in a single biconnected component B of G. Let us
focus on this case from now on.
    Let the graph G0B be obtained from B by
   1. adding a new vertex uf in the center of each face f in B,
   2. for each new vertex uf , connecting it to all the vertices from B lying on the face f .
Let us note several properties of G0B . Let the set U0 consist of the new single vertex put in place of
the outer face of G, if that vertex belongs to V (G0B ), or be empty if the outer face is not adjacent
to any vertex of B.
   1. If u, v ∈ V (B) and uv ∈ E(G0B ), then uv ∈ E(G).
   2. If S ⊆ V (B) is a (v, x)-separator in G0B − U0 , then S is a (v, x)-separator in G.
   3. Since B is a biconnected component of G, each face of B forms a cycle and thus G0B is a plane
      triangulation.
   4. Let Sj = {u ∈ V (B) | wG (X, u) = j}. Then Sj ∪ U0 is a (v, x)-separator in G0B for j ∈ [`].
      The last property requires a short justification. Suppose there exists a (v, x)-path P 0 in
G0B − (Sj ∪ U0 ) and let P be the sequence of vertices from V (B) occurring on P 0 . Since P 0 does
not use the vertex corresponding to the outer face, each pair of consecutive vertices yi , yj from P
share an interior face, thus |wG (X, yi ) − wG (X, yj )| ≤ 1. Since wG (X, x) = 0 and wG (X, v) > ` ≥ j,
P must contain a vertex from Sj ; a contradiction.
      We shall now show that for each j ∈ [`] there exists a set Sj0 ⊆ Sj such that G[Sj0 ] is connected
and Sj0 ∪ U0 is a (v, x)-separator in G0B of one of the two desired forms. Let Sj0 be an inclusion-wise
minimal subset of Sj0 ∪ U0 which is still a (v, x)-separator in G0B . Since G0B is a plane triangulation,
Proposition 7.26 applies and we get that G0B [Sj0 ] is an induced cycle. If Sj0 ∩ U0 = ∅, then Sj0 induces
a cycle in G. Otherwise, recall that U0 contains at most one element representing the outer face.
Removing a single vertex from a cycle turns it into a path, hence G0B [Sj0 \ U0 ] = G[Sj0 \ U0 ] induces
a path. Since the vertex in U0 was placed in the outer face, the path has both endpoints on the
outer face of G. Note that Sj0 = Sj0 \ U0 is a (v, x) separator in G0B − U0 . Because Sj0 ⊆ Sj ⊆ V (B),
we obtain that Sj0 is the desired (v, x)-separator in B, and thus in G.
      These separators are clearly vertex-disjoint and contained in WG          ` (X) \ X. The fact that they

can be ordered into a nested sequence follows from their connectivity and minimality. For i =             6 j,
the set Si0 must be fully contained in some component of G − Sj0 , precisely either in RG (x, Sj0 ) or
in RG (v, Sj0 ). From minimality we get that each vertex of Sj0 is adjacent to both RG (x, Sj0 ) and
RG (v, Sj0 ). In the first case Si0 must separate x from Sj0 and the second case it must separate v from
Sj0 . Therefore, either RG (x, Si0 ) ⊆ RG (x, Sj0 ) or RG (x, Sj0 ) ⊆ RG (x, Si0 ).

                                                     56
    Note that even though the proof gives a natural order of separators (Si0 )`i=1 , they might be
nested in a different order. This is because we require Si0 ⊆ {u ∈ B | wG (X, u) = i}, not
Si0 ⊆ {u ∈ B | wG (x, u) = i}. This is necessary to guarantee that Si0 ∩ X = ∅, which will be an
important property in the proof of Lemma 7.29.
    When given a single-faced embedding of a c-inseparable graph GhAi and a solution S in G, we
are going to remove S ∩ A from the solution and replace it with some subset of NG (A), of size
comparable to |S ∩ A|. As the new solution removes some vertices from NG (A) we need to ensure
that this cannot disconnect the separators constructed in Lemma 7.27.

Lemma 7.28. Let G be a connected plane graph, u, v ∈ V (G), and S ⊆ V (G) be a minimal
(u, v)-separator such that G[S] either induces a cycle or a path with both endpoints on the outer face.
If Y ⊆ V (G) \ {u, v} is a subset of vertices lying on the outer face of G and S 6⊆ Y , then S \ Y is a
connected (u, v)-separator in G − Y .

Proof. It is clear that S \ Y is a (u, v)-separator in G − Y and we only need to show that it is
connected. We will rely on the observation that, since S is minimal, each vertex s ∈ S is adjacent
to both RG (u, S) and RG (v, S). Let G0 be obtained from G by adding a new vertex f adjacent to
all vertices in Y . Since they lie on the outer face of G, the graph G0 is planar.
     Suppose that S induces a cycle and that S \ Y is not connected. Then there exist vertices
y1 , y2 ∈ Y ∩ S and a partition of S \ {y1 , y2 } into connected vertex sets S1 , S2 so that each edge
set EG (yi , Sj ) for i, j ∈ {1, 2} is non-empty. The sets RG (u, S), S1 ∪ RG (v, S), S2 , {y1 , f }, {y2 } form
branch sets of a K5 -minor model in G0 , which gives a contradiction.
     Now suppose that S induces a path with both endpoints on the outer face and that S \ Y
is not connected. Then there exists vertex y ∈ Y ∩ S and a partition of S \ {y} into connected
vertex sets S1 , S2 so that each of them contains a vertex lying on the outer face. The sets
RG (u, S), RG (v, S), {f }, S1 , S2 , {y} form branch sets of a K3,3 -minor model in G0 , which again leads
to a contradiction.

    We are ready to show that when GhAi is single-faced and 8-inseparable then ∅ is an α-preserver
for A, where α = 3 · 8 · 7 = 168. We first fix a single-faced embedding of GhAi. When S is a solution
in G and X = S ∩ A, we consider terminal pairs separated by WGhAi    3    (X) and use Lemma 7.25 to
identify a subset of NG (A) of size comparable to |X|, which intersects all the separated terminal
pairs. We can add it to S, creating a larger solution S 0 (see Figure 5). We need to argue that
vertices from X can be now removed from S 0 without invalidating the solution. To this end, we
use Lemma 7.27 to construct 3 nested connected separators between any x ∈ X and NG (A) \ S 0 in
G − (S 0 \ {x}) which allows us to use the planarity criterion from Lemma 3.17.

Lemma 7.29. Let A ⊆ V (G) be such that GhAi is an 8-inseparable single-faced boundaried
planar graph. Then for any planar modulator S ⊆ V (G), there exists a planar modulator S 0 ⊆
(S \ A) ∪ NG (A), such that S 0 \ NG [A] = S \ NG [A] and |S 0 | ≤ |S| + 168 · |S ∩ A|.

Proof. Let r = |NG (A)|, X = S ∩ A, and d = |X|. If 3 · 8 · 7 · d > r, then we set S 0 = (S \ A) ∪ NG (A).
Since the graph G[A] is planar, G − (A ∪ S 0 ) is a subgraph of G − S, and G − S 0 is a disjoint union
of these graphs, we get that S 0 is also a planar modulator of the desired size. (This simple case
actually forms the worst-case scenario for the size of S 0 .)
    Suppose now that 3 · 8 · 7 · d ≤ r. Note that all boundary vertices are connected in GhAi due to
8-inseparability and, by the definition of being single-faced (Definition 3.12), GhAi is connected.
Let us fix any single-faced embedding of GhAi, so the set WGhAi     3   (X) is well-defined. We apply
Lemma 7.25 to GhAi and X = S ∩ A, with c = 8 and ` = 3, to infer that there exists a single


                                                      57
                                  x

                                                                         y




                        C
                                                                     z




Figure 5: An illustration of the proof of Lemma 7.29. In the plane embedding of GhAi the boundary
vertices from NG (A) are drawn in blue; they lie on the outer face. The red squares represent vertices
X = {x, y, z} in the intersection of a solution S and the set A. The sets WGhAi 1            2
                                                                                     (X), WGhAi  (X),
    3
WGhAi (X) are sketched with shades of gray so, e.g., the vertices incident to the dark gray faces
              1
belong to WGhAi   (X). Due to Lemma 7.25, when GhAi is c-inseparable there exists a connected
component C of GhAi − WGhAi  3   (X), containing all but O(|X|) boundary vertices. The new solution
  0
S is obtained from S by adding the vertices from NG (A) \ C (enclosed by red circles) and removing
vertices from X. For each vertex v ∈ X we can construct 3 connected nested (v, C)-separators in
the gray area, which certifies that inserting v back into the graph does not affect planarity.


connected component C of GhAi − WGhAi   3   (X) containing at least r − 8 · 7 · d vertices from NG (A). We
set S = (S \ A) ∪ (NG (A) \ C), which satisfies S 0 \ NG [A] = S \ NG [A]. Clearly, |NG (A) \ C| ≤ 8 · 7 · d
     0

and so |S 0 | ≤ |S| + 8 · 7 · |S ∩ A|.
    We need to show that S 0 is a planar modulator. If NG (A) ∩ C ⊆ S, then NG (A) ⊆ S 0 and we
again obtain that G − S 0 is a disjoint union of planar graphs. Suppose otherwise that there exists
v ∈ (NG (A) ∩ C) \ S. Let X0 be an inclusion-wise minimal subset of X, such that G − (S 0 ∪ X0 ) is
planar. Note that X0 is well-defined because S ⊆ S 0 ∪ X and thus G − (S 0 ∪ X) is planar.
    We are going to prove that X0 = ∅, thereby establishing that S 0 is a solution. Suppose otherwise
and let x ∈ X0 . We apply Lemma 7.27 to GhAi, and v, x, X as above. We obtain that in GhAi there
exists either (a) a vertex y ∈ WGhAi3  (X) \ X which separates v from x or (b) 3 nested vertex-disjoint
                                              3
connected (v, x)-separators Y1 , Y2 , Y3 ⊆ WGhAi  (X) \ X. Since WGhAi 3    (X) ⊆ NG [A] \ C and C 3 v
induces a connected subgraph of GhAi, these must also be (x, C)-separators in GhAi.
    Let X1 = X0 \ {x}. We want to show that G1 = G − (S 0 ∪ X1 ) is still planar. Let us note an
easy observation (*) that whenever Y ⊆ NG [A] \ (S 0 ∪ X) is a restricted (x, C \ S 0 )-separator in
GhAi − S 0 , then RG1 (x, Y ) ⊆ A. To see this, consider any path in GhAi that starts at x and reaches
NG (A) \ S 0 ⊆ C: it clearly must go through S 0 ∪ Y , so it is not present in G1 − Y .
    In case (a) there exists a vertex y ∈ WGhAi 3     (X) \ X which separates x from C in GhAi. If
       0
y ∈ S then by observation (*) for Y = ∅ we get that the connected component of x in G1 is
contained in A so it is planar and the remaining components of G1 are subgraphs of G − (S 0 ∪ X0 ),


                                                    58
so G1 is planar. If y 6∈ S 0 , then by observation (*) for Y = {y} we get that RG1 (x, {y}) ⊆ A, so
that RG1 [x, {y}] ⊆ NG [A]. Hence the latter again induces a planar subgraph of G1 . For any other
component U of G1 − y the graph G1 hU i is a subgraph of G − (S 0 ∪ X0 ), hence it is planar, and
each biconnected component of G1 is planar and so we infer that G1 is planar. This contradicts the
assumption that X0 is minimal.
                                                                                  3
     In case (b) there are 3 nested connected (x, C)-separators Y1 , Y2 , Y3 ⊆ WGhAi      (X) \ X. If for
                                             0
any i ∈ [3] the set Yi is contained in S , then by observation (*) for Y = ∅ we get that the
connected component of x in G1 is contained in A so it is planar and the remaining components
of G1 are subgraphs of G0 − X0 , so G1 is planar. Otherwise let Yi0 = Yi \ S 0 for i ∈ [3]. Note that
S 0 ∩ NG [A] ⊆ NG (A) lies on the outer face of GhAi, so by Lemma 7.28 the sets Y10 , Y20 , Y30 form nested
connected (x, C)-separators in GhAi − S 0 . Note that Yi0 ∩ X1 ⊆ Yi ∩ X = ∅ so Yi0 ⊆ NG [A] \ (S 0 ∪ X),
so these are present in the graph G1 . For each i ∈ [3] we take advantage of observation (*)
with Y = Yi0 to see that RG1 [x, Yi0 ] ⊆ NG [A] and so these sets induce planar subgraphs of G1 .
Furthermore, the graph G1 − x = G − (S 0 ∪ X0 ) is planar by assumption. By Lemma 3.17 the graph
G1 is planar. This again contradicts the minimality of X0 . We conclude that G − S 0 is planar.

   We have shown that when GhAi is single-faced and 8-inseparable then any solution to G can be
made disjoint from A with a small cost. This finishes the proof of Proposition 7.13 (restated below)
and the construction of solution preservers for single-faced boundaried graphs.

Proposition 7.13. Let A ⊆ V (G) be such that GhAi is a single-faced boundaried graph. Then
there exists a set SA ⊆ A of size at most |NG (A)|2 which is a 168-preserver for A. Furthermore, SA
can be computed in polynomial time.

Proof. We apply Lemma 7.23 to compute, in polynomial time, a boundaried decomposition (Y, C) of
GhAi, so that |Y | ≤ |NG (A)|2 and for each C ∈ C it holds that GhCi is single-faced and 8-inseparable.
By Lemma 7.29, the empty set forms a 168-preserver for each C ∈ C. Hence, Lemma 7.7 implies
that Y is a 168-preserver for A.


8     Compressing the negligible components
After collecting the solution preservers, we obtain a planar modulator X 0 ⊆ G with the following
property: there exists a 170-approximate solution S 0 such that S 0 ⊆ X 0 . In the final step of the
algorithm we want to compress each connected component C of G − X 0 ; these component are called
negligible. By Lemma 7.11 we can augment the solution preservers computed for boundaried plane
graphs with bounded radial diameter, so that the negligible components can be represented with
boundaried plane graphs which are circumscribed. Recall that in a circumscribed boundaried plane
graph H the image of each vertex in ∂(H) belongs to the outer face of H − ∂(H). We refer to the
set of vertices of H − ∂(H) lying on the outer face as ∆(H) ⊆ V (H) \ ∂(H); equivalently, this is
the first outerplanarity layer of H − ∂(H). We are going to decompose H into cycles and bridges,
making it easier to analyze H through the criterion from Lemma 3.15. Refer to Figure 6 for an
illustration of the following concept.

Definition 8.1. A bridge decomposition of a circumscribed r-boundaried plane graph H is a pair
(Y, B) satisfying the following conditions:

    1. Y ⊆ ∆(H) and |Y | ≤ 24 · r,

    2. B is a subfamily of the connected components of H − (∂(H) ∪ ∆(H)) with |B| ≤ 24 · r,


                                                    59
Figure 6: Schematic illustration of a bridge decomposition of a circumscribed 9-boundaried graph H.
The boundary ∂(H) is drawn as red squares. The vertices of ∆(H) are shown by circles. Each
connected component of H − (∂(H) ∪ ∆(H)) is a shaded region. The set Y consists of the blue
circles and the set B of the single component inside the blue curve. After removing the blue and red
objects, the neighborhoods of the resulting components are bounded.

                                                      S
   3. each connected component of H − (∂(H) ∪ Y ∪ A∈B V (A)) has at most 2 neighbors in ∂(H),
      at most 10 neighbors in Y , and is adjacent to at most 10 components from B.

    Observe that if we only could assume
                                  S      that the subgraphs from B have constant size, then we
could mark all the vertices in Y ∪ B∈B V (B), and the leftover components would have only O(1)
neighbors each, making them amenable to protrusion replacement. However these subgraphs may
be large and we will need to compress them.
    First we show that a bridge decomposition can be easily computed with known techniques for
processing bounded-treewidth subgraphs.

Lemma 8.2. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a circumscribed r-boundaried plane
graph H, returns a bridge decomposition of H.

Proof. Let B0 denote the family of all connected components of H − (∂(H) ∪ ∆(H)). Consider a
circumscribed r-boundaried plane graph H 0 obtained from H by contracting each component from
B0 into a single vertex. It is clear that this operation does not affect the boundary and the outer
face, so we can write ∂(H 0 ) = ∂(H) and ∆(H 0 ) = ∆(H). Let us refer to the set of vertices obtained
by contracting components from B0 as B 0 ⊆ V (H 0 ). We have a natural mapping φB : B 0 → B0 which
maps vertices of B 0 to their pre-image before contraction. The graph H 0 − ∂(H 0 ) is 2-outerplanar
(see Definition 6.7) therefore its treewidth is at most 5 [Bod98]. A corresponding tree decomposition
of width 5 can be found in polynomial time [Bod96].
    We apply Lemma 3.7 to H 0 with S = ∂(H 0 ) and η = 5 to mark a set Y 0 ⊆ V (H 0 ) \ ∂(H 0 ) such
that |Y 0 | ≤ 24 · r and each connected component of H 0 − (∂(H 0 ) ∪ Y 0 ) has at most 2 neighbors in
∂(H 0 ) and at most 10 neighbors in Y 0 . Let Y = Y 0 ∩ ∆(H 0 ) be the set of marked vertices on the
outer face, B = {φB (b) | b ∈ Y 0 ∩ B 0 } be the set of connected components
                                                                        S     from B0 that got marked
after contraction. Each connected component of H − (∂(H) ∪ Y ∪ B∈B V (B)) corresponds to a


                                                 60
connected component of H 0 − (∂(H 0 ) ∪ Y 0 ) and its neighborhood is the union of the corresponding
branch sets. The claim follows.

    The next lemma explains the correspondence between a bridge decomposition and the concept
of a C-bridge. The assumption that H is circumscribed plays an important role here. Recall the
notion of overlap graph O from Lemma 3.15.

Lemma 8.3. Let (Y, B) be a bridge decomposition of a circumscribed boundaried plane graph H
and B ∈ B. Then there exists a cycle C such that V (C) ⊆ ∆(H) and B is a connected component
of H − V (C). Furthermore, the graph O(H − ∂(H), C) has no edges, that is, no two C-bridges in
H − ∂(H) overlap.

Proof. Consider a circumscribed boundaried plane graph H 0 obtained from H by contracting each
component of H − (∂(H) ∪ ∆(H)) into a single vertex. Let b be the vertex given by contracting B.
Since B ∩ ∆(H) = ∅, vertex b does not lie on the outer face of H 0 . Hence the image of b lies in an
interior face f of H[∆(H)] consisting of vertices which lie on the outer face of H, which implies
that the boundary cycle of f is a simple cycle C with V (C) ⊆ ∆(H). We proceed to show that C
has the desired properties.
    Observe that NH 0 (b) ⊆ V (C): by planarity of the embedding, b cannot have neighbors on the
exterior of C, while b cannot have neighbors embedded in the proper interior of C as they would
have been part of the same connected component of H − (∂(H) ∪ ∆(H)) and therefore would have
been contracted when forming b. Hence NH 0 (b) ⊆ V (C) which implies NH (B) ⊆ V (C). Since H[B]
is connected, this implies B is a connected component of H − V (C). It remains to prove that no
two C-bridges in H − ∂(H) overlap.
    Note that for each connected component A of H − V (C) that is embedded on the exterior
of C, we have |NG (A) ∩ V (C)| ≤ 2: if A had at least three neighbors on the cycle C, then one of
these neighbors does not lie on the outer face of H since it is enclosed by A and a path around
the cycle. The same argument shows that if |NG (A) ∩ V (C)| = 2, then the two neighbors of A
on C are consecutive along C. Note that by definition, such a C-bridge does not overlap any other
C-bridges. This holds also when |NG (A) ∩ V (C)| = 1. Finally, no C-bridge that is a chord of C can
be embedded on the exterior of C, as it would again separate a vertex of C from the outer face.
    When it comes to C-bridges corresponding to connected components of H − V (C) or chords of C
embedded on the interior of C, by Observation 3.14 any two C-bridges which overlap are embedded
on opposite sides of C, so there are no overlaps between C-bridges embedded in the interior. The
claim follows.

    Let G be a graph, D ⊆ V (G), and consider the embedding of GhDi as a circumscribed boundaried
plane graph H. If A ∈ B is a C-bridge for some cycle C within ∆(H), then any planar modulator
S in G which is disjoint from D, remains valid if we replace A with an equivalent C-bridge, that
is, having the same attachments at C and not violating planarity of A ∪ C (see Lemma 3.15).
This holds in particular for a bridge obtained by contracting A into a single vertex. However such
a modification is insufficient to provide the backward safeness: for any solution of size at most
k (possibly intersecting D) we need to be able to lift it back. A possible “dirty” solution is to
mark such vertices as undeletable. This however would lead to producing an instance of a different
problem (which could be harder to approximate) and would by insufficient to obtain Theorem 1.2.
Instead, we will replace A with a well of depth O(k) and perimeter k O(1) . We perform this operation
in several steps. First we introduce the concept of drawing cycles within C surrounding the vertices
from A.



                                                 61
       Figure 7: A result of 3-nesting the vertex set given by the five vertices in the center.


Definition 8.4. Let A be a vertex subset of a plane graph G, so that the induced embedding of
GhAi is circumscribed. We say that A is c-well-nested in G if the following conditions hold:

   1. the first c outerplanarity layers of G[A] are cycles of fixed length m ≥ 3, the i-th outer cycle
      comprising vertices v1i , . . . , vm
                                         i , ordered clockwise,


   2. for each j ∈ [m], there is at most one vertex u ∈ NG (A) such that uvj1 ∈ E(G),

   3. vji is adjacent to vji+1 for all i ∈ [c − 1], j ∈ [m].

Definition 8.5. Let A be a vertex subset of a (boundaried) plane graph G, so that the induced
embedding of GhAi is circumscribed and EG (A, V (G) \ A) ≥ 3. The act of c-nesting the set A means
replacing G by G0 given by

   1. enumerating the edges in EG (A, V (G) \ A) in clockwise order with respect to the embedding of
      GhAi; let us refer to them as e1 , e2 , . . . , em ,

   2. subdividing each edge ei c times, creating vertices vi1 , vi2 , . . . , vic , counting towards the endpoint
      in A,

   3. connecting vertices vij and vi+1
                                   j                                         j
                                       for j ∈ [c], i ∈ [m − 1], as well as vm and v1j for each j ∈ [c],

and replacing A with A0 being the union of A and all the new vertices. See Figure 7. We treat the
remaining vertices and the corresponding points in the embedding as unaffected, that is, V (G0 ) \ A0 =
V (G) \ A.

    The operation of c-nesting is clearly backward safe as the original graph is a minor of the graph
after the modification. We take note of several other useful properties of c-nesting.

Observation 8.6. Let H be a circumscribed boundaried plane graph with a bridge decomposition
(Y, B) and A ∈ B. Suppose that H 0 and A0 have been obtained by c-nesting the set A. Then the
following hold.

   1. H 0 is a circumscribed boundaried plane graph,

   2. (Y, B 0 ) is a bridge decomposition of H 0 , where B 0 is given by replacing A with A0 in B,

   3. the set A0 is c-well-nested in H 0 ,


                                                       62
  4. the size of each of the c outermost layers in H 0 [A0 ] equals the number of edges in EH 0 (A0 , V (H 0 )\
     A0 ), which is the same as the number of edges in EH (A, V (H) \ A),

  5. H can be obtained back from H 0 by removing or contracting edges which are non-incident to
     the boundary ∂(H) = ∂(H 0 ).

   We now prove the forward safeness of c-nesting with respect to solutions disjoint from the
subgraph being decomposed.

Lemma 8.7. Consider a graph G, vertex set D ⊆ V (G), so that GhDi admits a circumscribed
embedding, and let H = GhDi denote the corresponding circumscribed boundaried plane graph. Let
(Y, B) be a bridge decomposition of H and A ∈ B. Suppose that (H 0 , A0 ) has been obtained by
c-nesting the set A in H and let G0 = G∂ [D] ⊕ H 0 . If S ⊆ V (G) \ D is a planar modulator in G,
then it is a planar modulator in G0 .

Proof. By Lemma 8.3 there exists a cycle C such that V (C) ⊆ ∆(H) ⊆ D and A is a connected
component of H − V (C). Since S ∩ D = ∅, A is also a connected component of (G − S) − V (C).
We apply Lemma 3.15 with respect to G − S and C. The overlap graph O(G − S, C) is not affected
by c-nesting the set A, and the only C-bridge that has been modified is the one generated by
component A of (G − S) − V (C), which is replaced by A0 . The graph induced by A0 ∪ V (C) is a
subgraph of H 0 , hence it is planar. Therefore S is still a planar modulator in G∂ [D] ⊕ H 0 .

    After c-nesting some set of vertices A for c = Ω(k), they become surrounded by Ω(k) nested
cyclic A-planarizing separators. This suffices to make each vertex in A k-irrelevant. We would like
now to remove the vertex set A but the number of vertices introduced during c-nesting might still
be large if the number of edges outgoing from A was large. In order to handle this, we first state a
simple criterion for proving that some separator planarizes a vertex.

Lemma 8.8. Let G be a graph, A ⊆ V (G), S ⊆ A, and v ∈ A \ S. If RGhAi (v, S) ∩ NG (A) = ∅
then RGhAi (v, S) = RG (v, S).

Proof. Assume the contrary: then there exists a path P in G − S that starts at v and ends
at u 6∈ RGhAi (v, S). The path P cannot be fully contained in A because then we would have
u ∈ RGhAi (v, S). Therefore the path P intersects NG (A): let P 0 be the subpath of P starting at v
and ending with the first occurrence of a vertex x from V (P ) ∩ NG (A). Then P 0 witnesses that
x ∈ RGhAi (v, S) but this contradicts the assumption that RGhAi (v, S) ∩ NG (A) = ∅. The claim
follows.

    The next lemma states then when the set A ∈ B is (k + 5)-nested in GhAi and the number
of edges outgoing from A is large compared to k and |NG (A)|, then there exists an edge which is
k-irrelevant. Recall the notion of a pseudo-nested sequence from Definition 3.20. In the following
proof, we slightly abuse the notation and write RG (v, P ) to denote RG (v, V (P )) when P is a
subgraph of G (a path or a cycle).

Lemma 8.9. Let G be a graph, k be an integer, and D ⊆ V (G) with |NG (D)| = r. Suppose
that GhDi has a circumscribed embedding and let (Y, B) be a bridge decomposition of GhDi with
respect to this embedding. Suppose that A ∈ B is (k + 5)-well-nested and satisfies |EG (A, NG (A))| >
2 · r2 · (2k + 7)3 . Then there exist vertices v ∈ ∂G (A), u ∈ NG (A), such that uv ∈ E(G) and one of
the following holds:

  1. there exists a sequence of k + 3 nested v-planarizing connected vertex sets in G, or


                                                     63
   2. there exists a sequence of k + 3 pseudo-nested v-planarizing cycles in G.

Furthermore, such a pair (u, v) can be found in polynomial time.

Proof. Let Ai be the i-th outermost cycle in G[A], where i ∈ [k + 5], and let m denote the length of
each cycle Ai = (v1i , . . . , vm
                                i ). Let C be a cycle for which N (A) ⊆ V (C) ⊆ D and A is a connected
                                                                          G
component of GhDi − V (C) and therefore of G − V (C), guaranteed to exist by Lemma 8.3. We
shall consider three scenarios. We refer to Figure 8 for an illustration.
     First, suppose there exists a vertex u ∈ NG (A) such that |NG (u) ∩ A| ≥ 2k + 7. Since the
vertices from NG (u) ∩ A lie on the cycle A1 , we can choose an integer sequence (j1 , j2 , . . . , j2k+7 )
so that (1) for i ∈ [2k + 7] we have ji ∈ [m] and uvj1i ∈ E(G), (2) the vertices vj11 , vj12 , . . . , vj12k+7
lie in this order on the cycle A1 , and (3) the edges uvj11 , uvj12k+7 separate the exterior of cycle A1
into a bounded region containing all the remaining edges uvj12 , . . . uvj12k+6 and an unbounded region
containing all vertices from NG (D) (see Figure 8 on the left, where the edges uvj11 , . . . , uvj12k+7 are
the edges between u and the blue cycle A1 , from left to right).
     Let v = vj1k+4 . Intuitively, a cycle Ci consists of two paths starting in u: the two paths respectively
go to the vertices i steps left and right of v, move inwards over i + 1 cycles of the well, connecting
to each other via a subpath of the cycle Ai+1 . More precisely, for i ∈ [k + 3] we set h(i, 1) = jk+4−i
and h(i, 2) = jk+4+i to denote the two indices that are in distance i from the middle. We define a
                                              i+1                                                            i+1
path Pi1 as (u, vh(i,1)
                   1        2
                         , vh(i,1) , . . . , vh(i,1) ) and similarly Pi2 as (u, vh(i,2)
                                                                                 1         2
                                                                                        , vh(i,2) , . . . , vh(i,2) ). We define
                                                                                i+1                i+1
a cycle Ci as a concatentaion of paths Pi1 , Pi2 and a path that connects vh(i,1)         and vh(i,2)    within the
cycle Ai+1 ; there are two choices for the latter path and we choose the one that, together with Pi1
and Pi2 , separates v from V (Ai+2 ).
     We show that (C1 , . . . , Ck+3 ) is a sequence of pseudo-nested v-planarizing cycles. For each
i ∈ [k + 3], the cycle Ci in the plane graph GhDi separates the plane into two regions: one contains
v and the other one V (Ai+2 ) and NG (D). By Lemma 8.8 we get that RG (v, Ci ) = RGhDi (v, Ci ) ⊆ A.
This implies that RG [v, Ci ] induces a planar graph. Furthermore, let 1 ≤ i < j ≤ k + 3. By the
construction, V (Ci ) ∩ V (Cj ) = {u}. The cycle Ci separates v from V (Cj ) \ {u} in GhDi. By the
same argument as above, we obtain that RG (v, Ci ) ∩ V (Cj ) = ∅.
     Before analyzing the second and third scenario, let us greedily construct a family of paths P,
which is initialized as empty. As long as we can find a path in GhDi connecting A to NG (D) which
is internally vertex-disjoint from the already constructed paths, we choose a shortest path with this
property and insert it to P. Such a family can be easily constructed in polynomial time. Recall
that A1 is the set of vertices on the outer face of G[A], i.e., its first outerplanarity layer. By the
definition of a c-well-nested set, each vertex x ∈ A can have at most one neighbor in NG (A), and it
is possible only when x ∈ A1 . Because we always choose a shortest path, which does not contain
vertices from A in its interior, the A-endpoints of the paths in P are therefore distinct and belong
to A1 . The usage of shortest paths also implies that (*) the interior of each path P ∈ P does not
contain any vertices from NG (D) and (**) the set V (P ) contains exactly one vertex from NG (A).
     As the second scenario we consider the case |P| > r2 · (2k + 7). As |NG (D)| = r, this implies
that for some t ∈ NG (D) there exists a subfamily Pt ⊆ P of ` > r · (2k + 7) internally vertex-disjoint
(A, t)-paths in GhDi. Since the A-endpoints of these paths are distinct and lie on the cycle A1 ,
we can choose an ordering (P1 , . . . , P` ) of Pt and an integer sequence (j1 , j2 , . . . , j` ) so that (1) for
i ∈ [`] we have ji ∈ [m] and Pi is a (t, vj1i )-path, (2) the vertices vj11 , vj12 , . . . , vj1` lie in this order
on the cycle A1 , and (3) the paths P1 , P` separate the exterior of cycle A1 into a bounded region
containing all the remaining paths P2 , . . . P`−1 and an unbounded region. Since A1 is a cycle, we
can construct regions R1 , . . . , R`−1 , so that Ri is the bounded subset of the plane surrounded by Pi ,


                                                              64
                                                    t                                       v
                u
                v                                   v




Figure 8: Illustration of three scenarios in the proof of Lemma 8.9. Each figure shows a circumscribed
boundaried plane graph GhDi whose boundary vertices are shown as red squares, for which the
vertices of ∆(GhDi) are visualized with black circles. A bridge decomposition of the graph consists
of Y = ∅, while B consists of a single connected component A of (GhDi) − (∂(GhDi) ∪ ∆(GhDi)),
bounded by the blue cycle A1 . Left: a sequence of pseudo-nested v-planarizing cycles constructed
in the first scenario when some vertex u ∈ NG (A) has many neighbors in A. Middle: a sequence of
pseudo-nested v-planarizing cycles constructed in the second scenario. Right: A sequence of nested
connected v-planarizing sets constructed in the third scenario. The cycle C is the cycle formed by
the black round vertices. The segment S of this cycle is highlighted in bold. The paths from the
family P are drawn in green.


Pi+1 , and A1 (exclusively), for each distinct i, j ∈ [` − 1] we have Ri ∩ Rj = ∅ and for each i ∈ [` − 1]
the region Ri does not intersect any paths from (P1 , . . . , P` ).
    We say that index i ∈ [` − 1] is contaminated if Ri contains a vertex from NG (D). Since the
sets Ri are disjoint and t ∈ NG (D) is not properly contained in any of them, there can be at most
r − 1 contaminated indices and there exists a contiguous subsequence [`1 , `3 ] ⊆ [` − 1] of length
2k + 7, which do not contain any contaminated indices. For i ∈ [k + 3] and ` ∈ [`1 , `3 ] we define the
extended path Qi` as the concatenation of the path P` with the path (vj1` , vj2` , . . . , vji+1
                                                                                              `
                                                                                                 ) within A.
Let `2 be the middle index in [`1 , `3 ]. For i ∈ [k + 3], we define cycle Ci as the concatenation of the
extended paths Qi`2 −i , Qi`2 +i (they intersect only at t) with the path connecting the endpoints of the
extended paths within Ai+1 (see Figure 8 in the middle). Similarly as before, there are two choices
for the path in Ai+1 and we choose the one that makes V (Ci ) a (v, V (Ai+2 ))-separator in GhDi.
    Let v = vj1` . We show that (C1 , . . . , Ck+3 ) is a sequence of pseudo-nested v-planarizing cycles.
                2
Let 1 ≤ i < j ≤ k + 3. By the construction, V (Ci ) ∩ V (Cj ) = {t}. The cycle Ci in the plane graph
GhDi separates the plane into two regions: one containing v and the other one containing V (Cj )\{t}.
By the elimination of contaminated regions and property (*), the set RGhDi (v, V (Ci )) does not
contain any vertices from NG (D). By Lemma 8.8 we get that RG (v, Ci ) = RGhDi (v, Ci ) ⊆ D. This
implies that RG [v, Ci ] induces a planar graph and RG (v, Ci ) ∩ V (Cj ) = ∅.
                                                                                           2
    Finally, suppose that none of the previous two scenarios occurs. We have
                                                2           2
                                                                                S |P| ≤ r · (2k + 7) and
|NG (A)| ≥ |EG (A, NG (A))| / (2k + 6) ≥ 2 · r · (2k + 7) . Let U = NG (A) ∩ P ∈P V (P ). By property
(**) each path P ∈ P goes through exactly one vertex from NG (A) and so |U | ≤ r2 · (2k + 7). Recall
the cycle C in GhDi for which NG (A) ⊆ V (C). The set U divides the cycle C into |U | segments;
these segments are considered without their endpoints in U and some of them may be empty.
By the pigeonhole principle, one of these segments must contain at least (|NG (A)| − |U |) / |U | ≥


                                                    65
|NG (A)| / (2 · |U |) ≥ 2k + 7 vertices from NG (A). Let us refer to this segment as S ⊆ V (C) and
equip it with the order inherited from the clockwise orientation of the cycle C. Then there exists a
sequence of distinct vertices u1 , u2 , . . . , u2k+7 from S ∩ NG (A), respecting the order above and an
integer sequence (j1 , j2 , . . . , j2k+7 ) so that (1) for i ∈ [`] we have ji ∈ [m] and ui vj1i ∈ E(G), and (2)
the vertices vj11 , vj12 , . . . , vj12k+7 lie in this order on the cycle A1 .
    We set v = vj1k+4 . and h(i, 1) = jk+4−i and h(i, 2) = jk+4+i . For i ∈ [k + 3] we define a path
                                                   i+1                                                        i+1
Pi1 as (uk+4−i , vh(i,1)
                    1           2
                            , vh(i,1)   , . . . , vh(i,1) ) and Pi2 as (uk+4+i , vh(i,2)
                                                                                  1         2
                                                                                         , vh(i,2) , . . . , vh(i,2) ). The path Pi is
                                                                i+1         i+1
obtained as a concatenation of Pi1 , the path connecting vh(i,1)       and vh(i,2) within Ai+1 , and finally
  2
Pi . As before, we choose the path within Ai+1 to make V (Pi ) a (v, V (Ai+2 ))-separator in GhAi
(see Figure 8 on the right). Note that V (Pi ) ⊆ A ∪ (S ∩ NG (A)) is disjoint from all the paths from
P. We shall prove that (V (P1 ), . . . , V (Pk+3 )) is a sequence of nested connected v-planarizing sets.
    We want to show that for each i ∈ [k + 3] it holds that RGhDi (v, Pi ) ∩ NG (D) = ∅. Suppose
otherwise, that there exists a path P v in GhDi − V (Pi ) which connects v to NG (D). This path must
intersect the interior of some path P 0 ∈ P because of the greedy construction. The set V (P 0 ) ∩ V (C)
contains a vertex from outside S. Therefore the set V (P v ) ∪ V (P 0 ) contains a path P 00 connecting
v to V (C) \ S in GhDi − V (Pi ). Let us consider the intersection of V (P 00 ) with V (C). First, V (P 00 )
must intersect the subsegment of S between uk+4−i and uk+4+i (exclusively) by the construction
of Pi ; let us refer to this subsegment as Si . Hence, there is a subpath of P 00 which connects Si to
V (C) \ (Pi ∪ Si ), internally disjoint from V (C). The interior of this subpath must be contained
in some C-bridge B other than the one generated by the component A of G − V (C). However,
as uk+4−i and uk+4+i are attachments of the bridge generated by the connected component A
of G − V (C), the bridges A and B overlap. This is impossible due to Lemma 8.3.
    We have shown that RGhDi (v, Pi ) ∩ NG (D) = ∅, so by Lemma 8.8 we get that RG (v, Pi ) =
RGhDi (v, Pi ) and so RG [v, Pi ] induces a planar graph. Let i < j ≤ k + 3. By the construction,
V (Pi ) and V (Pj ) are disjoint. To see that RGhDi (v, Pi ) ∩ V (Pj ) = ∅, observe that V (Pj ) belongs to
the same component of GhDi − V (Pi ) as V (Ai+2 ). By the construction, this component does not
contain v.
    We have thus proven that there always exist a vertex v, with a neighbor in NG (A), that satisfies
the conditions of the lemma. The proof relies on degree counting and computing shortest paths,
therefore it can be turned into a polynomial-time algorithm.

    We are ready to prove the main lemma of this section. Given the boundaried graph GhDi with
a circumscribed embedding, we compute a bridge decomposition (Y, B) to identify O(r) subgraphs
that need to compressed. For A ∈ B, we first perform c-nesting for c = k + 5, to make it amenable
to Lemma 8.9. This allows us to reduce the number of edges outgoing from A. Next, we perform
c-nesting again (this time it suffices to take c = k + 3) to surround all the vertices in A with k + 3
cycles of length k O(1) and remove vertices from A due to their k-irrelevance. The properties of
the bridge decomposition guarantees that marking all the vertices in Y and the union of closed
neighborhoods from B (in total k O(1) vertices now) yields a decomposition into subgraphs of constant
neighborhood size, which can be reduced by protrusion replacement.
Lemma 8.10. Let G be a graph, k be an integer, and D ⊆ V (G) with |NG (D)| = r. Suppose that
H = GhDi admits a circumscribed embedding. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given
G, D, k, and a circumscribed embedding of H, outputs a labeled r-boundaried planar graph H 0 , and
a vertex set F 0 ⊆ V (H 0 ) \ ∂(H 0 ) such that the following conditions hold.
   1. each connected component of H 0 − (∂(H 0 ) ∪ F 0 ) has at most 32 neighbors,
   2. |F 0 | ≤ 50 · r3 · (2k + 7)4 ,

                                                                 66
   3. if S ⊆ V (G) \ D is a planar modulator in G, then it is a planar modulator in H 0 ⊕ G∂ [D].

   4. there is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given G, D, G0 = H 0 ⊕G∂ [D], and a planar modulator
      S 0 in G0 of size at most k, returns a planar modulator in G of size at most |S 0 |.
Proof. We begin by computing a bridge decomposition (Y, B) of GhDi (Lemma 8.2). For a set
A ∈ B with at least 3 edges in EH (A, V (H) \ A) we will perform a series of graph modifications
and analyze a series of tuples (Hi , Yi , Bi , Ai ), where Hi is a boundaried plane graph, (Yi , Bi ) is
a bridge decomposition of Hi , and Ai ∈ Bi . The lower bound on the number of outgoing edges
is necessary to perform c-nesting in a well-defined way. As a goal, we want to replace A with a
subgraph of moderate size and moderate neighborhood. There are two kinds of safeness we need
to ensure during the graph modification process. Forward safeness means that for every vertex
set S ⊆ V (G∂ [D]) if S is a planar modulator in Hi ⊕ G∂ [D], then it is also a planar modulator in
Hi+1 ⊕ G∂ [D]. Backward safeness means that any planar modulator S in Hi+1 ⊕ G∂ [D] of size at
most k can be turned, in polynomial time, into a planar modulator in Hi ⊕ G∂ [D] of size at most
|S|.
     Let α = 2 · r2 · (2k + 7)3 and A ∈ B be fixed. We have H1 = GhDi, (Y1 , B1 ) = (Y, B), and
A1 = A ∈ B. We obtain (H2 , Y2 , B2 , A2 ) by (k + 5)-nesting the set A1 . The forward safeness of this
modification follows directly from Lemma 8.7. The backward safeness holds because H1 ⊕ G∂ [D] is
a minor of H2 ⊕ G∂ [D] (Observation 8.6(5)). In the next step we reduce the number of outgoing
edges from A2 in H2 . As long as it holds that |EH2 (A2 , V (H2 ) \ A2 )| > α, we apply Lemma 8.9 to
find vertices v ∈ ∂H2 (A2 ), u ∈ NH2 (A2 ), such that uv ∈ E(H2 ) and one of the following holds:
   1. there exists a sequence of k + 3 nested v-planarizing connected vertex sets in H2 ⊕ G∂ [D], or

   2. there exists a sequence of k + 3 pseudo-nested v-planarizing cycles in H2 ⊕ G∂ [D].
In both cases the edge uv is k-irrelevant due to Lemmas 3.19 and 3.21, which implies backward
safeness of removing uv. The forward safeness of an edge removal is trivial.
      At some point we reach a situation where these reductions rules are no longer applicable. Let
(H3 , Y3 , B3 , A3 ) denote the graph and the decomposition after performing the edge deletions. We
have |EH3 (A3 , V (H3 ) \ A3 )| ≤ α, which implies that |NH3 (A3 )| ≤ α. We obtain (H4 , Y4 , B4 , A4 ) by
(k + 3)-nesting the set A3 . The forward and backward safeness again follow from Lemma 8.7 and
the minor relation. By Observation 8.6(4) we know that the size of each of the (k + 3) outermost
layers in H4 [A4 ] is at most α and |NH4 (A4 )| ≤ α. Consider now a vertex v ∈ A4 which does not
belong to any of the (k + 3) outermost layers in H4 [A4 ]. These layers form a sequence of k + 3
nested v-planarizing connected sets in H4 ⊕ G∂ [D], so v is k-irrelevant in H4 ⊕ G∂ [D]. We can thus
remove all such vertices and obtain the final tuple (H5 , Y5 , B5 , A5 ). The forward safeness is trivial
and the backward safeness follows from the definition of k-irrelevance. In the resulting graph we
have |A5 | ≤ (k + 3) · α and |NH5 (A5 )| ≤ α.
      With the recipe for compressing a single bridge component in B without affecting the other parts
of the graph, we can perform this replacement for every A ∈ B satisfying |EH (A, V (H) \ A)| ≥ 3.
Let (H 0 , Y 0 , B 0 ) be obtained from (GhDi, Y, B) by such a procedure and B30 ⊆ B 0 denote the
subfamily of sets with at least 3 outgoing edges, for which we have performed the modification.
We assign labels to ∂(H 0 ) to make them consistent with the (implicit) labeling of ∂(H). We set
G0 = H 0 ⊕ G∂ [D]. The properties of forward and backward safeness imply conditions (3) and
(4)—the existence of an algorithm that lifts solutions from G0 to G. Let F 0 be the union of NH 0 [A]
over all A ∈ B30 plus the union of NH 0 (A) over all A ∈ B 0 \ B30 plus Y 0 . For A ∈ B 0 \ B30 it holds
|NH 0 (A)| ≤ 2 and for A ∈ B 0 it holds |NH 0 [A]| ≤ (k + 4) · α. We have |B 0 | = |B|, |Y 0 | = |Y |, and so
|F 0 | ≤ |B 0 | · (k + 4) · α + |Y 0 | ≤ 24r · (2 · r2 · (2k + 7)4 + 1) ≤ 50 · r3 · (2k + 7)4 .

                                                     67
     Finally, we want to estimate the neighborhood size of connected components R0 of H 0 − (∂(H 0 ) ∪
F 0 ). If R0 ∈ B 0 \ B30 then clearly |NH 0 (R0 )| ≤ 2. Otherwise,
                                                            S        the vertex set V (R0 ) is a subset of V (R),
where R is some component of H − (∂(H) ∪ Y ∪ A∈B V (A)). Hence, by the properties of a bridge
decomposition, R can have at most 2 neighbors in ∂(H), at most 10 neighbors in Y , and can be
adjacent to at most 10 components from B. This means that R0 also can have at most 2 neighbors
in ∂(H 0 ) and at most 10 neighbors in Y 0 . To estimate the number of neighbors of R0 in NH 0 [A], for
A ∈ B 0 , first observe that these neighbors must belong to NH 0 (A). It remains to show that R0 can
be adjacent to at most 2 vertices from NH 0 (A) for a fixed A ∈ B 0 . Suppose otherwise, that there
are 3 such vertices v1 , v2 , v3 . Because (Y 0 , B 0 ) is a bridge decomposition of H 0 , they must lie on the
outer face of H 0 − ∂(H 0 ). We can thus add a vertex u to H 0 − ∂(H 0 ), adjacent to all v1 , v2 , v3 , while
maintaining planarity. However, v1 , v2 , v3 together with u, V (R0 ), V (A) form a minor model of K3,3 ;
a contradiction. In summary, the set NH 0 (R0 ) can comprise of at most 2 vertices from ∂(H 0 ), 10
vertices from Y 0 , and 2 · 10 vertices in total from NG0 [A], where A ∈ B 0 , which gives at most 32
neighbors of R0 .


9     Wrapping up
We are ready to combine all the intermediate results into a proof of the main theorem. Proposition 6.21
provides us with a strong modulator X of fragmentation k O(1) and a family of embeddings for
GhCi for C ∈ CC(G − X) of radial diameter k O(1) . We will now summarize Sections 7 and 8 with
Proposition 9.1. First we use Proposition 7.15 to compute a 170-preserver SC for C, and then
Lemma 7.11 to find a superset YC of SC so that NG (C)∪YC is radially connected in GhCi. The union
of sets YC together with X gives a modulator X 0 in G containing some 170-approximate solution.
Furthermore, for C 0 ∈ CC(G − X 0 ) we get a circumscribed embedding of GhC 0 i. Lemma 8.10 allows
us to mark k O(1) vertices in C 0 so that the remaining components have only O(1) neighbors. Such
components can be reduced to be of size O(1) using protrusion replacement.

Proposition 9.1. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given integers k, d, r, s, a graph G
along with an r-strong planar modulator X ⊆ V (G) of fragmentation s, and for each C ∈ C(G − X)
a plane embedding of GhCi of radial diameter at most d, returns a graph G0 , such that

    1. |V (G0 )| = O(d64 r32 k 8 s2 ),

    2. mvp(G0 ) ≤ 170 · mvp(G),

    3. there is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given G, G0 , and a planar modulator S 0 in G0 of
       size at most k, outputs a planar modulator S in G such that |S| ≤ |S 0 |.

Proof. We partition CC(G − X) into families C≤2 , comprising those components that have at most
2 neighbors, and C≥3 , which contains all the remaining components. As observed in the proof
of Lemma 7.14, for C ∈ C2 the empty set forms a 2-preserver. For each C ∈ C≥3 , we apply
Proposition 7.15 to compute a 170-preserver SC ⊆ C of size O(d7 r4 ). Note that (X, C≤2 ∪ C≥3 ) is a
boundaried decompositionSof (G, ∅) (a boundaried graph with an empty boundary). By Lemma 7.7
                 b =X∪
we obtain that X          C∈C≥3 SC forms a 170-preserver for (G, ∅). By definition, for any planar
modulator S in G (in particular for the optimal one), there exists a planar modulator Sb ⊆ Xb such
that |S| ≤ 170 · |S|.
      b
   We proceed with compressing the components C ∈ C≥3 . Recall that |NG (C)| ≤ r and we
work with a plane embedding of GhCi of radial diameter at most d. We apply Lemma 7.11 to
Y = SC to compute a set YC ⊇ SC , YC ⊆ C of size (2d + 2) · (|NG (C)| + |SC |) = O(d8 r4 ) such

                                                       68
that for each connected component A of GhCi − (NG (C) ∪ YC ) the boundaried plane graph GhAi is
circumscribed. Furthermore, by Lemma 7.4      S there are at most 2 b· (|NG (C)| + |YC |) such components
with at least 3 neighbors. Let X0 = X ∪ C∈C≥3 YC ; note that X             ⊆ X0 . Each connected component
C0 ∈ CC(G−X0 ) is contained in some connected component C ∈ CC(G−X) so NG (C0 ) ⊆ NG (C)∪YC
and thus |NG (C0 )| = O(d8 r4 ). Again, we partition CC(G − X0 ) into families C≤2           0 , comprising those

components that have at most 2 neighbors, and C≥3         0 , which contains all the remaining components.

The number of elements of C≥3 is at most C∈C≥3 (2 · (|NG (C)| + |YC |)) = O(d8 r4 s).
                                0
                                                 P

    Now for any C0 ∈ C≥3  0 we can take advantage of the circumscribed embedding of GhC i and
                                                                                                           0
apply Lemma 8.10 to GhC0 i. This allows us to perform a replacement of NG [C0 ] with a compatible
boundaried graph HC0 0 such that any planar modulator disjoint from C0 (in particular one contained in
X0 ) remains valid and we can perform a lossless lifting of any solution of size at most k. Furthermore,
we are given a vertex set FC0 0 ⊆ V (HC0 0 ) \ ∂(HC0 0 ) of size at most 50 · |NG (C0 )|3 · (2k + 7)4 so that each
connected component of HC0 0 − (∂(HC0 0 ) ∪ FC0 0 ) has at most 32 neighbors. As before, we estimate
the number of such components with at least 3 neighbors by 2 · |FC0 0 | (by Lemma 7.4). We have
upper bounded |NG (C0 )| by O(d8 r4 ), hence |FC0 0 | = O(d24 r12 k 4 ).
    After performing this replacement for each C0 ∈ C≥3            0 we obtain a new graph G0 such that

the set X0 stays intact and any solution       S S ⊆ X00 remains valid. Since X 0⊆ X00 we get that
                                                                                          b
       0                           0
mvp(G ) ≤ 170 · mvp(G). Let X = X0 ∪ C0 ∈C 0 FC0 . The fragmentation of X in G can be again
                                                       ≥3
bounded by C0 ∈C 0 (2 · (|FC0 0 |)) = O(d8 r4 s) · O(d24 r12 k 4 ) = O(d32 r16 k 4 s). Thanks to Lemma 8.10
             P
                     ≥3
every component of G0 − X 0 has at most 32 neighbors.
    By Lemma 6.2 the Vertex planarization problem admits a lossless protrusion replacer. Let
γ be the function from Definition 6.1 and g(r) = 27(2r + 7)(r + 1). Using Lemma 6.6 we can replace
any connected component of G0 − X 0 which is larger than γ(g(32)) = O(1) with one smaller than
γ(g(32)) without affecting the value of mvp(G0 ) and so that any solution to the new instance can
be losslessly lifted to a solution to the original instance. We perform such a replacement for each
component of G0 − X 0 with at least 3 neighbors. This yields a total number of vertices proportional
to the fragmentation of X 0 in G0 , that is O(d32 r16 k 4 s).
    The number of connected components from CC(G0 − X 0 ) with at most 2 neighbors may be
large so we handle them differently.         We partition these components into groups sharing the same
                                   0 
neighborhood. There are |X2 | + |X 0 | ≤ |X 0 |2 possible neighborhoods. Let X0 ⊆ X 0 be of size at
most 2 and let C(X0 ) denote the union of these components Ci from CC(G0 −X 0 ) whose neighborhood
is exactly NG0 (Ci ) = X0 . Similarly as above we repeatedly perform protrusion replacement for
each C(X0 ). The graph G0 hC(X0 )i is connected so Lemma 6.6 applies and if C(X0 ) is larger
than γ(g(2)) then we can replace it with a subgraph on at most γ(g(2)) vertices. This gives
γ(g(2)) · |X 0 |2 = O(d64 r32 k 8 s2 ) vertices in total.

    Finally, we combine Proposition 9.1 with the propositions from the previous sections to obtain
our main technical contribution. The final exponent in the approximate kernelization evaluates to
7082. In the solution-lifting part we require a strict inequality |S 0 | < k+1−3·`
                                                                              3    to avoid off-by-one
issues in the proof of Theorem 1.1.
Theorem 9.2. There is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a graph G and an integer k, either
   1. outputs a planar modulator in G of size mvp(G), or
   2. correctly concludes that mvp(G) > k, or
   3. outputs a graph G0 on O(k 7082 ) vertices and integer `, such that if mvp(G) ≤ k, then
      mvp(G0 ) ≤ 170 · (mvp(G) − `). Furthermore, there is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given

                                                       69
      G, k, G0 , and a planar modulator S 0 in G0 of size |S 0 | < k+1−3·`
                                                                      3    , outputs a planar modulator
                                   0
      S in G such that |S| ≤ 3 · |S | + 3 · `.

Proof. We will analyze a series of graphs G, G1 , G2 , G3 , G4 = G0 obtained from G by applying
the intermediate reductions. For each reduction we need to prove (a) the forward safeness: that
the existence of a planar modulator in Gi implies the existence of a planar modulator in Gi+1 of
comparable size, and (b) the backward safeness: that when given a planar modulator in Gi+1 within
particular size bound we can lift it to a planar modulator in Gi .
     We begin with Proposition 4.16. We either find a planar modulator in G of size mvp(G) ≤ k, or
correctly conclude that mvp(G) > k, or construct a graph G1 together with a tree decomposition of
width O(k 36 ). In the first two cases we can terminate the algorithm. In the last case we also obtain
an integer k1 ≤ k, such that if mvp(G) ≤ k, then mvp(G1 ) = mvp(G) − (k − k1 ). Furthermore,
there is a polynomial-time algorithm that, given G, k, G1 , and a planar modulator S1 in G1 of size
at most k1 , outputs a planar modulator S in G such that |S| = |S1 | + (k − k1 ).
     Next, we apply Proposition 5.7 to G1 , k1 , and the computed tree decomposition of width
t = O(k 36 ). Again, if we conclude that mvp(G1 ) > k1 then it implies that mvp(G) > k so
we can terminate the algorithm. Otherwise, we compute a graph G2 with an r-strong planar
modulator X2 , where r = 2t + 2, and an integer k2 ≤ k1 , such that mvp(G1 ) ≤ k1 implies
mvp(G2 ) ≤ mvp(G1 ) − (k1 − k2 ) and the fragmentation of X2 in G2 is s = O(k 49 t48 ) = O(k 1777 ).
Furthermore, given a planar modulator S2 in G2 , one can turn it into a planar modulator in G1 of
size at most |S2 | + 3 · (k1 − k2 ) in polynomial time.
     We process the pair (G2 , X2 ) with Proposition 6.21 for the parameter value k2 . We obtain
a new graph G3 , an r-strong modulator X3 in G3 of fragmentation s, and a family of plane
embeddings of G3 hCi for each connected component C ∈ CC(G3 − X3 ), each with a radial diameter
d = O(kr) = O(k 37 ). We know that mvp(G3 ) ≤ mvp(G2 ) and there is a lifting algorithm that can
turn a solution S3 of size at most k2 in G3 into a solution of size at most 3 · |S3 | in G2 .
     The last modification applies Proposition 9.1 to the decomposition computed so far and the
parameter value k2 . We obtain a graph G4 with O(d64 r32 k 8 s2 ) = O(k 7082 ) vertices (37 · 64 + 36 ·
32 + 8 + 1777 · 2 = 7082), such that mvp(G4 ) ≤ 170 · mvp(G3 ) and any planar modulator S4 of size
at most k2 in G4 can be turned, in polynomial time, into a planar modulator of size at most |S4 | in
G3 .
     We set ` = k − k2 . We check the forward safeness: mvp(G) ≤ k ⇒ mvp(G1 ) ≤ k1 ⇒ mvp(G2 ) ≤
k2 = k − ` so mvp(G2 ) ≤ mvp(G) − `. Then mvp(G4 ) ≤ 170 · mvp(G3 ) ≤ 170 · mvp(G2 ) ≤
170 · (mvp(G) − `). Now we check the backward safeness. Suppose that we are given a planar
modulator in S4 in G4 of size less than k+1−3·`
                                              3     ≤ k2 . We follow the chain of the lifting algorithms
backwards from G4 to G to compute the following planar modulators:

   • S3 in G3 of size at most |S4 |,

   • S2 in G2 of size at most 3 · |S3 | < k + 1 − 3 · `, (so |S2 | ≤ k − 3 · ` ≤ k2 ),

   • S1 in G1 of size at most |S2 | + 3 · (k1 − k2 ) ≤ k − 3 · (k − k1 ) ≤ k1 , and finally

   • S in G of size at most |S1 | + (k − k1 ).

We check that |S| ≤ |S2 | + 3 · ` ≤ 3 · |S4 | + 3 · `. The claim follows.

    The main theorem is now a simple corollary from Theorem 9.2. It remains to unroll the definition
of the approximate kernelization and reformulate the guarantees in this language. Recall that for
a graph G, integer k, and S ⊆ V (G), we define Πvp (G, k, S) = min(|S|, k + 1) if S is a planar


                                                    70
modulator in G, and Πvp (G, k, S) = ∞ otherwise. We have that OPTΠvp (G, k) = min(mvp(G), k+1).
Capping the solution cost at k + 1 cannot increase the approximation factor of a solution, that is,
 Πvp (G,k,S)    |S|
OPTΠ (G,k) ≤ mvp(G) . When |S| ≤ k, then no capping occurs and we obtain equality.
      vp

Theorem 1.1. The Vertex planarization problem admits a deterministic 510-approximate
kernelization of polynomial size. There is a deterministic polynomial-time algorithm that, given a
graph G and integer k, outputs a graph G0 on k O(1) vertices and integer k 0 ≤ k such that any planar
modulator S 0 in G0 can be lifted in polynomial time to a planar modulator S in G satisfying:
                               min(|S|, k + 1)            min(|S 0 |, k 0 + 1)
                                                ≤ 510 ·                        .
                             min(mvp(G), k + 1)         min(mvp(G0 ), k 0 + 1)
Proof. Let (G, k) be the input instance and recall the formalization of the parameterized minimization
problem Πvp from Section 3. As the reduction algorithm, we run the reduction algorithm from
Theorem 9.2. If it terminates with option (1) or (2), we output an arbitrary instance, e.g., a
single-vertex graph and k 0 = 0. Otherwise, we output G0 and k 0 = d k+1−3·`         3    e.
      The solution-lifting algorithm, given G, k, G , and a planar modulator S 0 in G0 , first executes
                                                              0

the reduction algorithm from Theorem 9.2 again. If it terminates with option (1) we ignore S 0 and
return the optimal solution. Also, if it terminates with option (2) we ignore S 0 and return S = V (G)
with cost Πvp (G, k, V (G)) = k + 1. Note that when mvp(G) > k then OP Tvp (G, k) = k + 1 hence
V (G) is optimal with respect to the capped solution cost. If the lifting algorithm terminates with
option (3) but |S 0 | > k+1−3·`   3    , we return S = V (G): we will check that we are allowed to do this.
Otherwise we take advantage of the solution-lifting algorithm from Theorem 9.2.
                 |S 0 |                            0 0 0
                                       cap = Πvp (G ,k ,S ) ≥ 1. We have β cap ≤ β. If (510·β cap )·mvp(G) ≥ k+1,
      Let β = mvp(G      0 ) ≥ 1 and β        OPTvp (G0 ,k0 )
then by definition any solution in G evaluates at Πvp to at most k + 1 and we get the desired
(510 · β cap )-approximation no matter whether we use the solution-lifting algorithm or just return
V (G).
      Suppose now that (510 · β cap ) · mvp(G) < k + 1. We are going to show that this implies
|S 0 | < k+1−3·`
            3     ≤ k 0 and that the size of the solution S returned by the solution-lifting algorithm is
within the approximation guarantee. From Theorem 9.2 we have mvp(G0 ) ≤ 170 · (mvp(G) − `) and
so mvp(G0 ) < 3·β  k+1
                        cap − 170 · ` ≤
                                          k+1−3·`
                                             3    ≤ k 0 . Therefore the optimum in G0 is not being capped and
OPTvp (G0 , k 0 ) = mvp(G0 ).
           Πvp (G0 , k 0 , S 0 ) = β cap · mvp(G0 ) ≤ β cap · 170 · (mvp(G) − `)
                                                                
                                     cap            k+1               k+1                      k+1−3·`
                                 < β · 170 ·                 −` ≤          − 170 · β cap · ` ≤         .
                                                 510 · β cap            3                         3
In the last inequality we estimate simply 170 · β cap · ` ≥ `. This implies that Πvp (G0 , k 0 , S 0 ) ≤ k 0 so
Πvp (G0 , k 0 , S 0 ) = |S 0 | and β = β cap . The inequality |S 0 | < k+1−3·`
                                                                          3    allows us to use the solution-lifting
algorithm. We estimate the size of the returned solution S.
  |S| ≤ 3 · |S 0 | + 3 · ` = 3 · β · mvp(G0 ) + 3 · ` ≤ 3 · β · 170 · (mvp(G) − `) + 3` ≤ 510 · β · mvp(G).
This concludes the proof.

   Polynomial-time approximation As a consequence of Theorem 1.1 we give improved ap-
proximation algorithms for Vertex planarization. This is obtained by pipelining the approximate
kernelization with the following result by Kawarabayashi and Sidiropoulos.
Theorem 9.3 ([KS17]). Vertex planarization admits the following randomized approximation
algorithms on n-vertex graphs.

                                                        71
   1. O(nε )-approximation in time nO(1/ε) for any ε > 0,
                                                                 
                                                        log n
                                              O
   2. O((log n)32 )-approximation in time n           log log n
                                                                      .

   We give a general observation on the result of applying ρ(n)-approximation to the outcome of
approximate kernelization.

Lemma 9.4. Let α, c, d, r ∈ N be constants and ρ, f : N → N be functions satisfying:

   1. Vertex planarization admits an α-approximate kernelization of size f , such that f (k) ≤
      c · k d for k ≥ r, and

   2. α · ρ(k 2d ) ≤ k for k ≥ r.

Suppose that Vertex planarization admits a (randomized) ρ(n)-approximation algorithm running
in time T (n) where n is the number of vertices in the input. Then there is a (randomized) algorithm
that, given a graph G and integer `, runs in time O(nr+O(1) ) + T (c2d · `2d ), and either outputs a
planar modulator in G of size at most α · ρ(c2d · `2d ) · mvp(G) or correctly concludes that mvp(G) > `.

Proof. If ` < r we can find a solution of size at most ` in time O(nr+1 ) so suppose that ` ≥ r.
We execute the algorithm from Theorem 1.1 on the instance (G, k) where k = c · `2 and obtain a
new instance (G0 , k 0 ), where G0 has at most n0 = cd+1 · `2d ≤ (c · `)2d vertices. Next, we execute
the ρ(n)-approximation algorithm on G0 and obtain a planar modulator S 0 in G0 of size at most
ρ((c · `)2d ) · mvp(G0 ). We use the solution lifting algorithm to turn S 0 into a planar modulator S in
G so that
                   Πvp (G, k, S)       Πvp (G0 , k 0 , S 0 )         |S 0 |
                                 ≤α·                         ≤ α ·          ≤ α · ρ((c · `)2d ).
                   OPTvp (G, k)        OPTvp (G0 , k 0 )           mvp(G0 )
                                                                  Πvp (G,k,S)       |S|
We will show that when mvp(G) ≤ ` then actually |S| ≤ k and so OPT     vp (G,k)
                                                                                = mvp(G) . As ` ≤ k this
already implies that OPTvp (G, k) = mvp(G). It remains to show that Πvp (G, k, S) ≤ k which implies
Πvp (G, k, S) = |S|. From the estimation above, we have Πvp (G, k, S) ≤ α · ρ((c · `)2d ) · OPTvp (G, k)
but by the assumption on ρ and since r ≤ ` ≤ c · ` and OPTvp (G, k) = mvp(G) ≤ ` this is upper
bounded by (c · `) · ` = k. Hence, if we get |S| > k, we can conclude that mvp(G) > `. Otherwise,
S is an (α · ρ((c · `)2d ))-approximate solution.

   Since approximation factors of the form (log n)O(1) and O(nε ) for sufficiently small ε satisfy the
conditions of Lemma 9.4, we obtain the following consequence.

Theorem 1.2. Vertex planarization admits the following randomized approximation algorithms.

   1. O(OPTε )-approximation in time nC(ε) , where C(ε) is a constant depending on ε, for sufficiently
      small ε > 0,
                                                                                           
                                                                                log OPT
                                                       O
   2. O((log OPT)32 )-approximation in time nO(1) + OPT                       log log OPT
                                                                                                .

Proof. We apply Lemma 9.4 for polynomial function f and functions ρ from Theorem 9.3. To see part
                   1
(1), consider ε < 2d , where d is the exponent in the kernel size from Theorem 1.1, and ρ(k) = O(k ε ).
Then ρ(k 2d ) = o(k) and the asymptotic conditions in Lemma 9.4 are met. We obtain an algorithm
                                                                        1
that, given a graph G and integer `, runs in time O(nr+O(1) ) + `O( 2dε ) , where r is a constant from
Lemma 9.4 depending on ε, and either returns a solution of size O(`2dε ) · mvp(G) or concludes that
mvp(G) > `. We execute this algorithm for ` = 1, 2, 3, . . . until we obtain a solution. Then we know


                                                         72
that OPT = mvp(G) ≥ ` and the returned solution gives an O(OPT2dε )-approximation. The claim
follows by adjusting ε.
    The proof of part (2) is analogous. We consider ρ(k) = O((log
                                                              
                                                                   k)32 ) for which ρ(k 2d ) = o(k).
                                                                   log `
                                                             O
The algorithm from Lemma 9.4 runs in time nO(1) + `              log log `
                                                                             and gives approximation factor
α · ρ(`2d ) = O((log `)32 ).


10      Planarization criteria
In this section we provide the proofs of the planarization criteria stated in Section 3. We first
show how the criterion from Lemma 3.15 can be used to prove that a graph remains planar after
some modification. The following lemma generalizes the case where S is a connected restricted
(v, V (C))-separator which was an argument used in earlier work [JLS14]. This stronger version will
be later needed to prove Lemma 3.21.

Lemma 10.1. Let G be a connected graph, C be a cycle in G, S ⊆ V (G), and v ∈ V (G) \ (V (C) ∪
S). Suppose that |S ∩ V (C)| ≤ 1, G[S] is connected, G[S \ V (C)] is non-empty and connected,
RG (v, S) ∩ V (C) = ∅, and the overlap graph O(G − v, C) is bipartite. Then the overlap graph
O(G, C) is bipartite as well.

Proof. For a C-bridge B we denote by A(B) ⊆ V (C) its set of attachments on C. We say that
B1 , B2 are incomparable if A(B1 ) 6⊆ A(B2 ) and A(B2 ) 6⊆ A(B1 ). We start by showing that inserting
v into G − v cannot merge two incomparable C-bridges B1 , B2 into one C-bridge. Suppose otherwise.
Let b1 and b2 . There exist a (v, b1 )-path P1 in G with internal vertices in V (B1 ) and a (v, b2 )-path P2
with internal vertices in V (B2 ). Suppose first that S ∩ V (C) = ∅. Then S is a connected restricted
(v, V (C))-separator in G and both paths P1 , P2 must cross S. Let P10 , P20 be obtained from P1 , P2
by removing their endpoints; note that they are non-empty. Then V (P10 ) ∪ V (P20 ) ∪ S induces a
connected subgraph of (G − v) − V (C) and contains vertices from both B1 , B2 ; a contradiction with
the assumption that B1 , B2 are distinct C-bridges in G − v.
     Suppose now that S ∩ V (C) = {t}. Assume without loss of generality that b1 6= t, which can
be achieved by swapping B1 and B2 if needed: since they are incomparable, at least one of them
has an attachment point other than t. Since RG (v, S) ∩ V (C) = ∅, the path P1 must intersect
S \ V (C). As G[S \ V (C)] is connected, we obtain S \ V (C) ⊆ V (B1 ) and, since G[S] is connected,
t ∈ A(B1 ). If there exists b2 ∈ A(B2 ) \ {t}, then by the same argument we get S \ V (C) ⊆ V (B2 ),
contradicting that B1 , B2 are distinct C-bridges. Therefore A(B2 ) = {t}, which contradicts that
B1 , B2 are incomparable.
     Using the derived property we conclude the proof. If v is an isolated vertex of G − V (C), then
its insertion to G − v creates a new C-bridge. The attachments of the bridge {v} must belong to
S ∩ V (C) (since RG (v, S) ∩ V (C) = ∅) so the new bridge can have only one attachment. Such a
bridge cannot overlap with any other bridge, so this cannot create any odd cycles in the overlap
graph. Otherwise, inserting v merges some bridges B1 , B2 , . . . , B` (possibly ` = 1) into one and
augments the set of attachments by NG (v) ∩ V (C). There cannot be an incomparable pair in
B1 , B2 , . . . , B` , so there is one C-bridge Bi so that A(Bj ) ⊆ A(Bi ) for j ∈ [`]. If Bj is overlapping
with some bridge B 0 , then also Bi overlaps with B 0 . Similarly as in the previous paragraph, we have
S ∩ V (C) ⊆ A(Bi ) and also NG (v) ∩ V (C) ⊆ S ∩ V (C). Therefore inserting v into G − v cannot
augment the set of attachments of Bi . The graph O(G, C) is thus obtained from O(G − v, C) by
simply removing vertices representing Bj for j 6= i. This also cannot create any odd cycles.

     This is sufficient to prove the “classic” planarity criterion (Lemma 3.16). We present the


                                                    73
following, slightly stronger, lemma, in which one of the separators does not need to be cyclic but
only connected. This directly implies Lemma 3.16 and later will be useful for proving Lemma 3.17.

Lemma 10.2. Let v0 , v3 ∈ V (G) and let S1 , S2 ⊆ V (G) be disjoint nested restricted (v0 , v3 )-
separators in a connected graph G, so that G[S2 ] has a Hamiltonian cycle and G[S1 ] is connected.
If RG [v0 , S2 ] and RG [v3 , S1 ] induce planar graphs, then G is planar.

Proof. First we show that if G − v0 is planar then G is planar as well. Let C be a Hamiltonian
cycle in G[S2 ]. By Lemma 3.15 the overlap graph O(G − v0 , C) is bipartite and for every C-bridge
B in G − v0 the graph B ∪ C is planar. We apply Lemma 10.1 for the set S = S1 which has empty
intersection with V (C), RG (v0 , S) ∩ V (C) = ∅, and the graph G[S] is connected. We obtain that
the overlap graph O(G, C) is bipartite. Let B0 be the C-bridge in G containing v0 . Then B0 ∪ C is
a subgraph of G[RG [v0 , V (C)]] which is planar by assumption. For any other C-bridge B in G, the
graph B ∪ C is a subgraph of G − v0 , hence it is planar as well. Therefore, from Lemma 3.15 we
infer that G is planar.
    Now we give a proof of the lemma by induction on the number of vertices in V (G) \ RG [v3 , S1 ].
If v0 is the only vertex in V (G) \ RG [v3 , S1 ] then G − v0 is planar and the argument above implies
planarity of G. When v0 is an articulation point in G then only one connected component C0 of
G − v0 may be not fully contained in RG [v, S1 ] and by Observation 3.18 it suffices to focus on the
graph G0 = G[V (C0 ) ∪ {v0 }]. The sets S1 , S2 as well as the vertex v3 must be contained in V (G0 ).
If v0 is not an articulation point, we set G0 = G. Let v 0 ∈ V (G) \ RG [v3 , S1 ] be distinct from v0
and contained in G0 − v0 . We have that S1 , S2 are disjoint nested restricted (v 0 , v3 )-separators in a
connected graph G0 − v0 . By induction we obtain that G0 − v0 is planar. Applying the argument
from the first paragraph concludes the proof.

10.1    The new criterion
We move on to proving the new planarity criterion, where instead of 2 cyclic nested separators,
we work with 3 connected nested separators. We start with the following observation about the
behavior of nested separators.

Observation 10.3. If (Si )`i=1 is a sequence of nested vertex-disjoint restricted (v0 , v`+1 )-separators
in a connected graph G such that G[Si ] is connected for all i ∈ [`], then the following holds.

   1. For each i ∈ [` − 1] (resp. i ∈ {2, . . . , `}) we have NG [Si ] ⊆ RG [v0 , Si+1 ] (resp. NG [Si ] ⊆
      RG [v`+1 , Si−1 ]).

   2. For each i ∈ [` − 1] we have RG [v0 , Si ] ⊆ RG [v0 , Si+1 ] and Si ⊆ RG (v0 , Si+1 ).

   The following elementary lemma localizes paths connecting consecutive separators in a nested
sequence.

Lemma 10.4. Let S1 , S2 be two nested vertex-disjoint restricted (v0 , v3 )-separators in a connected
graph G, such that G[Si ] is connected for each i ∈ [2]. If P is an (S1 , S2 )-path in G whose internal
vertices are disjoint from S1 ∪ S2 , then V (P ) ⊆ RG [v0 , S2 ] ∩ RG [v3 , S1 ].

Proof. Let P 0 be the subpath formed by the interior vertices of P . Since each G[Si ] is connected
and G is connected, we have Si ⊆ RG [x, Si ] for each x ∈ {v0 , v3 }. If V (P 0 ) = ∅, then together with
the fact that S1 ⊆ RG [v0 , S2 ] and S2 ⊆ RG [v3 , S1 ] by Observation 10.3, the lemma follows.
    So suppose V (P 0 ) 6= ∅ and orient P 0 so that it starts at a neighbor w1 of S1 and ends in a
neighbor w2 of S2 . By the previous argument, it suffices to show that V (P 0 ) ⊆ RG [v0 , S2 ]∩RG [v3 , S1 ].

                                                     74
By the first point of Observation 10.3 we have w1 ∈ NG [S1 ] ⊆ RG [v0 , S2 ] and since P 0 is by
definition disjoint from S1 ∪ S2 , reachability of the first vertex of P 0 implies reachability of the entire
subpath: V (P 0 ) ⊆ RG [v0 , S2 ]. Conversely, since P 0 ends in w2 ∈ NG [S2 ] ⊆ RG [v3 , S1 ] and P 0 does
not intersect S1 ∪ S2 , path P 0 is contained entirely in RG [v3 , S1 ], which completes the proof.
Lemma 3.17. Let v0 , v4 ∈ V (G) and let S1 , S2 , S3 ⊆ V (G) be disjoint nested restricted (v0 , v4 )-
separators in a connected graph G, so that G[Si ] is connected for each i ∈ [3]. If RG [v0 , S3 ] and
RG [v4 , S1 ] induce planar graphs, then G is planar.
Proof. Since the separators S1 , S2 , S3 are nested, S2 is an (S1 , S3 )-separator. We first argue that
we can assume that S2 is in fact inclusion-wise minimal with respect to simultaneously being
a (restricted) (S1 , S3 ) separator and inducing a connected graph, as follows. If S20 ( S2 is also
a connected (S1 , S3 ) separator, then the sequence S1 , S20 , S3 is also a sequence of nested (v0 , v4 )
separators satisfying the lemma statement, since each (S1 , S3 )-separator is also an (v0 , v4 )-separator
since they are nested. As the graphs induced by RG [v0 , S3 ] and RG [v4 , S1 ] are the same with respect
to this sequence, the triple S1 , S20 , S3 also satisfies the preconditions to the lemma.
    In the remainder may therefore assume that S2 is a (v0 , v4 )-separator which is inclusion-minimal
with respect to being a connected (S1 , S3 )-separator.
    We first deal with an easy case. If |S2 | = 1, then the single vertex x in S2 is an articulation point
that separates v0 from v4 . In this case, it is easy to verify that for each connected component H
of G − x, the set V (H) ∪ {x} is a subset of RG [v0 , S3 ] or RG [v4 , S1 ] and therefore induces a planar
graph by assumption. Hence by Observation 3.18, in this case we are guaranteed that G is planar.
    In the remainder we assume that S2 is not a singleton, and is inclusion-minimal with respect to
being a connected (S1 , S3 )-separator. For the following claim, recall that RG (x, S) denotes the set
of vertices reachable from x in G − S, that is, the vertex set of the connected component of G − S
containing x.
Claim 10.5. G[S2 ] has a Hamiltonian path whose endpoint(s) are adjacent to both RG (v0 , S2 )
and RG (v4 , S2 ).
Proof. Let T be a spanning tree of the connected subgraph G[S2 ]. Since S2 is minimal with
respect to being a connected (S1 , S3 )-separator, each leaf ` of T is adjacent to both the connected
component of G−S2 containing S1 (on vertex set RG (v0 , S2 )) and the connected component of G−S2
containing S3 (on vertex set RG (v4 , S2 )). If T has at most two leaves, this proves the claim. Suppose
for a contradiction that T has at least three leaves `1 , `2 , `3 , so that the set I ⊆ V (T ) = S2 of
internal vertices of T is non-empty.
    Let Q1 be a vertex set containing S1 and three paths, defined as follows. Each leaf `i for i ∈ [3]
has a neighbor wi in RG (v0 , S2 ); add a shortest path from wi to S1 through RG (v0 , S2 ) to Q1 , which
exists since S1 ⊆ RG [v0 , S2 ]. Since G[S1 ] is connected, the graph G[Q1 ] is connected. The paths
added to Q1 are contained in RG [v0 , S2 ] ⊆ RG [v0 , S3 ] by Observation 10.3, and since S1 ⊆ RG [v0 , S3 ]
by connectivity of G and G[S1 ] we have Q1 ⊆ RG [v0 , S3 ].
    The vertex set Q3 is defined similarly: it contains S3 and for each leaf `i it contains a shortest
path Pi0 through RG (v4 , S1 ) from a neighbor wi0 ∈ NG (`i )∩RG (v4 , S1 ) to S3 . By applying Lemma 10.4
to the (S2 , S3 ) path Pi obtained by appending `i ∈ S2 to Pi0 , for each path Pi0 added to Q3 we
have V (Pi0 ) ⊆ RG [v0 , S3 ]. Since S3 ⊆ RG [v0 , S3 ] we have Q3 ⊆ RG [v0 , S3 ].
    The sets defined so far form a minor model of K3,3 : the vertex sets Q1 , Q3 , I are disjoint
and connected and are each adjacent to the three vertices `1 , `2 , `3 ∈       / Q1 ∪ Q3 ∪ I. As we have
shown Q1 , Q3 ⊆ RG [u, S3 ], together with S2 ⊆ RG [u, S3 ] this implies that the entire minor model
is contained in RG [u, S3 ], contradicting the assumption that RG [u, S3 ] induces a planar subgraph
of G.                                                                                                    J

                                                     75
   The following claim shows that there is a cycle in G containing the entire set S2 (which is therefore
a (u, v)-separator) which is contained in the region of the graph ‘in between’ the separators S1
and S2 , and can therefore be shown to be disjoint from S3 .
Claim 10.6. There is a cycle C in G such that S2 ⊆ V (C) ⊆ RG [v0 , S2 ] ∩ RG [v4 , S1 ].

Proof. Let H be a Hamiltonian path of G[S2 ] whose two endpoints `1 , `2 are adjacent to both RG (v0 , S2 )
and RG (v4 , S2 ), as guaranteed by Claim 10.5.
    For each i ∈ [2], let Pi be an (S1 , `i )-path in G whose internal vertices are disjoint from S1 ∪ S2 .
Such a path exists since `i has a neighbor in the connected set RG (v0 , S2 ) ⊇ S1 . By Lemma 10.4,
we therefore have V (Pi ) ⊆ (RG [v0 , S2 ] ∩ RG [v3 , S1 ]). Since G[S1 ] is connected, the subgraph G[S2 ∪
V (P1 ) ∪ V (P2 )] is connected and contains a simple (`1 , `2 )-path P with at least one internal
vertex, such that the interior of P is disjoint from S2 . Then V (P ) ⊆ S2 ∪ V (P1 ) ∪ V (P2 ) ⊆
RG [v0 , S3 ] ∩ RG [v4 , S1 ]. Hence P together with the Hamiltonian (`1 , `2 )-path T spanning S2 forms
a cycle C as desired, completing the proof.                                                               J

    Fix a cycle C as guaranteed by the previous claim. Note that V (C)∩S3 = ∅ since S3 ∩RG [v0 , S2 ] =
∅ by the nesting property of the separators. Similarly we infer that v0 6∈ V (C). Furthermore, V (C) is
a (v0 , S3 )-separator because S2 ⊆ V (C) and S3 is a (V (C), v4 )-separators because V (C) is contained
in the same component of G − S3 as S2 . Hence, (V (C), S3 ) are disjoint nested (v0 , v4 )-separators
which satisfy the prerequisites of Lemma 10.2 (modulo ordering) and this concludes the proof.

10.2    Irrelevant vertices
Finally, we show how the planarity criteria give sufficient conditions for a vertex/edge to be
k-irrelevant.

Lemma 3.19. Let G be a connected graph, k ∈ N, v ∈ V (G), and S1 , S2 , . . . , Sk+3 ⊆ V (G) \ {v}
be disjoint, connected, nested (with respect to v), and v-planarizing. Then v is k-irrelevant in G
and every edge incident to v is k-irrelevant in G.

Proof. Let X ⊆ V (G) \ {v} be any planar modulator in G − v of size at most k; we have that
(G − v) − X is planar. We are going to show that G − X is planar as well. There must exist indices
i1 < i2 < i3 so that Sij ∩ X = ∅ for j ∈ [3]. The sets Si1 , Si2 , Si3 form a nested sequence (with
respect to v) in the graph G − X. They are v-planarizing and induce connected subgraphs of G,
so the same holds in G − X. Consider the connected component of v in G − X; let us refer to
it as Gv . If V (Gv ) ⊆ RG−X [v, Si3 ] then, since Si3 planarizes v, this component is planar. Other
connected components of G − X are subgraphs of (G − v) − X so the entire graph G − X is planar.
Otherwise there exists a vertex u ∈ V (Gv ) \ RG−X [v, Si3 ]. Now the sets Si1 , Si2 , Si3 are nested
(v, u)-separators. Note that RG−X [u, Si1 ] ⊆ V (G) \ {v} so it induces a planar subgraph of G − X.
We apply Lemma 3.17 to infer that Gv is planar and thus G − X is planar. This concludes the
proof that v is k-irrelevant. If e is an edge incident to v, then any solution to G \ e is also a solution
to G − v, so the edge case reduces to the vertex case.

Lemma 3.21. Let G be a connected graph containing v ∈ V (G), let k ∈ N and let (S1 , S2 , . . . , Sk+3 )
be a pseudo-nested sequence of cycles with respect to v, such that each set Si is v-planarizing. Then
v is k-irrelevant in G and every edge incident to v is k-irrelevant in G.

Proof. Let t ∈ V (G), t 6= v, be the common intersection of every pair of sets Si , Sj , 1 ≤ i < j ≤ k + 3.
Let X ⊆ V (G) \ {v} be any planar modulator in G − v of size at most k; we have that (G − v) − X


                                                    76
is planar. We are going to show that G − X is planar as well. We consider two cases depending on
whether t ∈ S or not.
    Suppose first that t ∈ X and let Xt = X \ {t}. Then Xt is a planar modulator in G − t of size
at most k − 1. Observe that {Si \ {t} | i ∈ [k + 3]} are disjoint and form a (standard) nested (with
respect to v) sequence in G − t. They also induce connected subgraphs of G − t as removal of a single
vertex from a cycle cannot disconnect it. Analogously as in the proof of Lemma 3.19, we consider
indices i1 < i2 < i3 so that Sij ∩ Xt = ∅ for j ∈ [3]. The sequence (Si1 \ {t}, Si2 \ {t}, Si3 \ {t}) is
nested and v-planarizing in (G − t) − Xt . From the assumption that (G − v) − X = ((G − t) − v) − Xt
is planar and by Lemma 3.17 we get that (G − t) − Xt = G − X is planar.
    Suppose now that t 6∈ S. Again by a counting argument, we can pick i, j ∈ [k + 3], i < j such
that Si ∩ X = Sj ∩ X = ∅. We have that RG−X (v, Si ) ∩ Sj = ∅ and |Si ∩ Sj | = 1. Furthermore G[Si ]
and G[Si \ Sj ] are connected. Let C be the Hamiltonian cycle in G[Sj ]. We shall use the criterion
from Lemma 3.15 directly. The graph (G − v) − X is planar so the overlap graph O((G − v) − X, C)
is bipartite and for each C-bridge B we have that B ∪ C is planar. We apply Lemma 10.1 to the
graph G − X, cycle C, and the set Si to infer that the overlap graph O(G − X, C) is also bipartite.
Let Bv be the C-bridge in G − X which contains v. Then Bv ∪ C is subgraph of G[RG [v, Sj ]] which
is planar by the assumption. Since the other C-bridges are unaffected, Lemma 3.15 implies that
G − X is planar.
    This concludes the proof that v is k-irrelevant. Again, if e is an edge incident to v, then any
solution to G \ e is also a solution to G − v, so the edge case reduces to the vertex case.


11     Conclusion
We presented the first constant-factor approximate kernelization for Vertex planarization.
While several of our reduction steps are lossy and cannot directly be used in an exact kerneliza-
tion, we believe the insights from our work will be important towards settling whether Vertex
planarization admits a polynomial-size exact kernelization. In turn, this will shed further light
on the algorithmic complexity of F-minor free deletion for families F that do not contain any
planar graphs.
    At the heart of our lossy kernelization is the subroutine to compute a bounded-size preserver
which contains a good approximate solution. Through several reduction steps, we showed that it
suffices to perform this computation on planar subgraphs which can be embedded in the plane
such that the boundary vertices by which they communicate with the rest of the graph all lie on
the outer face and are bounded in number. Whether an exact preserver of polynomial size exists
for such subgraphs, and whether it can be computed efficiently, is an important open question for
future work. To emphasize the importance of this question, we restate it here explicitly:

Open problem 11.1. Determine whether there exists a polynomial f : N → N such that the following
holds. Every planar k-boundaried graph H that has an embedding with all boundary vertices on the
outer face, contains a set A of f (k) vertices such that for any k-boundaried graph G, there is an
optimal solution S to the Vertex planarization problem on H ⊕ G satisfying S ∩ V (H) ⊆ A.

   In hindsight, the insight that the task of (approximately) kernelizing Vertex planarization
can be reduced to analyzing planar subgraphs interacting with the rest of the graph through their
outer face, and therefore that the problem is amenable to techniques typically applied only for
problems whose input graph is planar, is one of the conceptual take-away messages of this work.
Driven by this realization, we believe that the answer to Problem 11.1 will be the key to settling
the kernelization complexity of Vertex planarization.


                                                  77
    A second question is whether every F-minor free deletion problem admits a constant-factor
approximate kernelization. Although a number of steps in our algorithm can be generalized to
graphs excluding any fixed minor, we heavily depend on the properties of plane graphs when
decomposing the locally planar components. It is plausible that these arguments may be generalized
to graph families (near-)embeddable on more complex surfaces. A technically daunting but possibly
viable challenge is therefore to try using the Robertson-Seymour decomposition [KTW20, RS03] of
graphs excluding a fixed minor H to develop an analog of the solution preservers framework on
H-minor-free subgraphs for arbitrary H.


References
[AKK+ 17] Isolde Adler, Stavros G. Kolliopoulos, Philipp Klaus Krause, Daniel Lokshtanov, Saket
          Saurabh, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Irrelevant vertices for the planar disjoint paths
          problem. J. Comb. Theory, Ser. B, 122:815–843, 2017. doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2016.10.
          001.

[AMSZ19] Akanksha Agrawal, Pranabendu Misra, Saket Saurabh, and Meirav Zehavi. Interval
         vertex deletion admits a polynomial kernel. In Timothy M. Chan, editor, Proceedings
         of the Thirtieth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2019,
         San Diego, California, USA, January 6-9, 2019, pages 1711–1730. SIAM, 2019. doi:
         10.1137/1.9781611975482.103.

[Bak94]     Brenda S. Baker. Approximation algorithms for NP-complete problems on planar graphs.
            J. ACM, 41(1):153–180, 1994. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/174644.174650, doi:
            10.1145/174644.174650.

[BDFH09] Hans L. Bodlaender, Rodney G. Downey, Michael R. Fellows, and Danny Hermelin.
         On problems without polynomial kernels. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 75(8):423–434, 2009.
         doi:10.1016/j.jcss.2009.04.001.

[Ben19]     Cédric Bentz. An FPT algorithm for planar multicuts with sources and sinks on the outer
            face. Algorithmica, 81(1):224–237, January 2019. doi:10.1007/s00453-018-0443-4.

[BFL+ 16]   Hans L. Bodlaender, Fedor V. Fomin, Daniel Lokshtanov, Eelko Penninkx, Saket
            Saurabh, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. (Meta) Kernelization. Journal of the ACM, 63(5),
            November 2016. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2973749, doi:10.1145/2973749.

[BM89]      Daniel Bienstock and Clyde L. Monma. Optimal enclosing regions in planar graphs.
            Networks, 19(1):79–94, 1989. doi:10.1002/net.3230190107.

[BM04]      John M. Boyer and Wendy J. Myrvold. On the cutting edge: Simplified o(n) planarity
            by edge addition. Journal of Graph Algorithms and Applications, 8(3):241–273, 2004.
            doi:10.7155/jgaa.00091.

[Bod96]     Hans L. Bodlaender. A linear-time algorithm for finding tree-decompositions of small
            treewidth. SIAM Journal on Computing, 25(6):1305–1317, 1996. doi:10.1137/
            S0097539793251219.

[Bod98]     Hans L. Bodlaender. A partial k-arboretum of graphs with bounded treewidth. Theoret-
            ical Computer Science, 209(1):1 – 45, 1998. doi:10.1016/S0304-3975(97)00228-4.


                                                78
[BvD10]     Hans L. Bodlaender and Thomas C. van Dijk. A cubic kernel for feedback vertex
            set and loop cutset. Theory Comput. Syst., 46(3):566–597, 2010. doi:10.1007/
            s00224-009-9234-2.

[CC16]     Chandra Chekuri and Julia Chuzhoy. Polynomial bounds for the grid-minor theorem.
           J. ACM, 63(5), December 2016. doi:10.1145/2820609.

[CCH+ 16] Rajesh Chitnis, Marek Cygan, MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi, Marcin Pilipczuk, and
          Michal Pilipczuk. Designing FPT algorithms for cut problems using randomized
          contractions. SIAM J. Comput., 45(4):1171–1229, 2016. doi:10.1137/15M1032077.

[CFFK98] Gruia Călinescu, Cristina G. Fernandes, Ulrich Finkler, and Howard J. Karloff. A better
         approximation algorithm for finding planar subgraphs. J. Algorithms, 27(2):269–302,
         1998. doi:10.1006/jagm.1997.0920.

[CFK+ 15] Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Lukasz Kowalik, Daniel Lokshtanov, Dániel Marx,
          Marcin Pilipczuk, Michal Pilipczuk, and Saket Saurabh. Parameterized Algorithms.
          Springer, 2015. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-21275-3.

[CMS11]    Julia Chuzhoy, Yury Makarychev, and Anastasios Sidiropoulos. On graph crossing
           number and edge planarization. In Dana Randall, editor, Proceedings of the Twenty-
           Second Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2011, San
           Francisco, California, USA, January 23-25, 2011, pages 1050–1069. SIAM, 2011. doi:
           10.1137/1.9781611973082.80.

[CMT20]    Julia Chuzhoy, Sepideh Mahabadi, and Zihan Tan. Towards better approximation of
           graph crossing number. In 61st IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
           Science, FOCS 2020, Durham, NC, USA, November 16-19, 2020, pages 73–84. IEEE,
           2020. doi:10.1109/FOCS46700.2020.00016.

[CS18]      Chandra Chekuri and Anastasios Sidiropoulos. Approximation algorithms for Euler
            genus and related problems. SIAM Journal on Computing, 47(4):1610–1643, 2018.
            doi:10.1137/14099228X.

[CT21]     Julia Chuzhoy and Zihan Tan. Towards tight(er) bounds for the excluded grid theorem.
           Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 146:219–265, 2021. doi:10.1016/j.jctb.
           2020.09.010.

[DETT99] Giuseppe Di Battista, Peter Eades, Roberto Tamassia, and Ioannis G. Tollis. Graph
         drawing: algorithms for the visualization of graphs. Prentice Hall, 1999.

[DF13]      Rodney G. Downey and Michael R. Fellows. Fundamentals of Parameterized Complexity.
            Texts in Computer Science. Springer, 2013. doi:10.1007/978-1-4471-5559-1.

[DGK+ 19] Erik D. Demaine, Timothy D. Goodrich, Kyle Kloster, Brian Lavallee, Quanquan C.
          Liu, Blair D. Sullivan, Ali Vakilian, and Andrew van der Poel. Structural rounding: Ap-
          proximation algorithms for graphs near an algorithmically tractable class. In Michael A.
          Bender, Ola Svensson, and Grzegorz Herman, editors, 27th Annual European Symposium
          on Algorithms, ESA 2019, September 9-11, 2019, Munich/Garching, Germany, volume
          144 of LIPIcs, pages 37:1–37:15. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik,
          2019. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ESA.2019.37.


                                               79
[DH08]      Erik D. Demaine and MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi. The bidimensionality theory and
            its algorithmic applications. Comput. J., 51(3):292–302, 2008. doi:10.1093/comjnl/
            bxm033.

[Dru15]     Andrew Drucker. New limits to classical and quantum instance compression. SIAM J.
            Comput., 44(5):1443–1479, 2015. doi:10.1137/130927115.

[EHR17]     Eduard Eiben, Danny Hermelin, and M. S. Ramanujan. Lossy kernels for hitting
            subgraphs. In Kim G. Larsen, Hans L. Bodlaender, and Jean-François Raskin, editors,
            42nd International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science,
            MFCS 2017, August 21-25, 2017 - Aalborg, Denmark, volume 83 of LIPIcs, pages
            67:1–67:14. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2017. doi:10.4230/
            LIPIcs.MFCS.2017.67.

[EKM+ 19] Eduard Eiben, Mithilesh Kumar, Amer E. Mouawad, Fahad Panolan, and Sebastian
          Siebertz. Lossy kernels for connected dominating set on sparse graphs. SIAM J. Discret.
          Math., 33(3):1743–1771, 2019. doi:10.1137/18M1172508.

[EMV87]     Ranel E. Erickson, Clyde L. Monma, and Arthur F. Veinott. Send-and-split method for
            minimum-concave-cost network flows. Mathematics of Operations Research, 12(4):634–
            664, 1987. doi:10.1287/moor.12.4.634.

[FdFG+ 06] Luérbio Faria, Celina M. H. de Figueiredo, Sylvain Gravier, Candido Ferreira Xavier
           de Mendonça Neto, and Jorge Stolfi. On maximum planar induced subgraphs. Discret.
           Appl. Math., 154(13):1774–1782, 2006. doi:10.1016/j.dam.2006.03.021.

[FGT19]     Fedor V. Fomin, Petr A. Golovach, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Modification to planarity
            is fixed parameter tractable. In Rolf Niedermeier and Christophe Paul, editors, 36th
            International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, STACS 2019,
            March 13-16, 2019, Berlin, Germany, volume 126 of LIPIcs, pages 28:1–28:17. Schloss
            Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.2019.
            28.

[FHL08]     Uriel Feige, MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi, and James R. Lee. Improved approximation
            algorithms for minimum weight vertex separators. SIAM J. Comput., 38(2):629–657,
            2008. doi:10.1137/05064299X.

[FLMS12]    Fedor Fomin, Daniel Lokshtanov, Neeldhara Misra, and Saket Saurabh. Planar F-
            deletion: Approximation, kernelization and optimal FPT algorithms. In 2012 IEEE
            53rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 470–479, 2012.
            doi:10.1109/FOCS.2012.62.

[FLMS20]    Fedor Fomin, Daniel Lokshtanov, Neeldhara Misra, and Saket Saurabh. Planar F-
            deletion: Approximation, kernelization and optimal FPT algorithms, 2020. arXiv:
            1204.4230.

[FLP+ 20]   Fedor V. Fomin, Daniel Lokshtanov, Fahad Panolan, Saket Saurabh, and Meirav Zehavi.
            Hitting topological minors is FPT. In Konstantin Makarychev, Yury Makarychev,
            Madhur Tulsiani, Gautam Kamath, and Julia Chuzhoy, editors, Proccedings of the 52nd
            Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2020, Chicago, IL,
            USA, June 22-26, 2020, pages 1317–1326. ACM, 2020. doi:10.1145/3357713.3384318.


                                               80
[FLSZ19]   Fedor Fomin, Daniel Lokshtanov, Saket Saurabh, and Meirav Zehavi. Kernelization:
           theory of parameterized preprocessing. Cambridge University Press, 2019.

[FS11]     Lance Fortnow and Rahul Santhanam. Infeasibility of instance compression and succinct
           PCPs for NP. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 77(1):91–106, 2011. doi:10.1016/j.jcss.2010.
           06.007.

[FTV11]    Fedor V. Fomin, Ioan Todinca, and Yngve Villanger. Exact algorithm for the maximum
           induced planar subgraph problem. In Camil Demetrescu and Magnús M. Halldórsson,
           editors, Algorithms - ESA 2011 - 19th Annual European Symposium, Saarbrücken,
           Germany, September 5-9, 2011. Proceedings, volume 6942 of Lecture Notes in Computer
           Science, pages 287–298. Springer, 2011. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-23719-5_25.

[GT12]     Qian-Ping Gu and Hisao Tamaki. Improved bounds on the planar branchwidth with
           respect to the largest grid minor size. Algorithmica, 64(3):416–453, November 2012.
           doi:10.1007/s00453-012-9627-5.

[HT74]     John E. Hopcroft and Robert Endre Tarjan. Efficient planarity testing. J. ACM,
           21(4):549–568, 1974. doi:10.1145/321850.321852.

[JLS14]    Bart M. P. Jansen, Daniel Lokshtanov, and Saket Saurabh. A near-optimal planarization
           algorithm. In Proceedings of the twenty-fifth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete
           algorithms, pages 1802–1811. SIAM, 2014. doi:10.1137/1.9781611973402.130.

[JP18]     Bart M. P. Jansen and Marcin Pilipczuk. Approximation and kernelization for
           chordal vertex deletion. SIAM J. Discret. Math., 32(3):2258–2301, 2018. doi:
           10.1137/17M112035X.

[JPvL18]   Bart M. P. Jansen, Marcin Pilipczuk, and Erik Jan van Leeuwen. A Deterministic
           Polynomial Kernel for Odd Cycle Transversal and Vertex Multiway Cut in Planar
           Graphs, 2018. arXiv:1810.01136.

[JPvL19]   Bart M. P. Jansen, Marcin Pilipczuk, and Erik Jan van Leeuwen. A Deterministic
           Polynomial Kernel for Odd Cycle Transversal and Vertex Multiway Cut in Planar
           Graphs. In Rolf Niedermeier and Christophe Paul, editors, 36th International Symposium
           on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS 2019), volume 126 of Leibniz
           International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 39:1–39:18, Dagstuhl, Germany,
           2019. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.
           2019.39.

[Kaw09]    Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi. Planarity allowing few error vertices in linear time. In 50th
           Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2009, October
           25-27, 2009, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, pages 639–648. IEEE Computer Society, 2009.
           doi:10.1109/FOCS.2009.45.

[KMRT16] R. Krithika, Pranabendu Misra, Ashutosh Rai, and Prafullkumar Tale. Lossy kernels
         for graph contraction problems. In Akash Lal, S. Akshay, Saket Saurabh, and Sandeep
         Sen, editors, 36th IARCS Annual Conference on Foundations of Software Technology
         and Theoretical Computer Science, FSTTCS 2016, December 13-15, 2016, Chennai,
         India, volume 65 of LIPIcs, pages 23:1–23:14. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
         Informatik, 2016. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.FSTTCS.2016.23.


                                              81
[KP19]     Tomasz Kociumaka and Marcin Pilipczuk. Deleting vertices to graphs of bounded
           genus. Algorithmica, 81(9):3655–3691, 2019. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/
           s00453-019-00592-7, doi:10.1007/s00453-019-00592-7.

[Kra14]    Stefan Kratsch. Recent developments in kernelization: A survey. Bull. EATCS, 113,
           2014. URL: http://eatcs.org/beatcs/index.php/beatcs/article/view/285.

[KS17]     Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi and Anastasios Sidiropoulos. Polylogarithmic approximation for
           minimum planarization (almost). In 2017 IEEE 58th Annual Symposium on Foundations
           of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 779–788. IEEE, 2017. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2017.77.

[KS19]     Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi and Anastasios Sidiropoulos. Polylogarithmic approximation
           for Euler genus on bounded degree graphs. In Moses Charikar and Edith Cohen,
           editors, Proceedings of the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of
           Computing, STOC 2019, Phoenix, AZ, USA, June 23-26, 2019, pages 164–175. ACM,
           2019. doi:10.1145/3313276.3316409.

[KT10]     Stephan Kreutzer and Siamak Tazari. On brambles, grid-like minors, and parameterized
           intractability of monadic second-order logic. In Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual
           ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’10, page 354–364, USA, 2010.
           Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. doi:10.1137/1.9781611973075.30.

[KTW20]    Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, Robin Thomas, and Paul Wollan. Quickly excluding a non-
           planar graph. CoRR, abs/2010.12397, 2020. arXiv:2010.12397.

[Kur30]    Casimir Kuratowski. Sur le problème des courbes gauches en topologie. Fundamenta
           Mathematicae, 15(1):271–283, 1930. URL: http://eudml.org/doc/212352.

[KW20]     Stefan Kratsch and Magnus Wahlström. Representative sets and irrelevant vertices:
           New tools for kernelization. J. ACM, 67(3):16:1–16:50, 2020. doi:10.1145/3390887.

[Lan37]    Saunders Mac Lane. A combinatorial condition for planar graphs. Fundamenta Mathe-
           maticae, 28:22–32, 1937.

[Lok19]    Daniel Lokshtanov. Open problems from the workshop on kernelization (WorKer 2019,
           part 2), 2019. URL: https://youtu.be/6ZlP_0cVBrg?t=4278.

[LPRS17]   Daniel Lokshtanov, Fahad Panolan, M. S. Ramanujan, and Saket Saurabh. Lossy
           kernelization. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory
           of Computing, STOC 2017, page 224–237, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for
           Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/3055399.3055456.

[LRSZ18]   Daniel Lokshtanov, M. S. Ramanujan, Saket Saurabh, and Meirav Zehavi. Reducing
           CMSO Model Checking to Highly Connected Graphs. In Ioannis Chatzigiannakis,
           Christos Kaklamanis, Dániel Marx, and Donald Sannella, editors, 45th International
           Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2018), volume 107 of
           Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 135:1–135:14, Dagstuhl,
           Germany, 2018. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik. doi:10.4230/
           LIPIcs.ICALP.2018.135.

[LSV20]    Alexander Lindermayr, Sebastian Siebertz, and Alexandre Vigny. Elimination distance
           to bounded degree on planar graphs. In Javier Esparza and Daniel Král’, editors,

                                               82
           45th International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science,
           MFCS 2020, August 24-28, 2020, Prague, Czech Republic, volume 170 of LIPIcs,
           pages 65:1–65:12. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020. doi:
           10.4230/LIPIcs.MFCS.2020.65.
[LY80]     John M. Lewis and Mihalis Yannakakis. The node-deletion problem for hereditary
           properties is NP-complete. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 20(2):219–230, 1980. doi:10.1016/
           0022-0000(80)90060-4.
[MG70]     Peng-Siu Mei and Norman E. Gibbs. A planarity algorithm based on the Kuratowski
           theorem. In Harry L. Cooke, editor, American Federation of Information Processing
           Societies: AFIPS Conference Proceedings: 1970 Spring Joint Computer Conference,
           Atlantic City, NJ, USA, May 5-7, 1970, volume 36 of AFIPS Conference Proceedings,
           pages 91–93. AFIPS Press, 1970. doi:10.1145/1476936.1476957.
[Mis16]    Neeldhara Misra. Kernelization, Planar F-Deletion. In Encyclopedia of Algorithms,
           pages 1033–1036. Springer, 2016. doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-2864-4_527.
[MM96]     Kurt Mehlhorn and Petra Mutzel. On the embedding phase of the Hopcroft and
           Tarjan planarity testing algorithm. Algorithmica, 16(2):233–242, 1996. doi:10.1007/
           BF01940648.
[MS12]     Dániel Marx and Ildikó Schlotter. Obtaining a planar graph by vertex deletion. Algo-
           rithmica, 62(3-4):807–822, 2012. doi:10.1007/s00453-010-9484-z.
[MT01]     Bojan Mohar and Carsten Thomassen. Graphs on surfaces, volume 16. Johns Hopkins
           University Press Baltimore, 2001.
[PPSL18]   Marcin Pilipczuk, Michal Pilipczuk, Piotr Sankowski, and Erik Jan Van Leeuwen.
           Network sparsification for Steiner problems on planar and bounded-genus graphs. ACM
           Transactions on Algorithms (TALG), 14(4):1–73, 2018. doi:10.1145/3239560.
[Ram19]    M. S. Ramanujan. An approximate kernel for connected feedback vertex set. In Michael A.
           Bender, Ola Svensson, and Grzegorz Herman, editors, 27th Annual European Symposium
           on Algorithms, ESA 2019, September 9-11, 2019, Munich/Garching, Germany, volume
           144 of LIPIcs, pages 77:1–77:14. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik,
           2019. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ESA.2019.77.
[Ram21]    M. S. Ramanujan. On approximate compressions for connected minor-hitting sets. In
           Petra Mutzel, Rasmus Pagh, and Grzegorz Herman, editors, 29th Annual European
           Symposium on Algorithms, ESA 2021, September 6-8, 2021, Lisbon, Portugal (Virtual
           Conference), volume 204 of LIPIcs, pages 78:1–78:16. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum
           für Informatik, 2021. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ESA.2021.78.
[RS86]     Neil Robertson and Paul D. Seymour. Graph minors. V. Excluding a planar graph. J.
           Comb. Theory, Ser. B, 41(1):92–114, 1986. doi:10.1016/0095-8956(86)90030-4.
[RS03]     Neil Robertson and Paul D. Seymour. Graph minors. XVI. excluding a non-planar graph.
           J. Comb. Theory, Ser. B, 89(1):43–76, 2003. doi:10.1016/S0095-8956(03)00042-X.
[RS12]     Neil Robertson and Paul D. Seymour. Graph minors. XXII. irrelevant vertices in linkage
           problems. J. Comb. Theory, Ser. B, 102(2):530–563, 2012. doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2007.
           12.007.

                                               83
[RT17]     Jean-Florent Raymond and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Recent techniques and results on
           the Erdős-Pósa property. Discret. Appl. Math., 231:25–43, 2017. doi:10.1016/j.dam.
           2016.12.025.

[Sau19]    Saket Saurabh. Open problems from the workshop on kernelization (WorKer 2019, part
           1), 2019. URL: https://youtu.be/vCjG5zGjQr4?t=124.

[SST20]    Ignasi Sau, Giannos Stamoulis, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. An FPT-algorithm for
           recognizing k-apices of minor-closed graph classes. In Artur Czumaj, Anuj Dawar, and
           Emanuela Merelli, editors, 47th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages,
           and Programming, ICALP 2020, July 8-11, 2020, Saarbrücken, Germany (Virtual
           Conference), volume 168 of LIPIcs, pages 95:1–95:20. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum
           für Informatik, 2020. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2020.95.

[ST93]     Paul. D. Seymour and Robin Thomas. Graph searching and a min-max theorem for
           tree-width. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 58(1):22–33, 1993. doi:https:
           //doi.org/10.1006/jctb.1993.1027.

[ST94]     Paul D. Seymour and Robin Thomas. Call routing and the ratcatcher. Combinatorica,
           14(2):217–241, 1994. doi:10.1007/BF01215352.

[Tut59]    W. T. Tutte. Matroids and graphs. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 90:527–552, 1959.
           doi:10.1090/S0002-9947-1959-0101527-3.

[VBMN12] René Van Bevern, Hannes Moser, and Rolf Niedermeier. Approximation and tidying –
         A problem kernel for s-plex cluster vertex deletion. Algorithmica, 62(3):930–950, 2012.
         doi:10.1007/s00453-011-9492-7.

[Wag37]    Klaus Wagner. Über eine eigenschaft der ebenen komplexe. Mathematische Annalen,
           114:570–590, 1937. doi:10.1007/BF01594196.

[Whi32]    Hassler Whitney. Non-separable and planar graphs. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 34:339–
           362, 1932.




                                               84
