comput. complex. (2021) 30:12
c The Author(s) 2021
1016-3328/21/020001-44
published online August 18, 2021
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00037-021-00212-3      computational complexity




 AN EXPONENTIAL SEPARATION
BETWEEN MA AND AM PROOFS OF
         PROXIMITY

Tom Gur, Yang P. Liu, and Ron D. Rothblum


Abstract. Interactive proofs of proximity allow a sublinear-time veri-
ﬁer to check that a given input is close to the language, using a small
amount of communication with a powerful (but untrusted) prover. In
this work, we consider two natural minimally interactive variants of
such proofs systems, in which the prover only sends a single message,
referred to as the proof.
   The ﬁrst variant, known as MA-proofs of Proximity (MAP), is fully
non-interactive, meaning that the proof is a function of the input only.
The second variant, known as AM-proofs of Proximity (AMP), allows
the proof to additionally depend on the veriﬁer’s (entire) random string.
The complexity of both MAPs and AMPs is the total number of bits that
the veriﬁer observes—namely, the sum of the proof length and query
complexity.
   Our main result is an exponential separation between the power of
MAPs and AMPs. Speciﬁcally, we exhibit an explicit and natural prop-
erty Π that admits an AMP with complexity O(log n), whereas any
MAP for Π has complexity Ω̃(n1/4 ), where n denotes the length of the
input in bits. Our MAP lower bound also yields an alternate proof,
which is more general and arguably much simpler, for a recent result
of Fischer et al. (ITCS, 2014). Also, Aaronson (Quantum Information
& Computation 2012) has shown a Ω(n1/6 ) QMA lower bound for the
same property Π.
   Lastly, we also consider the notion of oblivious proofs of proximity, in
which the veriﬁer’s queries are oblivious to the proof. In this setting, we
show that AMPs can only be quadratically stronger than MAPs. As an
application of this result, we show an exponential separation between
                                                                Birkhäuser
12 Page 2 of 44                 Gur, Liu & Rothblum                  cc


the power of public and private coin for oblivious interactive proofs of
proximity.

Keywords. Interative proofs, proofs of proximity

Subject classification. 68Q10


                        1. Introduction
The ﬁeld of property testing (Goldreich et al. 1998; Rubinfeld &
Sudan 1996) deals with sublinear algorithms for deciding whether
a given object has a predetermined property or is far from any
object having this property. Such algorithms, called testers, obtain
local views of the object by performing queries; that is, the object
is seen as a function and the tester receives oracle access to this
function. The goal of the tester is to ascertain a global property of
the function based only on its local view.
    In the last couple of decades, the area of property testing has
attracted much attention (see surveys (Canonne 2015; Ron 2008,
2009) and recent textbook (Goldreich 2017)). However, while much
success was found in designing testers for a myriad of natural prop-
erties, which only make a small number of queries, many other
natural properties were shown to require a very large number of
queries to test (often linear in the length of the input).
    Proofs of proximity, ﬁrst considered by Ergün, Kumar and Ru-
binfeld (Ergün et al. 2004), are both intrinsically interesting as a
natural notion of proof systems for sublinear algorithms, as well as
provide means to signiﬁcantly reduce the number of queries that
the tester needs to make in order to verify, rather than decide.
These probabilistic proof systems can be viewed as augmenting
testers with help from a powerful, yet untrusted prover. In a re-
cent line of works (Berman et al. 2017; Chiesa & Gur 2017; Fischer
et al. 2014; Goldreich & Gur 2016b; Goldreich et al. 2015b; Gur
& Rothblum 2016, 2017; Kalai & Rothblum 2015; Reingold et al.
2016; Rothblum et al. 2013), various types of interactive (Rothblum
et al. 2013) and non-interactive proofs of proximity (Gur & Roth-
blum 2018) were studied, including arguments of proximity (Kalai
& Rothblum 2015), zero-knowledge proofs of proximity (Berman
cc         Separation Between MAP and AMP                   Page 3 of 44     12


et al. 2017), and proofs of proximity for distribution testing (Chiesa
& Gur 2017).
    In this work, we study the relation between two types of proofs
of proximity that are minimally interactive; namely, MA and AM
proofs of proximity, which can be viewed as the property testing
analogue of the class MA (i.e., “randomized NP”) and AM, respec-
tively, and are described in more detail next.
    Informally speaking, an MA proof of proximity (MAP) protocol
consists of a tester (or rather a veriﬁer) that receives oracle access
to an input function f and also receives explicit access to a short
purported proof w. Based on the proof string and a few oracle
queries to f , the veriﬁer should decide whether f has some property
Π (i.e., whether f ∈ Π). More speciﬁcally, after reading the proof
w, the veriﬁer tosses random coins, makes queries to the oracle f
and decides whether to accept or reject. We require the following
completeness and soundness conditions: if f ∈ Π, then there exists
a proof w that the veriﬁer accepts with high probability, and if
f is “far” (in Hamming distance) from any function in Π, then
the veriﬁer rejects with high probability. Following the literature,
the complexity of an MAP is the total number of bits that the
veriﬁer observes—namely, the sum of its proof length and query
complexity.1
    The reason that the foregoing model is referred to as a “Merlin-
Arthur” protocol is that we think of the prover as being Merlin (the
all powerful magician) and the veriﬁer as Arthur (a mere mor-
tal). Then, in the MAP model Merlin “speaks” ﬁrst (i.e., sends the
proof) and Arthur “speaks” second (i.e., tosses his random coins).
    It is natural to ask what happens if we switch the order—letting
Arthur toss his coins ﬁrst and Merlin send his proof after seeing
Arthur’s coin tosses. This type of protocol is typically referred to
as an “Arthur-Merlin” protocol. More precisely, an AM proof of
proximity (AMP) is deﬁned similarly to an MAP, except that now
     1
     Alternatively, one could view the running time of the veriﬁer (which serves
as an upper bound on the query and communication complexities) as the main
resource to be minimized. However, for simplicity (and following the property
testing literature), we focus on combinatorial resources. This only makes our
lower bounds stronger, whereas for all of our upper bounds the veriﬁer is also
computationally eﬃcient.
12 Page 4 of 44                    Gur, Liu & Rothblum                      cc


the proof oracle is a function of the veriﬁer’s entire random string.
We view AMPs as minimally interactive, since given a common
random string, the protocol consists of a single message (i.e., the
proof). Analogously to MAPs, the complexity of an AMP is the
sum of its proof length and query complexity. We emphasize that
the prover’s message can depend on all of the veriﬁer’s coin tosses.
Namely, the veriﬁer cannot toss an additional coins after receiving
its message from the prover.2
    While the diﬀerence between these two proof systems may ap-
pear minor, MA-type and AM-type proofs naturally admit very
diﬀerent types of strategies. In particular, note that AM proofs
provide the additional power of allowing the prover and veriﬁer
to jointly restrict their attention to a random subset of the input
function’s domain. On the other hand, the AM model also signiﬁ-
cantly hampers the power of the veriﬁer to detect malicious prover
strategies, since the prover knows the entire randomness of the ver-
iﬁer, and in particular the prover knows which queries the veriﬁer
will make.
    At ﬁrst glance, it may seem that AMPs are extremely limited,
since the prover can predict exactly what the veriﬁer will check
(knowing the veriﬁer’s entire random string allows the prover to
deduce which queries the veriﬁer will make). However, it turns
out that a straightforward adaptation of the classical MA ⊆ AM
inclusion (Babai & Moran 1988) implies that any MAP can be
emulated by an AMP at a quadratic cost. (More precisely, an MAP
with proof complexity p and query complexity q can be emulated
by an AMP with proof length p and query complexity O(p · q).3 )
   2
      In contrast, the complexity class AM is sometimes deﬁned as any constant-
round public-coin interactive proof-system. Indeed, if one does not care about
polynomial factors, then by a result of Babai and Moran (Babai & Moran
1988), any public-coin constant-round interactive proof can be reduced to just
2 messages.
    3
       The idea is to ﬁrst reduce the soundness error of the MAP to 2−O(p)
(by repetition). Now, suppose that the veriﬁer reveals its randomness to the
prover before receiving the proof-string. For soundness, observe that when f
is far from having the property, for any ﬁxed proof-string the probability that
the veriﬁer would accept is at most 2−Ω(p) and so by a union bound, with
high probability there simply does not exist a proof-string that will make the
veriﬁer accept.
cc            Separation Between MAP and AMP              Page 5 of 44    12


         It is natural to ask the following converse question:

Can any AMP protocol be emulated by an MAP, or is there a gap
          between the power of these two models?

Note that any AMP can be easily emulated by an MAP with at
most an exponential overhead.4 Thus, the question that we would
really like to answer is whether such an exponential overhead is
inherent.

1.1. Our results. Our main result shows that it is indeed the
case that AMPs can be exponentially stronger than MAPs and so
the foregoing emulation strategy is optimal, up to polynomial fac-
tors:

Theorem 1.1. There exists a property Π ⊆ {f : [n] → [n]} such
that:

         ◦ Π has an AMP of complexity O (log(n)/ε), with respect to
           proximity parameter ε > 0; and

         ◦ Every MAP for Π, with respect to proximity parameter ε ≤
            1                            1
           10
              , must have complexity Ω(n 4 ).

    The property Π that we use to prove Theorem 1.1 is actually
very simple and natural. Speciﬁcally, Π is the set of all permuta-
tions over [n]; the goal of the veriﬁer is to check whether a given
function f : [n] → [n] is close to being a permutation by querying
the function in a few locations and with a short interaction with
the prover.
    The AMP protocol for deciding whether a given function f :
[n] → [n] is a permutation is extremely simple. The idea is that
the random string speciﬁes some random element y ∈ [n] and the
prover should specify an inverse x of y (under f ). If f is a permu-
tation such an element must exist whereas if f is ε-far from being
a permutation, then with probability ε it holds that y simply does
     4
    Any AMP with proof complexity p and query complexity q can be emu-
lated by a tester (i.e., an MAP which does not use a proof at all) with query
complexity q · 2p by simply trying all possible candidate proof strings.
12 Page 6 of 44                    Gur, Liu & Rothblum                     cc


not have an inverse. We can repeat the base protocol O(1/ε) times
to get constant soundness error. This protocol can actually be
traced back to a result of Bellare and Yung (Bellare & Yung 1996)
who used it resolve a gap in the (Feige et al. 1999) construction
of non-interactive zero-knowledge proofs for NP based on trapdoor
permutations.
    Our MAP lower bound for deciding whether a function is close
to being a permutation can actually be established using techniques
due to Aaronson (Aaronson 2012). In more detail, (Aaronson 2012)
showed a QMA lower bound of Ω(n1/6 ) for this problem, but it
seems as though his technique can also be used to derive an Ω(n1/4 )
MAP lower bound.
    However, we take a diﬀerent and more general approach. We
show that any property that satisﬁes a relaxed notion √of k-wise
independence requires MAPs with complexity roughly k. This
result generalizes a recent result of Fischer, Goldhirsh and Lachish
(Fischer et√ al. 2014) which can be interpreted as an MAP lower
bound of k for properties that are exactly k-wise independent.5
Our proof is also considerably simpler than that of (Fischer et al.
2014) and in particular uses only elementary arguments, see further
discussion in Section 1.2. We show that the permutation property
that we consider satisﬁes
                      √ the relaxed notion of k-wise independence
                                                               1
with respect to k = n, which implies a lower bound of Ω(n 4 ).
    Of particular relevance, Aaronson (Aaronson 2012) considered
the problem of deciding whether a function is close to a permuta-
tion to derive a quantum query complexity separation between the
class QMA and the class of statistical zero knowledge SZK, show-
ing that every QMA query complexity algorithm with a w-qubit
witness and query complexity q must satisfy q + w = Ω(n1/6 ). This
in turn implies that the permutation property requires MAP com-
plexity Ω(n1/6 ). We have been informed that a similar method
may be used to show that the permutation property requires MAP
complexity Ω(n1/4 ).

   5
    More precisely, (Fischer et al. 2014) show that any linear code with large
dual distance requires MAPs of complexity that is roughly square root of the
code’s blocklength.
cc       Separation Between MAP and AMP            Page 7 of 44   12


1.1.1. Oblivious proofs of proximity. Having established The-
orem 1.1, we revisit the MA versus AM problem within the con-
text of proofs of proximity with prover-oblivious queries (a notion
ﬁrst considered in (Rothblum et al. 2013) and further explored in
(Gur & Rothblum 2018)), or in short oblivious proofs of proximity.
These are proofs of proximity that have the special feature that
the queries that the veriﬁer makes are independent of the proof.
Viewed from a temporal perspective, in these proof systems the
veriﬁer first makes its queries to the input function, and only af-
ter making all of its queries does it receive the proof. One reason
that makes this feature appealing is because it allows the veriﬁer
to probe the object and obtain a certiﬁcate, which can then be
used later when interacting with a prover, even if the object is no
longer accessible. Another reason is that many of the interactive
proof systems from the literature (e.g., the sumcheck protocol of
(Lund et al. 1992)) are oblivious.
    Surprisingly, it turns out that the gap between the power of
oblivious AMPs and MAPs is dramatically smaller than the one ex-
hibited in Theorem 1.1. Loosely speaking, we show that oblivious
AMPs can only be quadratically stronger than oblivious MAPs, and
in fact, standard testers (that do not use a proof).

Theorem 1.2. For any property Π, if there exists an oblivious
AMP for Π with proof complexity p and query complexity q, then
there also exists a tester (i.e., MAP with proof complexity 0) for Π
with query complexity O(p · q).

   As an application, we use Theorem 1.2 to derive lower bounds
on public-coin oblivious interactive proofs of proximity and show an
exponential separation between public-coin and private-coin pro-
tocols in this setting. See further discussion in Section 5.

1.2. Related works. The notion of proofs of proximity was
originally proposed by Ergün, Kumar and Rubinfeld. Ben Sas-
son et al. (Ben-Sasson et al. 2006) and Dinur and Reingold (Dinur
& Reingold 2006) considered such proofs in the context of PCPs.
Rothblum, Vadhan and Wigderson (Rothblum et al. 2013) consid-
ered interactive proofs of proximity and showed that every lan-
12 Page 8 of 44               Gur, Liu & Rothblum                cc


guage computable by a low-depth circuit has an interactive proof
of proximity (IPP) with a sublinear time veriﬁer. Reingold, Roth-
blum, and Rothblum (Reingold et al. 2016) showed constant-round
IPPs for any language computable in polynomial-time and bounded
polynomial-space. Goldreich and Gur (Goldreich & Gur 2016a,b)
showed general-purpose IPP with only 3 rounds, albeit for a much
smaller class.
    Proofs of proximity were further studied by (Goldreich et al.
2015b) who showed more eﬃcient constructions for certain re-
stricted complexity classes, such as functions accepted by small
read-once branching programs and context-free languages. Gur
and Rothblum proved a round hierarchy theorem for IPPs (Gur
& Rothblum 2017), showing that the power of IPPs gradually in-
creases with the number of rounds of interaction. Several works
focused on studying non-interactive (MA) proofs of proximity (Fis-
cher et al. 2014; Goldreich et al. 2015a; Gur & Rothblum 2018)
(see also (Gur 2017)). In addition, recent works studied (computa-
tionally sound) interactive arguments of proximity (Kalai & Roth-
blum 2015), zero-knowledge proofs of proximity (Berman et al.
2017), and proofs of proximity for distribution testing (Chiesa &
Gur 2017). Proofs of proximity have also found applications to
property testing and related models (Fischer et al. 2015; Gur &
Rothblum 2016, 2017). We remark that a concurrent work of
Berman et al. (Berman et al. 2017) utilizes our results (speciﬁ-
cally Theorem 1.1) to derive a separation between the power of
MAPs and zero-knowledge IPPs.
    The notion of MA and AM proofs plays a central role in the
study of proofs system in various computational models, other than
in the setting of polynomial-time Turing machines in which they
were originally conceived (Babai & Moran 1988). For example,
in quantum computation, the class QMA (quantum MA proofs)
captures the most fundamental type of quantum proof systems
(since quantum algorithms are inherently randomized) and it has
been extensively studied in the last couple of decades (see survey
(Aharonov & Naveh 2002)).
    In addition, MA and AM proof systems received much atten-
tion in the setting of communication complexity (Babai et al. 1986;
cc        Separation Between MAP and AMP                Page 9 of 44    12


Göös et al. 2015; Klauck 2003, 2011; Raz & Shpilka 2004; Sherstov
2016) and streaming algorithms (Chakrabarti et al. 2014, 2015;
Cormode et al. 2010, 2011; Gur & Raz 2015; Thaler 2016). The
former also has an interesting connection to the algebrization bar-
rier (Aaronson & Wigderson 2009) and recently found important
applications to distributed PCPs and hardness of approximation
(Abboud et al. 2017).6 The latter can be viewed as the property
testing analogue of online annotated data streams (there, instead
of oracle access to the input, the algorithm has one-pass sequential
access to the input, and the goal is to minimize space complexity
rather than query complexity). Indeed, part of our results concern-
ing oblivious proofs of proximity are inspired by the techniques for
online annotated data streams in (Chakrabarti et al. 2015).
    Perhaps most relevant to us, the notion of MA and AM proofs
for decision tree complexity (or the “query complexity model”),
which can be thought of as property testing for exact (rather than
approximate) decision problems, is closely related to proofs of prox-
imity, though the query complexity model is much simpler to an-
alyze than property testing. We remark that the high-level ap-
proach of our main lower bound for MAPs is inspired by the work
of Raz et al. (Raz et al. 1998).

Comparison with the techniques in (Fischer et al. 2014).
As we discussed above, our MAP lower bound generalizes the main
result of Fischer, Goldhirsh, and Lachish (Fischer et al. 2014). The
latter result can be interpreted as an MAP lower bound for any k-
wise independent property. Our lower bound extends to a natural
generalization of this family. We stress that this extension is crucial
for our main result, as the permutation property (with respect to
which we prove Theorem 1.1) is not k-wise independent, but does
     6
    We remark that there are several similarities between MA and AM proof
systems in the setting of property testing and communication complexity. In
particular, simulating MA communication complexity protocols by their AM
counterparts can also be done while only incurring a quadratic blow-up in
complexity, and on the other hand, AM protocols can also be exponentially
more powerful than MA protocols (Klauck 2011). In addition, oblivious MA
proofs of proximity can be viewed as analogous to online MA communication
complexity protocols (Chakrabarti et al. 2015).
12 Page 10 of 44                     Gur, Liu & Rothblum                      cc


satisfy our more general notion.7
    The proof in (Fischer et al. 2014) is technically quite involved
and includes several subtle and non-trivial arguments. For exam-
ple, while typically property testing lower bounds are shown by
exhibiting two distributions that are chosen only as a function of
the property, the argument in (Fischer et al. 2014) crucially re-
lies on distributions that are functions of both the property and
the description of the speciﬁc analyzed algorithm. This entails the
usage of several complex mechanisms. For example, they rely on
an involved treatment of adaptivity, which consists of procedures
for “grafting” decision trees, and use a special type of algorithms
(called “readers”) that expose low-entropy portions. Perhaps the
most signiﬁcant complication is that their argument uses a deli-
cate information theoretic analysis to handle MAPs that have a
two-sided error.
    In contrast, our proof is much shorter and consists purely of a
combinatorial argument, which does not require any special treat-
ment of adaptivity and two-sided error and does not use informa-
tion theory.

1.3. Organization. In Section 2, we introduce the notations
and deﬁnitions that we use throughout this work. In Section 3,
we prove our main technical contribution, which is an MAP lower
bound for relaxed k-wise independent properties. In Section 4, we
derive our main result: an exponential separation between MAPs
and AMPs. In Section 5, we present and prove our results regard-
ing oblivious proofs of proximity. Finally, in Section 6, we conclude
with a discussion and raise open problems.




   7
     Jumping ahead, we remark that our relaxed notion of k-wise independence
refers to distributions for which the probability that any subset of k indices is
equal to any given sequence of k values is upper bounded by the same proba-
bility given the uniform distribution up to a multiplicative constant (whereas
the standard (i.e., non-relaxed) notion requires exact equality). See further
details in Section 3.
cc       Separation Between MAP and AMP             Page 11 of 44   12


                       2. Preliminaries
In this section, we establish the deﬁnitions and notions that we
will need throughout this work.

2.1. Properties and distance. We focus on testing properties
of functions and identify a “property” with the set of functions
having that property. More accurately, for each n ∈ N, let Dn and
Rn be sets. Let Fn be the set of functions      from Dn to Rn . We
deﬁne a property as an ensemble Π = n Πn , where Πn ⊆ Fn for
all n.
    For an alphabet Σ, we denote the Hamming distance between
two strings x, y ∈ Σn by Δ(x, y) := |{xi = yi : i ∈ [n]}|. If
Δ(x, y) ≤ ε · n, we say that x is ε-close to y; otherwise, we say that
x is ε-far from y. For a non-empty set S ⊆ Σn , we similarly deﬁne
Δ(x, S) := miny∈S Δ(x, y). Again, if Δ(x, S) ≤ ε · n, we also say
that x is ε-close to S and otherwise x is ε-far from S. We extend
these deﬁnitions to functions by identifying functions with their
truth tables (viewed as strings).

Integrality. Throughout this work, for simplicity of notation, we
use the convention that all (relevant) integer parameters that are
stated as real numbers are implicitly rounded to the closest integer.

2.2. Proofs of proximity. We recall the deﬁnitions of MA and
AM proofs of proximity (i.e., MAPs and AMPs), following (Gur
& Rothblum 2018). Throughout, for an algorithm V we denote
by V f (n, ε, w) the output of V given oracle access to a function
f and explicit access to inputs n, ε, and w; if V is a probabilistic
algorithm, we write Pr[V f (n, ε, w) = z] to represent the probability
over the internal randomness of V that this outcome is z.

Definition 2.1 (MAP).        A Merlin–Arthur proof of proximity (MAP)
for a property Π = n Πn consists of a probabilistic algorithm V ,
called the verifier, that is given as explicit inputs an integer n ∈ N,
a proximity parameter ε > 0, and a proof string w ∈ {0, 1}∗ . In
addition, it is given oracle access to a function f ∈ Fn . The verifier
satisfies the following conditions.
12 Page 12 of 44               Gur, Liu & Rothblum                 cc


  (i) Completeness: For every n ∈ N and f ∈ Πn , there exists
      a string w (the proof) such that for every ε > 0 the verifier
      accepts with high probability; that is,
                                              2
                       Pr V f (n, ε, w; r) = 1 ≥ .
                        r                       3

 (ii) Soundness: For every n ∈ N, function f ∈ Fn , string w,
      and proximity parameter ε > 0, if f is ε-far from Πn , then
      the verifier rejects with high probability; that is,

                                              2
                       Pr V f (n, ε, w; r) = 0 ≥ .
                        r                       3
A MAP is said to have query complexity q : N × R+ → N if for every
n ∈ N, ε > 0, f ∈ Fn , and string w ∈ {0, 1}∗ , the veriﬁer reads
at most q(n, ε) bits in its queries to f . We say that a MAP has
proof complexity p : N → N if for every n ∈ N, there always exists a
w ∈ {0, 1}p(n) satisfying the conditions of Deﬁnition 2.1. We deﬁne
the complexity of the MAP to be t(n, ε) = q(n, ε) + p(n).
   Next, we deﬁne AM proofs of proximity (AMPs) similarly to
MAPs, except that here the proof is also a function of the inner
randomness of the veriﬁer (alternatively, the veriﬁer ﬁrst sends the
prover its entire random string and is deterministic after that).
Here, we use Pr[V f (n, ε, w; r) = z] to represent the probability
over the random string r that this outcome is z.

Definition 2.2 (AMP).        An Arthur–Merlin proof of proximity (AMP)
for a property Π = n Πn consists of a probabilistic algorithm V ,
called the verifier, that is given as explicit inputs an integer n ∈ N,
a proximity parameter ε > 0, and a proof string w that depends on
the veriﬁer’s random string r, as well as oracle access to a function
f ∈ Fn . The verifier must also be deterministic given the random
string r. The protocol satisfies the following conditions.

  (i) Completeness: For every n ∈ N and f ∈ Πn ,
                                                      2
           Pr ∃w = w(r) such that V f (n, ε, w; r) = 1 ≥ .
            r                                           3
cc         Separation Between MAP and AMP               Page 13 of 44     12


 (ii) Soundness: For every n ∈ N, function f ∈ Fn , and proxim-
      ity parameter ε > 0, if f is ε-far from Πn , then:
                                                         1
            Pr ∃w = w(r) such that V f (n, ε, w; r) = 1 ≤ .
             r                                             3
    Analogously to MAPs, an AMP is said to have query complexity
q : N × R+ → N if for every n ∈ N, ε > 0, f ∈ Fn , and string
w ∈ {0, 1}∗ , the veriﬁer reads at most q(n, ε) bits in its queries to
f ; and proof complexity p : N × R+ → N if for every n ∈ N and
f ∈ Fn , with probability at least 23 over coin tosses r in the ﬁrst
round, there exists a w(r) ∈ {0, 1}p(n,ε) satisfying the completeness
condition of Deﬁnition 2.2. We deﬁne the complexity of the AMP
to be t(n, ε) = q(n, ε) + p(n, ε).
    We note that we do not include the randomness complexity of
the veriﬁer in the complexity of the protocol (although the random-
ness complexity in all the protocols described in this work is not
large). This is a similar choice to what is done in similar contexts
such as AM query and communication complexities. Moreover, we
show in Appendix A (see Theorem A.1) that if a property Π of
functions f : Dn → Rn , such that |Rn ||Dn | = O(exp(poly(n))),
admits an AMP veriﬁer with query complexity q and proof com-
plexity p, then it also admits an AMP veriﬁer with query com-
plexity O(q), proof complexity O(p), and randomness complexity
O(log n).8 This transformation is similar to known results of New-
man(Newman 1991) in the context of communication complexity,
Goldreich and Sheﬀet (Goldreich & Sheﬀet 2010) in the context of
property testing, and Gur and Rothblum (Gur & Rothblum 2018)
for MAPs. Its main disadvantage, however, is that it does not
preserve the computational complexity of the veriﬁer.

         3. MAP lower bound for (relaxed) k-wise
                       independence
In this section, we show a general MAP lower bound for a large
class of properties. More speciﬁcally, we show that any MAP for a
     8
     For most properties, we have that both the domain and range have size
that is polynomial in n. Indeed, the case that |Rn ||Dn | = ω(f (n)) for some
superpolynomial function f (n) seems quite pathological.
12 Page 14 of 44                       Gur, Liu & Rothblum                         cc


(non-degenerate)√ property that is k-wise independent, must have
complexity Ω( k). By a k-wise independent property, we mean
that if we sample a random element having the property, then its
restriction to any k coordinates looks uniform. As mentioned in the
introduction, this generalizes a result due to Fischer et al. (Fischer
et al. 2014).
    We would like to apply this lower bound to the permutation
property. However, the permutation property is not k-wise inde-
pendent and so we cannot apply it directly.9 Rather, we give a
relaxed notion of k-wise independence that does capture the per-
mutation property and for which we can similarly derive an MAP
lower bound.
    We proceed to deﬁne our relaxed notion of k-wise independence.
Recall that we use Fn to denote the set of all functions from Dn
to Rn (see Section 2).
                                                                               
Definition 3.1 (Relaxed k-wise Independence). Let Π = n≥1 Πn
be a property, where Πn ⊂ Fn for every n. We say that Π is re-
laxed k-wise independent, for k = k(n), if there exists a constant
C ≥ 1 such that for all positive integers n, all pairwise distinct k-
tuples (i1 , i2 , . . . , ik ) ∈ (Dn )k and arbitrary (t1 , t2 , . . . , tk ) ∈ (Rn )k ,
we have that
                                                            C
(3.2)               Pr f (ij ) = tj for all j ∈ [k] ≤                .
                  f ∈Πn                                    |Rn |k

    Note that the standard deﬁnition of k-wise independence corre-
sponds to the special case of Deﬁnition 3.1 when C = 1 (in which
case the inequality in (3.2) can be replaced with an equality).
    At ﬁrst glance, it may seem that the relaxation that we allow in
Deﬁnition 3.1 is relatively minor and any lower bound that holds
for the full-ﬂedged deﬁnition should easily be extendable to our
relaxed variant. We argue that it is not the case. For example,
in a seminal work, Braverman (Braverman 2011) showed that any
k-wise independent distribution (for k that is poly-logarithmic)
fools AC0 circuits. Now, consider the permutation property (to be
   9
    Indeed, it is not even pairwise independent: the chance of seeing the same
element twice is zero.
cc        Separation Between MAP and AMP             Page 15 of 44   12


deﬁned formally in Section 4) which as noted above is not even
pairwise
      √ independent but does satisfy our relaxed variant (with
k = n). It is not too hard to see that there is a very simple
AC0 circuit for checking whether a function is a permutation: sim-
ply by checking whether there exist a pair of entries in the truth
table that are identical—thus, our seemingly minor relaxation com-
pletely sidesteps Braverman’s result. As a matter of fact, a similar
situation occurs in the context of AMPs: Rothblum et al. (Roth-
blum et al. 2013) showed an AMP lower bound for any exact k-wise
independent distribution, whereas we show a protocol for the per-
mutation property with logarithmic complexity.
    Having deﬁned our notion of relaxed k-wise independence, we
proceed to describe a second important condition that we require:
namely, that the property is sparse, in the sense that a random
function is far from the property. Sparsity is essential for our result
since there are trivial properties that are k-wise independent but
are testable with very few queries (e.g., the property that consists
of all functions).

Definition 3.3 (Sparse Property). Fix
                                     the proximity parameter
     1
ε = 10 . We say that a property Πn = n∈N Πn is t(n)-sparse if:

             Pr [f is ε-far from Πn ] ≥ 1 − |Rn |−t(n) .
            f ∈Fn


     We can now state our main theorem for this section.

Theorem 3.4. Let Π be a relaxed k-wise independent and k-
sparse property. Then, any MAP for Π, with respect to proximity
parameter ε = 1/10, with proof complexity p and query complexity
q must satisfy p · q = Ω(k).

    The intuition and high-level approach for the proof are as fol-
lows. First, we use the duality of an MAP as a collection of partial
testers (Fischer et al. 2014). More speciﬁcally, the existence of
an MAP for a property Π implies that there is some large “sub-
property” Π ⊆ Π and a tester T that distinguishes between inputs
in Π from those that are far from Π.
12 Page 16 of 44                Gur, Liu & Rothblum                 cc


    This simple observation reduces lower bounding MAPs for Π
to lower bounding a partial tester for an arbitrary, but large, sub-
property. To show such a lower bound, consider the uniform distri-
bution on Π vs. the uniform distribution over functions that are
far from Π. We would like to argue that these two distributions
look the same to T , which therefore cannot distinguish between
them.
    As a matter of fact, we will argue that both these distributions
are “close” to being k-wise independent, which suﬃces as long as k
is larger than the tester’s query complexity. First, by the sparsity
condition we have that the uniform distribution over functions that
are far from Π is close to the uniform distribution over all functions.
Clearly, the latter is k-wise independent.
    As for the uniform distribution over Π , we would like to argue
that since Π covers a substantial part of Π, which is relaxed k-
wise independent, then also Π is relaxed k-wise independent. The
problem with this argument is that Π only consists of a 2−p fraction
of Π, and so it could be quite far from being even relaxed k-wise
independent (e.g., it could be that the value of functions in Π on
some ﬁxed elements of Rn is constant over all functions in Π ).
    This seems like a signiﬁcant diﬃculty and was overcome using
highly elaborate techniques in (Fischer et al. 2014). In contrast,
we suggest a much simpler argument. The idea is that we ﬁrst
reduce the soundness error of the MAP to 2−O(p) by repetition.
This increases the query complexity of the tester to O(p · q) but
now that the soundness error is so small, that the fact that Π
covers a 2−p fraction of Π is suﬃcient to make the argument go
through.
    We proceed to the actual proof.

3.1. Proof of Theorem 3.4. Let C be a constant such that Πn
satisﬁes the constraints of Deﬁnition 3.1.
    Let V be an MAP veriﬁer, with respect to proximity parameter
ε, for Πn , and denote its proof complexity by p and query com-
plexity by q. Note that any MAP with standard 2/3 completeness
and soundness probability (as in Deﬁnition 2.1) can be ampliﬁed,
via O(p) repetitions, to have completeness and soundness errors
 1
10C
     · 2−p at the cost of increasing the query (but not the proof)
cc       Separation Between MAP and AMP              Page 17 of 44    12


complexity by a multiplicative factor of O(p), to O(p · q). For con-
creteness, let us ﬁx a constant C  such that a (C  ·p)-fold repetition
                                                  1
of V has completeness and soundness errors 10C      · 2−p (while having
                                                
proof complexity p and query complexity C · p · q). Assume toward
a contradiction that p · q ≤ 10Ck
                                  .

    Recall that for Π ⊆ Π, a (Π, Π )-partial tester (a notion due to
                      

(Fischer et al. 2014)) is a tester that is required to accept functions
in the subset Π and reject functions that are ε-far from the superset
Π. As pointed out by Fischer et al. (Fischer et al. 2014) an MAP
as we assumed above, implies a covering of the property by partial
testers as follows. For every possible proof string w ∈ {0, 1}p , let
                                                     1        
     Sw = f ∈ Πn : Pr V f (n, ε, w) = 1 ≥ 1 −               · 2−p .
                                                       10C
    By the completeness requirement
                                         of an MAP, these sets cover
the property Πn . That is, w Sw = Πn .
    Since the number of sets Sw is at most 2p , there exists a proof w
that corresponds to a large Sw . Namely, such that |Sw | ≥ |Πn |·2−p .
We ﬁx such a proof w and argue that the corresponding (Πn , Sw )-
partial tester must make Ω(k) queries, which would contradict our
assumption, thereby proving Theorem 3.4. Hence, we have reduced
proving an MAP lower bound for Πn to proving a partial testing
lower bound for (Πn , Sw ).
    Let Vwf (n, ε) := V f (n, ε, w) be the (Sw , Πn )-partial tester that
is induced by V when we ﬁx the proof string w (and with respect
to parameters n and ε). We use the notation Vwf (n, ε; r) to denote
the deterministic output Vwf when its random string is set to r.
    Let Bε = {f ∈ Fn : f is ε-far from Πn } (i.e., the no-instances).
As is standard in the property testing literature, we prove a lower
bound on the query complexity q  of a tester by presenting a dis-
tribution over YES-instances (f ∈ Sw ) and a distribution over
NO-instances (f ∈ Bε ) and bounding away from 1 the distin-
guishing probability for every deterministic algorithm making q 
queries. Speciﬁcally, we give distributions over Sw and Bε such
that any deterministic algorithm making q  queries to f has at
               1
most a 1 − 4C     · 2−p probability of distinguishing between them,
which is suﬃcient for our purposes. In our case, we simply con-
sider the uniform distributions over Sw and Bε .
12 Page 18 of 44                     Gur, Liu & Rothblum                       cc


    More formally, we ﬁrst observe that
                                                         
      Ef ∈Sw Pr Vwf (n, ε; r) = 1 − Ef ∈Bε Pr Vwf (n, ε; r) = 1
                    r                                  r
                                                            
(3.5) = Er          Pr Vwf (n, ε; r) = 1 − Pr Vwf (n, ε; r) = 1 ,
                f ∈Sw                         f ∈Bε


By Eq. (3.5), it suﬃces to bound the distinguishing probably for
any deterministic veriﬁer. We do this via the following lemma.

Lemma 3.6. For any deterministic verifier W with query complex-
            k
ity at most 10 , we have that

                                               1
      Pr W f (n, ε) = 1 − Pr W f (n, ε) = 1 ≤ 1 −    · 2−p .
    f ∈Sw                f ∈Bε                    4C

Proof.       We ﬁrst show that
                              1                         
(3.7)      Pr W f (n, ε) = 1 ≥    · 2−p · Pr W f (n, ε) = 1 .
          f ∈Bε                2C        f ∈Sw


      We can view the veriﬁer W as a decision tree of depth q  =
k/10. Each leaf of the decision tree is associated with indices
i1 , i2 , . . . , iq ∈ Dn and values t1 , t2 , . . . , tq ∈ Rn such that a func-
tion f ∈ Fn is accepted at that leaf if and only if f (ij ) = tj for all
j ∈ [q  ]. We may assume without loss of generality that the sets
of indices i1 , . . . , iq for all paths in the decision tree are pairwise
distinct. Fix such a sequence of indices i1 , . . . , iq ∈ Dn and values
t1 , . . . , tq ∈ Rn . Then,

                                              
(3.8)        Pr f (ij ) = tj for all j ∈ [q  ]
            f ∈Bε
              | {f ∈ Fn : f (ij ) = tj for all j ∈ [q  ]} | − |Fn \Bε |
            ≥
                                        |Bε |
                 1             1
            ≥          −
              |Rn | q     |Rn |k − 1
                  1
(3.9)       ≥           .
              2|Rn |q
cc           Separation Between MAP and AMP                     Page 19 of 44        12


    Here, we have used k-sparsity to note that |F|B       n \Bε |
                                                             ε|
                                                                  ≤ |Rn1|k −1 ,
and we used that q  = 10
                        k
                           . On the other hand, we also have that:
                                                
(3.10)         Pr f (ij ) = tj for all j ∈ [q  ]
             f ∈Sw
                                                       
                 Prf ∈Πn f (ij ) = tj for all j ∈ [q  ]       C · 2p
(3.11)       ≤                                            ≤
                            Prf ∈Πn [f ∈ Sw ]                  |Rn |q
by relaxed q  -wise independence and the lower bound on the size
of Sw .
    Dividing (3.8) by (3.10), we obtain that
                                                 1
      Pr [f (ij ) = tj for all j ∈ [q  ]] ≥         · 2−p · Pr
     f ∈Bε                                      2C           f ∈Sw

                                               [f (ij ) = tj for all j ∈ [q  ]] .

    Now, summing the above equation over all leaves of the decision
tree corresponding to W (since these correspond to disjoint events)
gives us (3.7).
    Given (3.7), we now consider two cases. First, if
                                            1
                     Pr W f (n, ε) = 1 ≤ 1 −    · 2−p
                   f ∈Sw                     2C
we are obviously done. Otherwise, we can assume that
                                            1
                     Pr W f (n, ε) = 1 > 1 −    · 2−p
                   f ∈Sw                     2C
and so:
                                                   
                 Pr W f (n, ε) = 1 − Pr W f (n, ε) = 1
                f ∈Sw                     f ∈Bε
                     1                         
                ≤1−    · 2−p · Pr W f (n, ε) = 1
                    2C         f ∈Sw

                     1                  1
                ≤1−    · 2−p · 1 −        · 2−p
                    2C                 2C
                     1
                ≤1−    · 2−p ,
                    4C
where the ﬁrst inequality is by (3.7). The lemma follows.
                                                                                     
12 Page 20 of 44              Gur, Liu & Rothblum                cc


    Now, we are ready to use Lemma 3.6 to complete our proof of
Theorem 3.4. Because Vwf has completeness and soundness errors
 1
10C
    · 2−p , we have that
                                                      
   Ef ∈Sw Pr Vwf (n, ε; r) = 1 − Ef ∈Bε Pr Vwf (n, ε; r) = 1
            r                             r
          1            1
    ≥1−       · 2−p −     · 2−p
        10C           10C
         1
    =1−     · 2−p .
        5C

On the other hand, by (3.5) and Lemma 3.6, it holds that
                                                      
   Ef ∈Sw Pr Vwf (n, ε; r) = 1 − Ef ∈Bε Pr Vwf (n, ε; r) = 1
            r                             r
         1
    ≤1−    · 2−p ,
        4C
which is a contradiction. Therefore, we can conclude that p · q ≥
  k
10C 
      , as desired.

 4. An exponential gap between MAP and AMP
In this section, we prove Theorem 1.1, by exhibiting a property
with an exponential gap between its AMP and MAP complexities.
In fact, we show this separation result with respect to the permu-
tation property, which we deﬁne next:
                                                              
Definition 4.1 (The Permutation Property). Let Perm = n Permn
be the property, where Permn consists of all functions f : [n] → [n]
that are permutations.

   To prove Theorem 1.1, we prove the following upper and lower
bounds for the permutation property.

Lemma 4.2 (AMP upper bound). There exists an AMP, with re-
spect to proximity parameter ε > 0, for Perm with proof complexity
O(log(n)/ε) and query complexity O(1/ε).
cc       Separation Between MAP and AMP                 Page 21 of 44    12


Lemma 4.3 (MAP lower bound). Any MAP, with respect to prox-
imity parameter ε ≤ 1/10, for Perm with √ proof complexity p and
query complexity q must satisfy p · q = Ω( n).
                      √
Note that p · q = Ω( n) implies that p + q = Ω(n1/4 ), and so
combining Lemma 4.2 and Lemma 4.3 shows that Perm has an
AMP with logarithmic complexity, whereas any MAP for Perm has
complexity Ω(n1/4 ). This proves Theorem 1.1.

Section organization. The rest of this section is devoted to the
proofs of Lemma 4.2 and Lemma 4.3. We ﬁrst prove the AMP
upper bound (Lemma 4.2) in Section 4.1 and then, the MAP lower
bound (Lemma 4.3) in Section 4.2.

4.1. AMP upper bound—proof of Lemma 4.2. The AMP for
checking whether f : [n] → [n] is a permutation proceeds as follows.
First, the veriﬁer randomly selects O (1/ε) integers from [n] (with
repetition). Denote this (multi-)set of integers by S. The veriﬁer
sends S to the prover and expects to get in response a sequence
of integers (ts )s∈S . After receiving these, the veriﬁer simply checks
whether f (ts ) = s for every s ∈ S. If so, it accepts, and otherwise,
it rejects.
    The proof complexity of this protocol is O (log(n)/ε), as the
prover uses O(log n) bits to specify each ts . The query complexity
is O (1/ε).

Completeness. Suppose f ∈ Permn , i.e., f is indeed a permu-
tation. The prover can respond with (ts )s∈S , where ts = f −1 (s)
for every s ∈ S. Given this response, the veriﬁer accepts with
probability 1.

Soundness. Assume that f : [n] → [n] is ε-far from Permn . Note
that the range of f has size at most (1 − ε) · n, i.e., |{f (i) : i ∈
[n]}| ≤ (1 − ε) · n.10 The only way in which the prover can convince
the veriﬁer to accept is if for all s ∈ S it holds that s is in the range
  10
    Otherwise, by changing the repeated outputs of f to diﬀerent outputs, we
can construct a permutation g that is ε-close to f .
12 Page 22 of 44                          Gur, Liu & Rothblum                   cc


of f . Therefore, the probability that the veriﬁer accepts is at most
(1 − ε)O(1/ε) which is smaller than 1/3 (by setting the constant in
the big-Oh notation to be suﬃciently large).

4.2. MAP lower bound - Proof of Lemma 4.3. We proceed
                                                        1
to show that any MAP for Perm must have complexity Ω(n 4 ). More
                                                1
accurately, for a ﬁxed proximity parameter ε = 10 , we show that
any MAP for Perm, with respect to proximity parameter ε, with
   √ complexity p and query complexity q must satisfy p · q =
proof
Ω( n).                                                    √
    To show this, √we simply show that Perm is relaxed 10n -wise
independent and n-sparse (as deﬁned in Section 3). The MAP
lower bound then follows from Theorem 3.4. This is done in the
two lemmas below. Recall that for our property Perm, we have
that Rn = [n].
                                          √
Lemma 4.4. Perm is relaxed 10n -wise independent.
                                  √
Proof. Deﬁne q := 10n . Fix pairwise distinct indices i1 , i2 , . . . , iq ∈
[n] and values t1 , t2 , . . . , tq ∈ [n]. If the tj ’s are not distinct, then
clearly it holds that:

                                                            
                     Pr          f (ij ) = tj for all j ∈ [q] = 0.
                   f ∈Perm

If the tj ’s are distinct, then:
                                                          1
        Pr        f (ij ) = tj for all j ∈ [q] =        q−1
                                                        i=0 (n − i)
       f ∈Perm

                                                     1 
                                                          q−1              −1
                                                             i
                                                   = q·   1−
                                                    n i=0    n
                                                                      −1
                                                     1      q2
                                                   ≤ q · 1−
                                                    n       2n
                                                     2
                                                   ≤ q,
                                                    n
                                                                √
where the last inequality uses the fact that q = 10n .                          
cc       Separation Between MAP and AMP              Page 23 of 44   12


   We still need to show that Perm is sparse. Recall that Bε =
{f ∈ Fn : f is ε-far from Perm} (i.e., the no-instances).
                                 1
Claim 4.5. For any constant ε ≤ 10 , we have that
                                               n
                       Pr [f ∈ Bε ] ≥ 1 − e− 10 .
                      f ∈Fn


Proof. Recall that f : [n] → [n] is ε-far from Permn if and only
if the image of f has size at most (1−ε)·n. Thus, we need to upper
bound the probability that a random function f has an image of
size greater than (1 − ε) · n.
    Let k = n2 + εn and consider the set S = {f (i) : i ∈ [k]}. If f is
to have an image with size greater than (1 − ε) · n, then certainly
we must have |S| ≥ n2 . Now, each of the values f (k + 1), . . . , f (n)
has probability at least |S|
                           n
                              ≥ 12 of colliding with a previous value.
By the Chernoﬀ bound, the probability that we get at most εn
collisions among these last n − k values is at most

                         (1 − 2ε)2 · (n − k)         n
                exp −                          ≤ e− 10
                                 2
             1
for any ε ≤ 10 , as desired.                                          

                               √
Corollary 4.6. Perm is             n-sparse.
                                         n     √
Proof.      We clearly have that e− 10 ≤ n− n for suﬃciently large
n.                                                              
     This completes the proof of Lemma 4.3.

     5. MA vs AM revisited: oblivious proofs of
                     proximity
We revisit the MA versus AM problem within the context of obliv-
ious proofs of proximity. These are proofs of proximity that have
the special feature that the queries that the veriﬁer makes are inde-
pendent of the proof (or prover messages in the interactive setting).
Such oblivious proofs should be thought of as a two phase process.
12 Page 24 of 44                    Gur, Liu & Rothblum                      cc


First, there is a query phase in which the veriﬁer can make its
queries but is not allowed to interact with the prover. In the com-
munication phase, the veriﬁer interacts with the prover (or just
receives the proof in the non-interactive setting) but is not allowed
to make any more queries.
    We thus deﬁne (equivalently to the deﬁnition in (Gur & Roth-
blum 2018; Rothblum et al. 2013)) an oblivious MAP as an MAP in
which a veriﬁer V operates in the following stages: (1) V queries
the input f , (2) V receives a proof w, and (3) V decides whether
to accept or reject according to w and the queries that it made in
the ﬁrst stage.
    The deﬁnition of oblivious AMPs is analogous, except for one
subtle point. Namely, it is crucial that the query phase is decoupled
from the proof phase; that is, the veriﬁer ﬁrst queries the input f ,
then it engages in a public-coin interaction in which it sends a
fresh random string r, receives a proof w that depends on f and
r, and rules according to w and the queries it made. In particular,
the randomness that was used for the ﬁrst step is not revealed to
the prover.11 While we ﬁnd this deﬁnition to be the most natural
one, we do remark that it has the unfortunate consequence that
an oblivious AMP according to our deﬁnition is not necessarily an
AMP. The reason is that the veriﬁer in an oblivious AMP is allowed
to toss coins that are not revealed to the prover. Still, an oblivious
AMP can be viewed as an AMAP (i.e., an AMP that is allowed to
toss coins after receiving the proof).
    In the next subsection, we show that the gap between the power
of oblivious AMPs and oblivious MAPs is much smaller than the
one exhibited in Theorem 1.1. Subsequently, we use this result to
derive an exponential separation between the power of public and
private coin oblivious proofs of proximity.


  11
    Indeed, note that if the veriﬁer also sends the old randomness that was used
to determine its queries, then the resulting proof system is rendered completely
degenerate. Namely, the veriﬁer has all the information necessary to fully
emulate the optimal prover (by say, enumerating over all possible proofs), and
thus, this model is equivalent to standard property testing (without a proof
or a prover).
cc        Separation Between MAP and AMP                 Page 25 of 44     12


5.1. A generic lower bound. In this subsection, we prove The-
orem 1.2, which shows that oblivious AMPs can only be quadrati-
cally stronger than oblivious MAPs, and in fact, standard testers.
We remark that this result generalizes the lower bound on oblivious
MAPs in (Gur & Rothblum 2018).
    Fix ε > 0 and input length n ∈ N, and let Π be any property of
inputs of length n. Suppose that there exists an AMP veriﬁer V ,
with respect to proximity parameter ε, for Π with proof complexity
p and query complexity q. We show that this implies that there ex-
ists a tester (i.e., MAP with proof complexity 0), also with respect
to proximity parameter ε, for Π with query complexity O(p · q).
We begin with a high-level overview, followed by a complete proof.

Overview. Recall that an AMP protocol has the following struc-
ture. The tester makes (possibly adaptive) queries a1 , . . . , aq to
the input function f , using randomness ρqueries . Then, the veri-
ﬁer samples fresh randomness ρmsg and sends it to the prover. In
return, the prover replies with a proof w, which may arbitrarily
depend on f , the proximity parameter ε, and the veriﬁer message
ρmsg . Finally the veriﬁer reads w and decides according to it and
the queries a1 , . . . , aq .
    The high-level idea is that since the query phase is independent
of the proof phase (i.e., the veriﬁer’s message ρmsg and the prover’s
message w), a tester can emulate all possible proofs, while using the
same samples for all invocations. To support a union bound over
all possible proofs, we wish to perform standard parallel repetition.
Indeed, this is the simple argument used in the lower bound on
oblivious MAPs in (Gur & Rothblum 2018).
    However, the situation is more involved when dealing with
oblivious AMPs. Speciﬁcally, we cannot perform standard par-
allel repetition, as this would increase the proof complexity.12 In
addition, it is not clear a priori how the veriﬁer should identify an
(emulated) valid proof, since it is possible that for some veriﬁer
message there exists a proof that always fools the veriﬁer.
  12
    This causes a “circular” argument, since we want to reduce the soundness
to be exponentially small in the proof complexity, but the ampliﬁcation itself
increases the proof complexity.
12 Page 26 of 44                  Gur, Liu & Rothblum                    cc


    The way these diﬃculties are dealt with is by observing that
since the query phase and the proof phase are decoupled, then
each oblivious AMP induces a family of testers that are determined
by the veriﬁer and prover messages. In particular, this allows us
to perform soundness ampliﬁcation on the induced testers, rather
than on the protocol, and hence, this does not increase the proof
complexity. This implies that, with high probability over veriﬁer’s
message ρmsg , each of the corresponding induced testers decides
correctly, with only an exponentially small probability of error.
    Thus, we can invoke all the testers that are induced by all
proofs that correspond to a particular veriﬁer message ρmsg , while
reusing the queries for all invocations. Finally, the completeness
and soundness of the original AMP assert that with high proba-
bility we choose a good veriﬁer message ρmsg , and so we can rule
according to the induced tester. A complete proof follows.

Proof (Proof of Theorem 1.2). We follow the notation used in
the overview. Assume, without loss of generality, that the AMP
veriﬁer V has soundness error at most 1/100 (this can be obtained
via parallel repetition, while only increasing the proof and query
complexity by a constant). For a veriﬁer message ρmsg and prover
message w denote by Tρmsg ,w the tester that is induced by ρmsg
and w = w(f, ρmsg , ε) (i.e., the decision procedure that the obliv-
ious AMP veriﬁer invokes after receiving the proof). Denote by
Tρmsg ,w (a1 , . . . , aq ; ε), the random variable that represents the out-
put of Tρmsg ,w with respect to queries a1 , . . . , aq drawn according
to V ’s distribution of queries. Let Tρ msg ,w be the induced tester
that is obtained by amplifying the soundness of Tρmsg ,w via O(p)
repetitions; denote its query complexity by q  = O(p · q), to be de-
termined precisely later. Note that all (ampliﬁed) induced testers
perform queries according to the exact same distribution.
    Consider the following tester T , which operates as follows.
   1. Query step: Make the queries a1 , . . . , aq that the (ampliﬁed)
      induced testers perform.
   2. Emulation step: Choose a uniform random string ρmsg and
      invoke the induced ampliﬁed testers {Tρ msg ,w }w∈{0,1}p with re-
      spect to proximity parameter ε and queries a1 , . . . , aq .
cc        Separation Between MAP and AMP                     Page 27 of 44   12


     3. Decision step: Accept if and only if there exists w ∈ {0, 1}p
        such that Tρ msg ,w (a1 , . . . , aq ; ε) = 1.

Clearly, the query complexity of T is as stated. We proceed to
prove its correctness. For a function f (purportedly in the property
Π), consider the quantity

        hardf,Π (ρmsg ) = max Pr [Tρmsg ,w (a1 , . . . , aq ; ε) = 1] ,
                            w     a1 ,...,aq


which can be viewed as measuring the hardness of the random
“challenge” ρmsg that is posed by the veriﬁer V ; that is, the proba-
bility of the optimal prover strategy to convince the veriﬁer given
the random message ρmsg .
    For completeness, suppose that f ∈ Π and observe that
Eρmsg [hardf,Π (ρmsg )] ≥ 99/100. Thus, by an averaging argument, we
have Prρmsg [hardf,Π (ρmsg ) ≥ 9/10] ≥ 9/10, which correspond to the
“good” event that the veriﬁer chose a random challenge ρmsg that
admits a convincing prover strategy. In which case, there exists a
proof w ∈ {0, 1}p such that

           Pr[T f (ε) = 1] ≥ Pr [hardf,Π (ρmsg ) ≥ 9/10]
                                ρmsg

                             · Pr[Tρ msg ,w (a1 , . . . , aq ; ε) = 1]
                               9
                           ≥     · Pr[Tρmsg ,w (a1 , . . . , aq ; ε) = 1]
                              10
                              2
                           ≥ ,
                              3

as required.
    The soundness argument is similar, only that now we need to
rely on the ampliﬁcation to tolerate a union bound over all possible
proofs. More precisely, suppose f is ε-far from Π, and observe that
Eρmsg [hardf,Π (ρmsg )] < 1/100.
    Thus, by an averaging argument, we have that Prρmsg [hardf,Π (ρmsg )
≤ 1/10] ≥ 9/10, which correspond to the “good” event that the
veriﬁer chose a random challenge ρmsg that does not admit a con-
12 Page 28 of 44                  Gur, Liu & Rothblum                             cc


vincing prover strategy. Thus,

  Pr[T f (ε) = 1] ≥ Pr [hardf,Π (ρmsg ) ≤ 1/10]
                    ρmsg

                   · Pr[∃w ∈ {0, 1}p s.t. Tρ msg ,w (a1 , . . . , aq ; ε) = 1]
                       9
                   ≥     · 2p · 2O(−p) .
                      10

We conclude the argument by choosing a suﬃciently large q  =
O(pq) such that Pr[T f (ε) = 1] ≥ 2/3.                      

5.2. Application: a chasm between public and private coin.
As an application, we use Theorem 1.2 to derive lower bounds on
public-coin oblivious interactive proofs of proximity and show an
exponential separation between public-coin and private-coin pro-
tocols in this setting.
    More speciﬁcally, (private-coin) oblivious interactive proofs of
proximity (oblivious IPPs) (Rothblum et al. 2013) are a natural
extension of oblivious MAPs, in which the proof is replaced with
a prover with whom the veriﬁer can interact. More accurately,
an r-round oblivious IPP consists of a veriﬁer V and prover P that
interact as follows: (1) V queries the input f , (2) V and P exchange
messages in r rounds, where each round contains one message from
each of the parties, and (3) at the end of the interaction, V rules
according to the transcript of the interaction and the queries it
made.
    A public-coin oblivious interactive proof of proximity is simply
referred to as an r-round oblivious AMP. Here, the deﬁnition is
the same as with oblivious IPPs, except that now the veriﬁer is
only allowed to send a (fresh) random string in each round. Note
that standard oblivious AMPs (to which we referred in the previous
subsection) are simply 1-round oblivious AMPs. The complexity of
an oblivious IPP is the sum of its communication complexity and
query complexity.
    We remark that in polynomial time computation, as well as in
non-oblivious proofs of proximity, the aforementioned models are
roughly equivalent (see, e.g., (Rothblum et al. 2013)). In stark con-
trast, as the following theorem shows, it turns out that oblivious
cc          Separation Between MAP and AMP                   Page 29 of 44   12


IPPs can be much more powerful than their public-coin counter-
parts.

Theorem 5.1. There exists a property Π for which there exists
a 2-round oblivious IPP whose complexity is exponentially smaller
than that of any r-round oblivious AMP, for constant r ∈ N.
   We prove Theorem 5.1 with respect to the following natural
property that consists of all low-degree polynomials that have a
root in a predetermined subset. More precisely, let F be a ﬁnite
ﬁeld, let m, d ∈ N such that d·m < |F|/10 and let H be an arbitrary
subset of F of size d. Consider the following property.

Definition 5.2. The        Tensor    Root      property,   denoted
TensorRootF,m,d,H , is parameterized by a field F, a dimension m ∈
N, a degree d ∈ N and a subset H ⊂ F, and contains all polyno-
mials P : Fm → F of individual degree d that takes a root in H m ;
that is,

                TensorRootF,m,d,H
                = {P : Fm → F of individual degree 2d :
                  ∃z ∈ H m such that P (z) = 0}.

    Throughout this section, we ﬁx a fairly standard parameteri-
zation of low degree extension from the PCP literature; namely,
we ﬁx a size parameter n ∈ N, degree d = log(n) − 1, dimen-
sion m = log(n)/ log log(n), a ﬁnite ﬁeld F of size 10 · dm, and a
subset H of F of size d (note that |H|m = n). Then, we denote
TensorRoot = TensorRootF,m,d,H , with the respect to the parame-
ters that we ﬁxed.13
    We prove Theorem 5.1 via the following two lemmas.

Lemma 5.3. Fix ε < 1/10 and a constant r ∈ N. Any r-round
oblivious AMP, with respect to proximity parameter ε, for TensorRoot,
with communication complexity c and query complexity q must
satisfy c + q = nΩ(1/r) .

 13
      Note that the input is of size |F|m , which is larger than |H|m .
12 Page 30 of 44               Gur, Liu & Rothblum                 cc


Lemma 5.4. For any ε > 0, there exists a 2-round oblivious IPP
for TensorRoot, with communication complexity O(log2 n) and query
complexity O(log(n)).
    Before we proceed to prove the lemmas above, we shall ﬁrst
need the following immediate corollary of Theorem 1.2, which fol-
lows by a straightforward application of the Babai–Moran (Babai
& Moran 1988) speedup theorem, as worked out in the setting of
proofs of proximity in (Rothblum et al. 2013), while noting that
this transformation preserves the oblivious feature.

Corollary 5.5. For any property Π and constant r ∈ N, if there
exists an oblivious r-round AMP for Π with communication com-
plexity c and query complexity q, then there also exists a tester for
Π with query complexity cO(r) · q.

Proof (Sketch of proof.). Consider an r-round AMP for Π with
communication complexity c and query complexity q. By (Roth-
blum et al. 2013, Lemma 4.6), we obtain a 1-round AMP for Π with
communication complexity O(cr ) and query complexity O(cr−1 · q);
Moreover, straightforward inspection shows that this transforma-
tion preserves obliviousness. Finally, we apply the argument in
(Gur & Rothblum 2018, Theorem 4.1) to obtain a tester for Π
with query complexity cO(r) · q.                               
    In particular, Corollary 5.5 implies that for a property Π that
requires t queries to test, it holds that any oblivious AMP for Π
with communication complexity c and query complexity q must
satisfy c + q = tΩ(1/r) .

Comparison with proofs of proximity for distributions. In
a recent work (Chiesa & Gur 2017), the question of private ver-
sus public coin interaction was studied in the context of proofs
of proximity for distribution testing. These proof systems diﬀer
from standard proofs of proximity in three respects: (1) the input
is a distribution, rather than a function; (2) query access is re-
placed with independent samples from the input distribution; and
(3) proximity is measured by total variation distance, rather than
Hamming distance.
cc        Separation Between MAP and AMP                 Page 31 of 44     12


    Proofs of proximity for distribution testing can be thought of
as oblivious in a very strong sense (because the veriﬁer cannot
query its input, but rather passively receives a set of samples).
This allows for a very strong lower bound on r-round AM proofs
of proximity for distribution testing. Namely, for any number of
rounds r (including super-constant values) these proofs of proxim-
ity can be emulated by standard distribution testers (i.e., without
proof or prover) at only a quadratic cost.
    In contrast, our lower bound on r-round oblivious AMPs de-
grades as the round complexity increases. Hence, it is natural to
inquire whether our lower bound can be improved to match the
stronger lower bound that holds in the distribution testing setting.
    However, we remark that the above strengthening is impossible,
and in fact there exists a property for which any lower bound for
oblivious AMPs must degrade with the round complexity. This
follows from the bounds on the Tensor Sum property that appears
in (Gur & Rothblum 2018). More speciﬁcally, the argument in
(Gur & Rothblum 2018) shows that for every r, there exist an r-
round AMP protocol for the Tensor Sum property with complexity
Õ(n1/r ).14 Moreover, their sumcheck-based protocol is actually an
oblivious AMP. Since in (Gur & Rothblum 2018), it is shown
that the Tensor Sum property requires Ω̃(n) queries to test, then
together with our Theorem 5.1, it holds that any r-round oblivious
AMP must have complexity nΩ(1/r) . So the complexity of r-round
oblivious AMPs for the Tensor Sum property decreases with as the
number of rounds increases.
5.2.1. Proof of Lemma 5.3. By Corollary 5.5 (and the dis-
cussion that follows it), to prove Lemma 5.3 it suﬃces to prove
that any (standard) property tester for TensorRoot must make
Ω̃(n) queries. We prove this via the framework of Blais, Brody,
and Matulef (Blais et al. 2012) for showing property testing lower
bounds via communication complexity lower bounds. To this end,
we assume basic familiarity with communication complexity (for
a comprehensive introduction to communication complexity, see
  14
     Actually, in (Gur & Rothblum 2018) this result is only stated for r =
1, 2, 3, log(n). However, straightforward inspection shows that it generalizes
to any value of r.
12 Page 32 of 44                  Gur, Liu & Rothblum                    cc


(Kushilevitz & Nisan 1997)).
    The basic approach of (Blais et al. 2012) is to reduce a hard
communication complexity problem to the property testing prob-
lem for which we want to show a lower bound. We follow (Blais
et al. 2012) by showing a reduction from the well-known communi-
cation complexity problem of set-disjointness. The aforementioned
framework allows us to obtain a lower bound on the query com-
plexity of testing the Tensor Root property.
    Recall that the set-disjointness problem is the communication
complexity problem wherein Alice gets an n-bit string x, Bob gets
an n-bit string y, and their goal is to decide whether there exists
i ∈ [n] such that xi = yi = 1. Equivalently, Alice and Bob’s inputs
can be viewed as indicator vectors of sets A, B ⊆ [n]. In this case,
the goal of the players is to decide if the sets corresponding to their
inputs intersect or not. We denote this problem by DISJn .
    It is well-known that the randomized communication complex-
ity of the set-disjointness problem is linear in the size of the inputs,
even under the promise that A and B intersect in at most one el-
ement.

Theorem 5.6 (Kalyanasundaram & Schnitger 1992). For every n
∈ N, every randomized communication complexity protocol for
DISJn must use Ω(n) bits of communication.
    We are now ready to prove the property testing lower bound
on the TensorRoot property via reduction from the set-disjointness
problem DISJn . Let T be a tester, with respect to proximity pa-
rameter ε = 1/10, for TensorRoot with query complexity q. We
prove that q = Ω̃(n).
    Consider the following randomized communication complexity
protocol. There are two parties, Alice and Bob. Alice receives an
input x ∈ {0, 1}n , and Bob receives an input y ∈ {0, 1}n . The goal
is to decide whether (x, y) ∈ DISJn , i.e., there exists an i ∈ [n] such
that xi = yi = 1; or whether (x, y) ∈   / DISJ, i.e., for every i ∈ [n]
                          15
either xi = 0 or yi = 0. Recall that we ﬁxed d = log(n) − 1,
  15
   More accurately, this is actually the set-intersection problem, i.e., the
complement of DISJn ; however, since standard randomized communication
complexity is closed under complement, the same lower bound applies.
cc        Separation Between MAP and AMP            Page 33 of 44   12


m = log(n)/ log log(n), and H ⊆ F of size d (so |H|m = n), and
that the low-degree extension of a string x ∈ {0, 1}n is the unique
m-variate polynomial Px of individual degree d that agrees with
fx on H m , where fx : H m → {0, 1} is an arbitrary predetermined
embedding of x in H m . The protocol takes places as follows:

     1. Creating distance: Alice computes the (unique) low-degree
        extension of x, denoted Px ; Bob computes the (unique) low-
        degree extension of y, denoted Py .

     2. Emulating the Tensor Root tester: Alice invokes the tester
        T , which requires (possibly adaptive) queries to a function
        P : Fm → F. For each query z ∈ Fm , Alice evaluates Px (z),
        sends z to Bob, and Bob sends back Py (z) to Alice.

     3. The combining operator: For each query z ∈ Fm asked by
        the tester and values Px (z) and Py (z) computed by Alice
        and Bob, Alice feeds the tester T with the evaluation of the
        m-variate individual degree 2d polynomial P (z) := 1−Px (z)·
        Py (z).

    For completeness, note that if (x, y) ∈ DISJn , then there exists
an i ∈ [n] such that xi = yi = 1. Hence, there exists a t ∈
H m such that Px (t) = Py (t) = 1, and so 1 − Px (t) · Py (t) = 0.
Therefore, the (combined) polynomial P has a root in H m , and so
P ∈ TensorRoot.
    For soundness, note that if (x, y) ∈ DISJn , then for every i ∈ [n]
either xi = 0 or yi = 0. Hence, for every t ∈ H m it holds that either
Px (t) = 0 or Py (t) = 0, and so 1 − Px (t) · Py (t) = 1. Therefore,
the (combined) polynomial P does not have a root in H m . By
the distance of the Reed–Muller code (i.e., the Schwartz–Zippel
Lemma), this implies that P is ε-far from TensorRoot.
    Since Alice can obtain the answer to each query of the tester T
to the function P using O(log n) bits of communication, then the
reduction above implies a communication complexity protocol for
DISJn with communication complexity O(q · log(n)), where recall
that q denotes the query complexity of T . Plugging the Ω(n) lower
bound on the (randomized) communication complexity of DISJn ,
we obtain that q = Ω̃(n), which concludes the proof of Lemma 5.3.
12 Page 34 of 44               Gur, Liu & Rothblum                cc


5.2.2. Proof of Lemma 5.4. We show a 2-round oblivious IPP
for TensorRoot, with communication complexity O(log2 n) and query
complexity O(log(n)). The main idea underlying this protocol can
be traced back to a work on quantum information and the PCP
theorem by Raz (Raz 2009) and was also used in the study of
streaming interactive proofs (Chakrabarti et al. 2015).
    Note that the TensorRoot problem is trivial for non-oblivious
proofs of proximity: the prover can simply indicate the location of
the root in H m , and then, the veriﬁer checks that this is the case.
However, in oblivious proofs of proximity, the query is performed
prior to the interaction with the prover, and so even if the prover
tells the veriﬁer the location of the root, the veriﬁer cannot “go
back in time” and make the query.
    However, we show that by capitalizing on the algebraic struc-
ture of low-degree polynomials and on private-coin communication
(which we know is required, by Lemma 5.3), we can in a sense “go
back in time” and recover the value pointed by the prover, even
though we can no longer make queries to the input function.
    Consider the following 2-round oblivious IPP, with respect to
proximity parameter ε > 0, for TensorRoot, where, assume without
loss of generality that ε < 1/10.

  1. Query phase:

      (a) Low-degree test: The veriﬁer performs a standard low
          (individual) degree test on the input function P : Fm →
          F, rejects if the low-degree test rejects, and otherwise,
          proceeds to the next step. (See (Gur & Rothblum 2018)
          for details of applying low-degree tests in the setting of
          proofs of proximity.)
      (b) Secret query: The veriﬁer draws uniformly at random a
          point r ∈ Fm and queries P (r).

  2. Interaction phase:

      (a) Pointing to the root: The prover sends a purported root
          z ∈ H m (i.e., such that allegedly P (z) = 0).
cc       Separation Between MAP and AMP            Page 35 of 44   12


      (b) A line through the root: The veriﬁer sends (some canon-
          ical representation) of the line  that passes through its
          secret query r and the purported root z. (Note that this
          does not reveal the full identity of r to the prover).
       (c) Restricting the polynomial to the line: the prover sends
           the purported restriction of P to the line , denoted P˜|,
           speciﬁed by its 2d coeﬃcients.
      (d) Line-versus-point consistency: The veriﬁer checks that
          P˜|, restricted to the point r, agrees with the value P (r)
          that it had originally queried.

Since low-degree testing can be performed via O(log(n)) queries,
the protocol above clearly satisﬁes the query complexity require-
ment. In terms of communication, the veriﬁer sends a line (which
can be characterized by two canonically chosen points), and the
prover sends 2d coeﬃcients, thus the communication complexity is
O(log2 n).
     Completeness is immediate by construction. For soundness,
suppose that P is ε-far from TensorRoot. If P is ε-far from being an
individual degree 2d polynomial, then the low-degree test rejects
with high probability. Otherwise, by the distance of the Reed–
Muller code (i.e., the Schwartz–Zippel Lemma) we can assume that
P is ε-close to an individual degree 2d polynomial P̂ such that
P̂ (x) = 0 for all x ∈ H m . Note that with probability 1 − ε (and by
our assumption we have 1 − ε > 9/10) the veriﬁer queries a “good”
point r such that P (r) = P̂ (r). Suppose hereafter that this is the
case.
     The prover receives the line  that passes through the secret
query r and the purported root z. However, since this line is canon-
ically represented, the prover does not know the location of the
point r on the line . Since a low-degree polynomial restricted to a
line is a Reed–Solomon codeword, then P˜| must disagree with P
except on a negligible number of points, and so the veriﬁer rejects
with probability at least 9/10 · (1 − o(1)) ≥ 2/3.
12 Page 36 of 44              Gur, Liu & Rothblum               cc


          6. Discussion and open problems
The complexity of the√permutation property for testers, which do
not use a proof, is Θ̃( n). In this work, we showed a lower bound
        1
of Ω̃(n 4 ) for MAPs for Perm. Thus, the MAP complexity of Perm is
                           1        √
somewhere between Ω̃(n 4 ) and Õ( n)—resolving the exact com-
plexity is an interesting open problem:

Problem√ 6.1. Does every MAP for Permutation have complex-
ity Ω̃( n)?

    Second, our work shows that AMPs can be exponentially more
eﬃcient than MAPs. It is natural to ask whether the converse also
holds—can MAPs be much more eﬃcient than AMPs? A partial
answer to this question is known. As mentioned in 3, every MAP
with complexity c can be emulated by an AMP with complexity
(roughly) c2 .
    Thus, MAPs can be at most quadratically more eﬃcient than
AMPs. However, we do not know a property for which this gap is
tight. In particular, the following problem is open:

Problem 6.2. Does √ there exist a property Π that has an MAP
with complexity O( n) but every AMP for Π must have complexity
Ω(n)?


        A. Randomness reduction in AMPs
In this section, we prove the following theorem, which shows that
for reasonable properties, we can reduce the randomness of any
AMP for the property down to O(log n). Speciﬁcally, we have the
following theorem.

Theorem A.1. Let Π be a property of functions f : Dn → Rn ,
where |Rn ||Dn | ≤ exp(poly(n)). If Π has an AMP verifier that
makes q queries, uses a proof of length p, and uses r random bits,
then Π has an AMP that makes O(q) queries, uses a proof of length
O(p), and uses O(log n) random bits.
cc       Separation Between MAP and AMP            Page 37 of 44   12


   We note that most properties that are considered have |Rn | =
O(poly(n)) and |Dn | = O(poly(n)), so properties that have |Rn ||Dn | =
ω(exp(poly(n))) seem quite pathological.

Proof. Our proof follows closely to the proof of MAP random-
ness reduction in (Gur & Rothblum 2018). Let Fn denote the set
of all functions Dn → Rn . Let V be an AMP veriﬁer for Πn . For
a function f ∈ Fn , let V f (n, ε, w; t) denote the output of V when
running with oracle access to f with random string t of length r.
For every function f ∈ Fn and subset S ⊆ {0, 1}r , deﬁne
                                                          
                 
        βf (S) =  Pr r ∃w such that V f (n, ε, w; t) = 1
                   t∈{0,1}
                                                       
                 − Pr ∃w such that V (n, ε, w; t) = 1 .
                                    f
                    t∈S


    We show, using the probabilistic method, that there exists a
multiset S of strings in {0, 1}r of size poly(n) such that for all
functions f ∈ Fn it holds that βf (S) ≤ 1/7.
    Fix a function f ∈ Fn . Sample k strings from {0, 1}r uniformly
at random and let these be the set S. By the Chernoﬀ bound,
we have that βf (S) ≤ 1/7 with probability 2−Ω(k) over our random 
choice of S. Thus, by setting k = O(log |Fn |) = O log(|Rn ||Dn | ) =
O(poly(n)) and applying the union bound over all f ∈ Fn , we
obtain that there exists a multiset S as desired.
    Now, we can obtain an AMP veriﬁer using only O(log |S|) =
O(log n) random bits by simply running the original veriﬁer V but
with respect to random strings selected uniformly from S (instead
of {0, 1}r ). We can amplify the completeness and soundness to 23
with O(1) repetitions.
                                                                     

                     Acknowledgements
We thank Oded Goldreich and Justin Thaler for very helpful dis-
cussions. We also thank the anonymous reviewers of Computa-
tional Complexity for useful comments. TG was supported in part
by UKRI Future Leaders Fellowship MR/S031545/1.
12 Page 38 of 44               Gur, Liu & Rothblum                cc


Open Access. This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or for-
mat, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original au-
thor(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other
third party material in this article are included in the article’s
Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit
line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s
Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permit-
ted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To
viewa copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional aﬃliations.

                          References
Scott Aaronson (2012). Impossibility of succinct quantum proofs
for collision-freeness. Quantum Information & Computation 12(1-
2), 21–28. URL http://www.rintonpress.com/xxqic12/qic-12-12/
0021-0028.pdf.

Scott Aaronson & Avi Wigderson (2009). Algebrization: A New
Barrier in Complexity Theory. TOCT 1(1), 2:1–2:54. URL http://
doi.acm.org/10.1145/1490270.1490272.

Amir Abboud, Aviad Rubinstein & R. Ryan Williams (2017).
Distributed PCP Theorems for Hardness of Approximation in P. In
58th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
FOCS 2017, Berkeley, CA, USA, October 15-17, 2017, 25–36. URL
https://doi.org/10.1109/FOCS.2017.12.

Dorit Aharonov & Tomer Naveh (2002). Quantum NP-a survey.
arXiv preprint quant-ph/0210077 .

László Babai, Peter Frankl & Janos Simon (1986). Complexity
classes in communication complexity theory. In 27th Annual Symposium
cc      Separation Between MAP and AMP           Page 39 of 44   12


on Foundations of Computer Science, Toronto, Canada, 27-29 October
1986, 337–347. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/SFCS.1986.15.

László Babai & Shlomo Moran (1988). Arthur-Merlin Games: A
Randomized Proof System, and a Hierarchy of Complexity Classes. J.
Comput. Syst. Sci. 36(2), 254–276. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/
0022-0000(88)90028-1.

Mihir Bellare & Moti Yung (1996). Certifying Permutations: Non-
interactive Zero-Knowledge Based on Any Trapdoor Permutation. J.
Cryptology 9(3), 149–166.

Eli Ben-Sasson, Oded Goldreich, Prahladh Harsha, Madhu
Sudan & Salil P. Vadhan (2006). Robust PCPs of Proximity, Shorter
PCPs, and Applications to Coding. SIAM J. Comput. 36(4), 889–974.
URL https://doi.org/10.1137/S0097539705446810.

Itay Berman, Ron D. Rothblum & Vinod Vaikuntanathan
(2017). Zero-Knowledge Proofs of Proximity. IACR Cryptology ePrint
Archive 2017, 114. URL http://eprint.iacr.org/2017/114.

Eric Blais, Joshua Brody & Kevin Matulef (2012). Property
Testing Lower Bounds via Communication Complexity. Computa-
tional Complexity 21(2), 311–358. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00037-012-0040-x.

Mark Braverman (2011). Poly-logarithmic independence fools
bounded-depth boolean circuits. Commun. ACM 54(4), 108–115. URL
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1924421.1924446.

Clément L. Canonne (2015). A Survey on Distribution Testing: Your
Data is Big. But is it Blue? Electronic Colloquium on Computational
Complexity (ECCC) 22, 63. URL http://eccc.hpi-web.de/report/
2015/063.

Amit Chakrabarti, Graham Cormode, Andrew McGregor
& Justin Thaler (2014). Annotations in Data Streams. ACM
Trans. Algorithms 11(1), 7:1–7:30. URL http://doi.acm.org/10.
1145/2636924.

Amit Chakrabarti, Graham Cormode, Andrew McGregor,
Justin Thaler & Suresh Venkatasubramanian (2015). Veriﬁable
12 Page 40 of 44               Gur, Liu & Rothblum                 cc


Stream Computation and Arthur-Merlin Communication. In 30th Con-
ference on Computational Complexity, CCC 2015, June 17-19, 2015,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 217–243. URL https://doi.org/10.4230/
LIPIcs.CCC.2015.217.

Alessandro Chiesa & Tom Gur (2017). Proofs of Proximity for
Distribution Testing. ECCC 24, 155. URL https://eccc.weizmann.
ac.il/report/2017/155.

Graham Cormode, Michael Mitzenmacher & Justin Thaler
(2010). Streaming Graph Computations with a Helpful Advisor. In
Algorithms - ESA 2010, 18th Annual European Symposium, Liverpool,
UK, September 6-8, 2010. Proceedings, Part I, 231–242. URL https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-15775-2_20.

Graham Cormode, Justin Thaler & Ke Yi (2011). Verifying
Computations with Streaming Interactive Proofs. PVLDB 5(1), 25–
36. URL http://www.vldb.org/pvldb/vol5/p025_grahamcormode_
vldb2012.pdf.

Irit Dinur & Omer Reingold (2006). Assignment Testers: Toward
a Combinatorial Proof of the PCP Theorem. SIAM J. Comput. 36(4),
975–1024. URL https://doi.org/10.1137/S0097539705446962.

Funda Ergün, Ravi Kumar & Ronitt Rubinfeld (2004). Fast
approximate probabilistically checkable proofs. Inf. Comput. 189(2),
135–159. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ic.2003.09.005.

Uriel Feige, Dror Lapidot & Adi Shamir (1999). Multiple Non-
Interactive Zero Knowledge Proofs Under General Assumptions. SIAM
Journal on Computing Preliminary version in FOCS’90.

Eldar Fischer, Yonatan Goldhirsh & Oded Lachish (2014).
Partial tests, universal tests and decomposability. In Innovations in
Theoretical Computer Science, ITCS’14, Princeton, NJ, USA, January
12-14, 2014, 483–500. URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2554797.
2554841.

Eldar Fischer, Oded Lachish & Yadu Vasudev (2015). Trading
Query Complexity for Sample-Based Testing and Multi-testing Scala-
bility. In IEEE 56th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science, FOCS 2015, Berkeley, CA, USA, 17-20 October, 2015, 1163–
1182. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/FOCS.2015.75.
cc      Separation Between MAP and AMP            Page 41 of 44   12


Oded Goldreich (2017). Introduction to Property Testing. Cambridge
University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-19405-2.

Oded Goldreich, Shafi Goldwasser & Dana Ron (1998). Prop-
erty Testing and its Connection to Learning and Approximation. J.
ACM 45(4), 653–750. URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/285055.
285060.

Oded Goldreich & Tom Gur (2016a). Universal Locally Testable
Codes. Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC)
23, 42. URL http://eccc.hpi-web.de/report/2016/042.

Oded Goldreich & Tom Gur (2016b). Universal Locally Veriﬁable
Codes and 3-Round Interactive Proofs of Proximity for CSP. Elec-
tronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC) 23, 192. URL
http://eccc.hpi-web.de/report/2016/192.

Oded Goldreich, Tom Gur & Ilan Komargodski (2015a). Strong
Locally Testable Codes with Relaxed Local Decoders. In 30th Confer-
ence on Computational Complexity, CCC 2015, June 17-19, 2015, Port-
land, Oregon, USA, 1–41. URL https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.
CCC.2015.1.

Oded Goldreich, Tom Gur & Ron D. Rothblum (2015b). Proofs
of Proximity for Context-Free Languages and Read-Once Branching
Programs - (Extended Abstract). In International Colloquium on Au-
tomata, Languages and Programming ICALP. URL https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-662-47672-7_54.

Oded Goldreich & Or Sheffet (2010). On The Randomness Com-
plexity of Property Testing. Computational Complexity 19(1), 99–133.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s00037-009-0282-4.

Mika Göös, Toniann Pitassi & Thomas Watson (2015). Zero-
Information Protocols and Unambiguity in Arthur-Merlin Communica-
tion. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Innovations in The-
oretical Computer Science, ITCS 2015, Rehovot, Israel, January 11-
13, 2015, 113–122. URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2688073.
2688074.

Tom Gur (2017). On Locally Veriﬁable Proofs of Proximity. Ph.D.
thesis, Weizmann Institute.
12 Page 42 of 44                Gur, Liu & Rothblum                 cc


Tom Gur & Ran Raz (2015). Arthur-Merlin streaming complexity.
Inf. Comput. 243, 145–165. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ic.
2014.12.011.

Tom Gur & Ron D. Rothblum (2016). Non-interactive proofs of
proximity. Computational Complexity ISSN 1420-8954. URL https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00037-016-0136-9.

Tom Gur & Ron D. Rothblum (2017). A Hierarchy Theorem for
Interactive Proofs of Proximity. In Innovations in Theoretical Computer
Science ITCS.

Tom Gur & Ron D. Rothblum (2018). Non-interactive proofs of
proximity. Computational Complexity 27(1), 99–207.

Yael Tauman Kalai & Ron D. Rothblum (2015). Arguments of
Proximity - [Extended Abstract]. In CRYPTO. URL https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-662-48000-7_21.

Bala Kalyanasundaram & Georg Schnitger (1992). The Prob-
abilistic Communication Complexity of Set Intersection. SIAM J. Dis-
crete Math. 5(4), 545–557. URL https://doi.org/10.1137/0405044.

Hartmut Klauck (2003). Rectangle Size Bounds and Threshold
Covers in Communication Complexity. In 18th Annual IEEE Confer-
ence on Computational Complexity (Complexity 2003), 7-10 July 2003,
Aarhus, Denmark, 118–134. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/CCC.
2003.1214415.

Hartmut Klauck (2011). On Arthur Merlin Games in Communica-
tion Complexity. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual IEEE Conference
on Computational Complexity, CCC 2011, San Jose, California, June
8-10, 2011, 189–199. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/CCC.2011.33.

Eyal Kushilevitz & Noam Nisan (1997). Communication complex-
ity. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-56067-2.

Carsten Lund, Lance Fortnow, Howard J. Karloff & Noam
Nisan (1992). Algebraic Methods for Interactive Proof Systems. J.
ACM 39(4), 859–868. URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/146585.
146605.
cc       Separation Between MAP and AMP            Page 43 of 44   12


Ilan Newman (1991). Private vs. Common Random Bits in Commu-
nication Complexity. Inf. Process. Lett. 39(2), 67–71. URL https://
doi.org/10.1016/0020-0190(91)90157-D.

Ran Raz (2009).      Quantum Information and the PCP Theo-
rem. Algorithmica 55(3), 462–489. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00453-007-9033-6.

Ran Raz & Amir Shpilka (2004). On the Power of Quantum Proofs.
In 19th Annual IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC
2004), 21-24 June 2004, Amherst, MA, USA, 260–274. URL https://
doi.org/10.1109/CCC.2004.1313849.

Ran Raz, Gábor Tardos, Oleg Verbitsky & Nikolai K.
Vereshchagin (1998). Arthur-Merlin Games in Boolean Decision
Trees. In Proceedings of the 13th Annual IEEE Conference on Compu-
tational Complexity, Buﬀalo, New York, USA, June 15-18, 1998, 58–67.
URL https://doi.org/10.1109/CCC.1998.694591.

Omer Reingold, Guy N. Rothblum & Ron D. Rothblum (2016).
Constant-round interactive proofs for delegating computation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 48th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of
Computing, STOC 2016, Cambridge, MA, USA, June 18-21, 2016, 49–
62. URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2897518.2897652.

Dana Ron (2008). Property Testing: A Learning Theory Perspec-
tive. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning 1(3), 307–402. URL
https://doi.org/10.1561/2200000004.

Dana Ron (2009). Algorithmic and Analysis Techniques in Property
Testing. Foundations and Trends in Theoretical Computer Science 5(2),
73–205. URL https://doi.org/10.1561/0400000029.

Guy N. Rothblum, Salil P. Vadhan & Avi Wigderson (2013).
Interactive proofs of proximity: delegating computation in sublinear
time. In Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC. URL http://
doi.acm.org/10.1145/2488608.2488709.

Ronitt Rubinfeld & Madhu Sudan (1996). Robust Charac-
terizations of Polynomials with Applications to Program Testing.
SIAM J. Comput. 25(2), 252–271. URL https://doi.org/10.1137/
S0097539793255151.
12 Page 44 of 44              Gur, Liu & Rothblum                cc


Alexander A. Sherstov (2016). The Multiparty Communication
Complexity of Set Disjointness. SIAM J. Comput. 45(4), 1450–1489.
URL https://doi.org/10.1137/120891587.

Justin Thaler (2016). Semi-Streaming Algorithms for Annotated
Graph Streams. In 43rd International Colloquium on Automata, Lan-
guages, and Programming, ICALP 2016, July 11-15, 2016, Rome, Italy,
59:1–59:14. URL https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2016.59.

Manuscript received May 10, 2018
Tom Gur                               Yang P. Liu
University of Warwick                 Stanford
Conventry, UK                         California, USA
tom.gur@warwick.ac.uk                 yangpliu@stanford.edu


Ron D. Rothblum
Technion
Haifa, Israel
rothblum@cs.technion.ac.il
