Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00453-025-01299-8




Online Metric Matching on the Line with Recourse

Nicole Megow1 · Lukas Nölke1

Received: 22 June 2022 / Accepted: 3 February 2025 / Published online: 1 March 2025
© The Author(s) 2025


Abstract
In online metric matching on the line, n requests appear one by one and have to be
matched immediately and irrevocably to a given set of servers, all located on the
real line. The goal is to minimize the sum of distances between the requests and
their assigned servers. The best known online algorithm achieves   √ a competitive ratio
of (log n), leaving a gap to the best-known lower bound of ( log n). In this work,
we approach the problem in a recourse model where online decisions can be partially
revised, allowing for the reassignment of previously matched edges. In contrast to the
traditional online setting, we show that with an amortized recourse budget of O(log n),
we can obtain an O(1)-competitive algorithm for online metric matching on the line.
This is one of the first non-trivial results for metric matching with recourse. Addition-
ally, for so-called alternating instances, where no more than one request lies between
two servers, we achieve a near-optimal result. Specifically, we give a simple algorithm
that is (1 + ε)-competitive and reassigns any request at most O( ε12 ) times. This special
case is particularly noteworthy, as a lower bound of (log n), constructed using such
instances, applies to a broad class of online algorithms, including all deterministic
algorithms studied in the literature.

Keywords Minimum-cost matching in bipartite graphs · Recourse · Competitive
analysis · Online algorithms

Mathematics Subject Classification 90C27 · 05C85




Nicole Megow and Lukas Nölke have contributed equally to this work.

An extended abstract with parts of the results has been published in the Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Approximation Algorithms for Combinatorial Optimization, APPROX 2020, [23].

B Nicole Megow
    nmegow@uni-bremen.de
    Lukas Nölke
    noelke@uni-bremen.de

1   Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany


                                                                                              123
814                                                              Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841


1 Introduction

Matching problems are among the most fundamental problems in combinatorial opti-
mization with great importance in both, theory and applications. In the (bipartite)
metric matching problem, we are given a complete bipartite graph G = (R ∪ S, E)
with positive edge cost c(e) = c(s, r ), for e = (s, r ) ∈ E. Elements of R and S are
called requests and servers, respectively, with n := |R| ≤ |S|. A matching M ⊆ E is a
set of pairwise non-incident edges. A matching is called complete if every request in R
is matched to a server in S, i.e., if it is incident to exactly one edge of M. The metric
matching problem asks to compute a complete      matching of minimum cost, where the
cost of a matching M is given by c(M) := e∈M c(e). When all information is given
in advance, the optimum can be computed efficiently, e.g., by using the Hungarian
Method as has been shown by Kuhn and Yaw [20].
    In the online setting, however, the set of requests is not known a priori. Requests
arrive online, one by one, and have to be matched immediately and irrevocably to
an unmatched server. As we cannot hope to find an optimal matching under these
restrictions, we use standard competitive analysis to evaluate the performance of algo-
rithms. An online matching algorithm is said to be α-competitive if it computes for
any instance a matching M with c(M) ≤ α · OPT, where OPT denotes the cost of an
optimal matching. The competitive ratio of an algorithm is the smallest α for which
it is α-competitive. Independently, Kalyanasundaram and Pruhs [17], and Khuller,
Mitchell, and Vazirani [19] showed that for arbitrary edge costs, the competitive ratio
of any online algorithm is unbounded. They also developed the same deterministic
algorithm, Permutation, which is (2n − 1)-competitive for metric costs and showed
that this is optimal for deterministic online algorithms. A remarkable recent result by
Nayyar and Raghvendra [26] is a fine-grained analysis of an online algorithm based on
t-net cost [28] showing a competitive ratio of O(μ(G) log2 n), where μ(G) denotes
the maximum ratio of the length of the minimum TSP tour and the weighted diameter
of a subset of G. This result is particularly interesting as it relates structural parameters
of the metric space to the performance guarantee.
    For a long time, the online metric matching problem has resisted all attempts for
achieving an O(1)-competitive algorithm, even for special metric spaces such as the
line. In online metric matching on the line, the edge costs are induced by a line metric;
that is, we identify each vertex of G with a point on the real line and the cost of an
edge between a request and a server equals their distance on the line. The competitive
ratio of the aforementioned algorithm in [26] is then O(log2 n), as μ(G) = 2. Sub-
sequently, Raghvendra [29] improved this to (log n). Only very recently, Peserico
and Scquizzato√[27] showed that no online algorithm can achieve a competitive ratio
better than ( log n). Thus, the quest for finding an O(1)-competitive algorithm,
even a randomized one, is indeed hopeless, at least when restricted to the strict online
setting.
    In this paper, we relax the strict irrevocability requirement and consider online met-
ric matching on the line with recourse. In the recourse model, we allow for limited
modifications to past decisions, thereby relaxing the standard online model. Specifi-
cally, at any point, we may delete a set of edges {(ri , si )}i of the current matching and
rematch the requests ri to different (free) servers.

123
Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841                                                          815


    Online optimization with recourse is an alternative model to standard online opti-
mization and has gained increasing attention as a framework for beyond worst-case
analysis. While an O(1)-competitive algorithm is impossible for online metric match-
ing even on the line, an interesting questions arises: how much recourse is needed to
achieve a constant competitive ratio. Beyond its theoretical appeal, recourse also aligns
well with practical applications where limited revisions to prior decisions are feasible
and beneficial.
    Clearly, if recourse is unrestricted, it becomes possible to simulate an optimal offline
algorithm, and the online nature of the problem disappears. We define an algorithm
to have an amortized recourse budget β if it rematches requests at most βn times in
total. The key question for online metric matching on the line is determining whether
it is possible to maintain an O(1)-competitive solution with bounded recourse—that
is, with a sublinear recourse budget.

1.1 Our Results

We answer this question to the affirmative and give non-trivial results for the online
metric matching problem with recourse. We show that with limited recourse, one can
indeed maintain a constant competitive solution on the line.

Theorem 1 The online metric matching problem on the line admits an O(1)-
competitive algorithm with amortized recourse budget O(log n).

   Our algorithm builds on the t-net cost algorithm by Raghvendra [28, 29]; details
follow later. It has the property of smoothly interpolating between an O(log n)-
competitive online solution (without any recourse) and an O(1)-approximate offline
solution (with possibly large recourse). Our algorithm can further be adapted to
allow for a range of different cost-recourse tradeoffs. We observe that our analysis
is asymptotically optimal.

Theorem 2 For any function f : N −→ N with 1 ≤ f (n) ≤ log n, there is an algo-
rithm for online metric matching on the line that is O( f (n))-competitive and has an
amortized recourse budget of O( log  n
                                 f (n) ).

   Additionally, we investigate a special class of instances, called alternating
instances, where between any two requests on the line there is at least one server.
This class is interesting as the quite strong lower bound of (log n), given by Anto-
niadis, Fischer, and Tönnis [2], holds already on such simple instances. While it does
not hold for arbitrary instances, the bound is true for all known deterministic online
algorithms without recourse. For alternating instances, we present a more direct and
near-optimal algorithm with a scalable performance-recourse trade-off.

Theorem 3 For alternating instances of online metric matching on the line, there is
a (1 + ε)-competitive algorithm that reassigns each request O( ε12 ) times.

   While the algorithm is quite simple, the proof requires a clever charging scheme
that exploits the special structure of optimal solutions on alternating instances. We

                                                                                 123
816                                                            Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841


observe that a large number of recourse actions for a specific request implies large
edges in the optimal solution elsewhere on the line.
   As a byproduct we give a simple analysis of (a variant of) the algorithm in the
traditional online setting without recourse. We show that it has a competitive ratio of
O(min{log n, log }) for instances with alternating requests on the line, where  is
the ratio between the largest and shortest request-server distance, also called the aspect
ratio of the metric. This result refines the competitive ratio (log n) of the currently
best known online algorithm [29].
   Remark Simultaneously and independently of our work, Gupta, Krishnaswamy and
Sandeep [15] obtained a similar result for online metric matching with recourse on
the line. Their algorithm builds on the O(n)-competitive Permutation algorithm [17,
19] and adapts it for the recourse setting. On the line, this is done by first match-
ing edges according to Permutation and then asymmetrically applying recourse to
arcs (r , s) of the current matching that overlap in a certain way. Both, their algo-
rithm and analysis are completely different from ours. They further obtain a more
general O(log n)-competitive algorithm with amortized recourse O(log n) for arbi-
trary metrics. Note that Permutation in fact coincides with the t-net cost algorithm
for t = 1.

1.2 Further Related Work

Extensive literature is devoted to online bipartite matching problems. The maximum
matching variant is quite well understood. For the unweighted setting, asking for a
maximum-cardinality matching, Karp, R. Vazirani, and U. Vazirani [18] gave optimal
deterministic and randomized algorithms with competitive ratio 2 and e/(e − 1),
respectively. The weighted maximization setting does not admit bounded guarantees
in general, but intensive research investigates models with additional assumptions;
see, e.g., the survey by Mehta [25].
   The online metric matching problem, asking for a minimum-cost matching, is much
less understood. In arbitrary metric spaces, the best possible deterministic algorithm
has a competitive ratio of (2n −1) [17, 19]. Randomization in the algorithms decisions
admits better algorithms; there is an O(log2 n)-competitive randomized algorithm due
to Bansal et al. [3]. On the line, no such improvement on the deterministic result by
randomization is known; the competitive ratio of O(log n) is the best-known result for
both, deterministic and randomized, algorithms
                                       √        [14, 29]. It remains a large gap between
to the best-known lower bound of ( log n) by Peserico and Scquizzato [27].
   Interestingly, Gairing and Klimm [9] showed that when assuming a random order
of request arrivals instead of an adversarial arrival order, the natural Greedy algo-
rithm that matches an arriving request to the closest free, i.e., unmatched, server
is n-competitive for general metric spaces. Furthermore, the online t-net cost algo-
rithm is O(log n)-competitive [28] in this case. Very recently, Gupta et al. [12] gave
an O((log log log n)2 )-competitive algorithm in the model with online known i.i.d.
arrivals.




123
Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841                                                                      817


    Recourse models received quite some attention in the past decade. In particular,
maintaining an online cardinality-maximal bipartite matching with recourse was stud-
ied extensively; see, e.g., [1, 4–7, 10, 30] and references therein. Bernstein et al. [5]
showed that the 2-competitive greedy algorithm uses amortized O(n log2 n) reassign-
ments, leaving a small gap to the lower bound of (n log n). In contrast, for the
min-cost variant, it remained a challenging question whether recourse can improve
upon the competitive ratio. Even on the line, it remained open whether and how
recourse can improve the bound of O(log n) [29].
    The following two models address other types of matching with recourse. In a setting
motivated by scheduling, several requests can be matched to the same server and the
goal is to minimize the maximum number of requests assigned to a server. Gupta et
al. [13] achieve an O(1)-competitive ratio with amortized O(n) edge reassignments.
A quite different two-stage robust model has been proposed recently by Matuschke et
al. [22]. In a first stage, one must compute a perfect matching on a given graph and in
a second stage a batch of 2k new nodes appears which must be incorporated into the
first-stage solution to maintain a low-cost matching by reassigning only few edges.
For matching on the line, they give an algorithm that maintains a 10-approximate
matching reassigning 2k edges.
    Recourse in online optimization has also been explored for other minimum-cost
problems, although it has been studied less extensively than for maximization prob-
lems. A prominent example is the online minimum Steiner tree problem [11, 16, 21,
24]. In this problem, an O(1)-competitive algorithm can be achieved with just one
edge reassignment per iteration [11], whereas in the standard online setting without
recourse, the competitive ratio is (log n).
    The recourse model has some relation to dynamic algorithms. Instead of minimizing
the number of past decisions that are changed (recourse), the dynamic model focuses
on the running time to implement this change (update time). A full body of research
exists on maximum (weighted) bipartite matching; we refer to the nice survey by
Chaudhuri et al. [8]. We are not aware of any results for maintaining a matching of
minimum cost.


2 Preliminaries

A path P is called alternating with respect to a matching M, if every other edge in P is
contained in M. An alternating path is called augmenting with respect to M if it starts
and ends at vertices not covered by M. A common method for increasing the cardinality
of an existing matching M is to augment along an augmenting path P, resulting in
a larger matching M̃ given by the symmetric difference1 M ⊕ P. There may be a
choice between different augmenting paths; typically, a path of minimum cost (w.r.t.
some metric) is selected. Recently, Raghvendra [28] introduced the following metric.
For t > 1, the t-net cost of a path P w.r.t. a matching M is defined as

1 For two sets X , Y, their symmetric difference is given by X ⊕ Y := (X ∪ Y )\(X ∩ Y ). For match-
ings M1 , M2 , their symmetric difference M1 ⊕ M2 consists of disjoint paths and cycles, whose edges are
alternating between M1 and M2 .


                                                                                           123
818                                                            Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841


        φtM (P) := t · c(P\M) − c(P ∩ M) = t · c(P ∩ M̃) − c(P ∩ M).                     (1)

   Our algorithm maintains three matchings: the recourse matching M, the actual
output of the algorithm, and two auxiliary matchings based on (online and offline ver-
sions of) the t-net cost algorithm [28], namely, the offline matching M ∗ and the online
matching M . While M ∗ is a near-optimal offline matching that possibly requires a
large amount of recourse, M is an online matching that is O(log n)-competitive [29]
but uses no recourse. We describe how M ∗ and M are obtained based on the above
cost function; see also [26, 28, 29]. By speaking of the matching Mi , Mi∗ or Mi , we
refer to the state of the respective matching after serving the i-th request.
   Upon arrival of the i-th request ri , the offline t-net cost algorithm constructs the
offline matching Mi∗ by augmenting Mi−1   ∗ along an alternating path P of minimum
                                                                          i
                    ∗               ∗
t-net cost w.r.t. Mi−1 . That is, Mi := Mi−1∗ ⊕ P . By definition, this path starts at r
                                                    i                                    i
and ends at a free server, which we denote by si . While this procedure may require
a large amount of recourse, the resulting matching has been shown to have bounded
cost.

Lemma 4 (Raghvendra [28]) For any t > 1, we have c(Mi∗ ) ≤ t · OPTi for all
i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}, where OPTi := c(MiOPT ) denotes the cost of an optimal offline
matching MiOPT of the first i requests.

    For constructing the online matching Mi without changing previous matching deci-
sions (no recourse), it may not be possible to augment along a path. Instead, the
online t-net cost algorithm maintains M ∗ as an auxiliary matching and constructs Mi
by directly connecting the end points ri and si of the augmenting path Pi . That is,
Mi := Mi−1 ∪ {(ri , si )}, cf. Fig. 1a. In particular, Mi and Mi∗ utilize the same sets of
servers.
    Intuitively, in putting a higher weight on edges that would be added to M ∗ dur-
ing augmentation, the parameter t in the t-net cost function discourages the offline
t-net cost algorithm from choosing long paths for augmentation (w.r.t. actual costs,
not in the t-net-cost metric). This allows for a trade-off between minimizing the cost
of the underlying offline matching and minimizing the connection cost in M with the
latter occurring in a greedy fashion. Looking at the extremal cases, this becomes even
more clear.
    When t = 1, the offline t-net cost algorithm is in fact equivalent to the Hungarian
Method [20] which computes an optimal offline solution. The corresponding online
matching, however, is that of the Permutation algorithm [17, 19] and has a competitive
ratio of (n), see [17, 19] and the lower bound instance in Fig. 1a.
    In contrast, as t tends to infinity, the algorithm increasingly favors augmenting via
paths of shorter length, making its behavior more similar to that of the greedy online
algorithm, which matches a request upon arrival to the nearest free server. The compet-
itive ratio in this case is (n), see [28] and Fig. 1b. Interestingly though, when t = 3,
the t-net cost algorithm has a competitive ratio of O(log n) [29]. Furthermore, it is
worth noting that t-net cost algorithm with t → ∞ achieves in the random order
arrival model the best possible competitive ratio of O(log n) [28].

123
Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841                                                          819




Fig. 1 Lower bound instances for the t-net cost algorithm and extremal choices of t




3 A Constant-Competitive Algorithm with Bounded Recourse

In this section, we prove our main results, Theorems 1 and 2, by describing the
corresponding algorithms.
   We begin by giving a high-level overview of our algorithm for Theorem 1. It exploits
the properties of the t-net cost algorithm by carefully balancing between the offline
matching M ∗ and the online matching M , simultaneously bounding competitive ratio
and recourse budget. On a high level, this is done as follows. When a request arrives,
we match it as in M and locally group it with other recent requests into blocks
that correspond to intervals on the line. Matching requests as in the online matching
increases the total cost but requires zero recourse. A structural result, Lemma 13, allows
us to bound this increase in cost, but only for a set of blocks whose corresponding
intervals are pairwise disjoint. Thus, when new blocks are created, the requests in old
intersecting blocks need to be rematched according to M ∗ causing a local update, which
we call a recourse step. During such a recourse step, the changes in M ∗ caused by the
arrivals of the requests in the respective old blocks are applied simultaneously. This
eliminates any redundant recourse action that would have occurred when updating M ∗
repeatedly, for each arriving request. Intuitively, blocks can be seen as input buffers
for M ∗ that temporarily match requests as in M and facilitate an efficient update of M ∗
in large local batches. The underlying structure of the blocks guarantees that recourse
steps affect only the corresponding portion of the line. To prevent the recourse steps
from causing too many reassignments, we additionally incorporate an edge freezing
scheme for low-cost edges that keeps the overall cost low.

                                                                                      123
820                                                                 Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841


3.1 A First Attempt: Balancing Between M∗ and M Without Freezing

We start our pursuit of a constant competitive algorithm with bounded recourse by
exploring the idea of balancing between M ∗ and M , and show that this first strat-
egy does indeed yield a constant competitive algorithm. While we will see that this
strategy uses potentially a lot of recourse, the algorithm we develop here serves as the
basis of our final algorithm satisfying Theorem 1. The latter simply requires an addi-
tional freezing scheme targeting low-cost edges, which we present in the following
subsection.

3.1.1 Definitions and Notation

We classify requests according to the structure of intervals that describe where on the
line the t-net cost algorithm has already searched for free servers, following the ideas
from Raghvendra [29]. While the definitions used in that work differ slightly, as we
elaborate below, they serve essentially the same purpose. Throughout the paper, we
visualize the real line as a horizontal line from −∞ on the left to ∞ on the right and
use according vocabulary, e.g., by saying a server s is left of a request r , or simply
s < r . We also assume, without loss of generality, that at any point on the line, there
is at most one point of R ∪ S.
   Define the search interval of a request ri as the open interval Īi = (siL , siR ), where siL
and siR denote points on the line farthest to the left and right of ri , respectively, and
                                                M∗
reachable from ri with t-net-cost at most φt i−1 (Pi ). We will show in Lemma 10 that
one of siL , siR is the server si (which ri is matched to in M ), while the other may not
necessarily be a point of R ∪ S. For the purpose of this definition, we think of it as
a (virtual) server. That is, we ask the question “If point p was a server in S, would
                                                                                M∗
we be able to reach it via an augmenting path of t-net cost at most φt i−1 (Pi )?”. In
other words, Īi is the convex hull of all points on the line, reachable from ri via an
                                                         M∗
augmenting path of t-net cost (strictly) less than φt i−1 (Pi ).
   Define the aggregate search interval
                                             of ri to be the maximal
                                                                     (open) interval Ii
which contains ri and is a subset of j≤i Ī j . Intuitively, the set j≤i Ī j consists of the
(disjoint) portions of the line, which the t-net cost algorithm has already considered, up
to time i, in its search for free servers; the interval Ii is simply the connected portion
containing r i . See Fig. 2 for an illustration. By definition, the portions of the line
constituting j≤i Ī j grow monotonously (and possibly merge while doing so). Thus,
the aggregate search intervals inhibit a laminar structure as detailed in the following
observation.

Observation 5 Whenever i < j, then either Ii ∩ I j = ∅ or Ii ⊆ I j .

     We say an aggregate search interval Ii is of level k, if its length satisfies (1+ε)k−1 ≤
|Ii | < (1 + ε)k ; we write (Ii ) = k. Throughout the remainder of this section, we
set t = 3 and ε = 32t 1
                        . Further, two aggregate search intervals are said to belong to
the same block, if they intersect with each other and are of same level. If the aggregate
search intervals of a block are not contained in some interval of a higher level, then

123
Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841                                                                                821




Fig. 2 Construction of search intervals and aggregate search intervals of requests r j and r j+1 . The points s Lj
and s Rj+1 (hatched) are points on the line that do not lie in S. We think of them as virtual servers for the
purpose of defining Ī j and Ī j+1 respectively




Fig. 3 Illustration of a typical block structure. On arrival of ri , its aggregate search interval Ii creates a
new top block (active). Requests in the hatched area are now all inactive. We observe that on Ii , locally,
   ∗ = M ∗ for j, k ≤ h < i
Mi−1        h




this block is said to be a top block. We note that the top blocks partition the line into
portions that are compatible with the structure of M ∗ . Specifically, we will see that, at
all times, the edges of M ∗ (and M ) are fully contained in some top block. Intuitively,
this holds since the portion of the line corresponding to a top block is the convex hull of
points considered for the searches for a free server originating from requests inside the
block, so no edge of M ∗ can possibly lead outside the block. A typical block-structure
is depicted in Fig. 3.
    Based on these structures, we dynamically classify requests as follows. When the
aggregate search interval of a request belongs to a top block then this request is said to
be active. Once this no longer holds, we call it inactive. Note that due to the definition
of aggregate search intervals, any arriving request is initially active. And once a request
becomes inactive, it will remain inactive indefinitely. When considering the attributes
active, inactive, or membership in a block, (or later on frozen), we identify a request ri ,
the edge ei = {ri , si } ∈ M and the interval Ii . For instance, we say ri is of level k and
belongs to a certain block, when this holds for Ii , or, ei is active when this is the case
for ri .

                                                                                                    123
822                                                               Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841


3.1.2 Algorithm Description

Our algorithm, summarized as Algorithm 1 produces the recourse matching M by
assigning requests according to their classification as either active or inactive. Specif-
ically, active requests are matched in M exactly as in the online matching M , and
inactive requests are matched as in the offline matching M ∗ .
   While the online matching M does not change but only gets revealed over time,
the offline matching M ∗ may change its structure drastically at any point causing
a lot of recourse. Active requests act as an input buffer for M ∗ , it is updated only
periodically and locally when a new top block appears and renders previously active
requests inactive. We call this a recourse step.
   The algorithm then consists of the following two steps that are executed whenever
a new request ri arrives.
Matching ri Upon arrival of ri , label it active and match it according to the online
matching M , that is, via the edge ei = (ri , si ).
Recourse step If there is no j < i such that I j ⊆ Ii and (I j ) = (Ii ), the arrival of ri
produces a new top block and may render a number of previously active requests
inactive, see Fig. 3. Reassign all requests r j ∈ Ii except ri to the same server to which
they are matched in Mi−1∗ .



Algorithm 1 : Balancing M’ and M* without Freezing
Upon arrival of the i-th request ri :                         ri matched in M via ei = (ri , si )
   Matching ri
1: match ri to si as in M                                                               ri active
   Recourse step
2: if there is an active r j ∈ Ii with (I j ) < (Ii ) then              Ii creates new top block
3:     for r j ∈ Ii with j  = i do
4:                                                ∗
          reassign r j to the same server as in Mi−1                                  ri inactive




3.1.3 Algorithm Analysis

We start by noting that Algorithm 1 indeed produces a matching after each iteration.
In Step 1, ri can be matched to si , since both are not yet matched by definition of the
t-net cost algorithm. Therefore, the edge (ri , si ) also does not interfere in a possible
                                                                    ∗ .
recourse step due to the arrival of ri , as it is not contained in Mi−1
Observation 6 At the end of each iteration, Algorithm 1 produces a feasible match-
ing Mi .
Bounding the competitive ratio We first observe, that the cost of inactive edges can be
easily bounded using Lemma 4.
Corollary 7 The total cost of inactive edges is at most t · OPT.
To bound the cost of active edges, we build on the analysis of Raghvendra [29]. We
refine his technical propositions and perform a slightly more fine-grained analysis.

123
Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841                                                           823


Instead of simultaneously bounding the cost of all blocks of the same level, we argue
more generally on the cost of any set of pairwise disjoint blocks at possibly different
levels, where two blocks are said to be disjoint if their corresponding maximal aggre-
gate search intervals do not intersect. In particular, we are interested in bounding the
cost contribution of the disjoint set of top blocks. We show the following result.
Lemma 8 For t = 3, the cost of all active edges of M is bounded by O(OPT).
   Corollary 7 and Lemma 8 together imply a constant competitive ratio.
Corollary 9 Algorithm 1 has a competitive ratio of O(1).
   For the sake of completeness, we give a proof of Lemma 8, including the adaptations
from [29]. We start by discussing our definition of search intervals. While this definition
was motivated by intuition and practicality (specifically with the proof of Lemma 19
below in mind), it describes intervals different from the “search intervals” in [29].
However, we show that our definition of aggregate search intervals coincides with
Raghvendra’s definition of intervals of a cumulative search region, which we denote
by Ci . We may therefore use the corresponding results from [29].
Lemma 10 For a request ri , the corresponding aggregate search interval Ii coincides
with the “interval of a cumulative search region” Ci defined in [29]. Further, for the
search interval Īi = (siL , siR ), we have si ∈ {siL , siR }.
Proof To see that the first claim holds, note that the intervals Ci and Ii are constructed
the same way. That is, they are built by taking the union of all known search intervals
(for the respective definition) and choosing of the resulting new intervals that which
contains the considered request. We describe the definition of search intervals in [29],
which, to avoid confusion, we call dual intervals. The t-net cost algorithm maintains
dual values y i : S ∪ R → R+ satisfying ysi + yri = c(s, r ) if (s, r ) ∈ Mi∗ and ysi + yri ≤
t · c(s, r ) otherwise. Additionally, duals of free requests or servers are zero. When a
request ri arrives, a shortest t-net-cost path Pi is found and the duals of all vertices in
the search tree, which is partitioned by sets Ai ⊆ S and Bi ⊆ R, are updated before
augmentation so that the dual constraints on Pi are tight. This is true for both the
augmenting paths PiL and PiR that are used to    reach siL and siR , respectively. The dual
interval of a request ri is defined as interior ( r ∈Bi cspan(r , i)), where cspan(r , i)
                                 yi   (r )   yi   (r )
denotes the interval [r − maxt , r + maxt ] on the real line and ymax   i (r ) the highest

dual weight assigned to r until time i.
   Raghvendra [28] shows, that the dual constraints on PiL and PiR are tight before aug-
mentation. Therefore, we obtain our search intervals Īi from the respective dual interval
               i (r ) with the dual weight y i of r before augmentation along P . Hence,
by replacing ymax                            r                                   i
a search interval is contained in the corresponding dual interval and therefore Ii ⊆ Ci .
At the same time, dual weights of requests can only be increased when the request
is contained in some Bi or reduced right after an augmentation but remain otherwise
unchanged. Thus, the maximal value ymax  i (r ) is attained right before an augmentation,

in which case the request is part of some PhL or PhR . Using again that the dual weights
are tight here, this implies Ci ⊆ Ii . Therefore, the intervals Ii and Ci coincide and we
may use the respective results from [29].

                                                                                  123
824                                                               Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841


   The second claim follows directly from Lemma 6 in [29], which states that there
are no free servers in the dual interval. As seen above, search intervals are contained
in dual intervals, so this statement is true for our definition as well. And lastly, since
clearly si ∈ [siL , siR ], it follows that si ∈ {siL , siR }.                            
                                                                                         
  We continue with a technical result that allows us to bound the cost contribution of
edges of M whose length is large when compared to the t-net cost of the corresponding
augmenting path. Formally, we call an edge ei of the online matching M or the
                                                             M∗
corresponding augmenting path Pi short, if c(Pi ) ≤ t−14
                                                          φt i−1 (Pi ) and long otherwise.
Raghvendra bounds the cost of all long edges by that of all short ones. We give the
following more general statement that allows us to consider a consecutive set of edges
instead. Note that the additional additive term of 2(t + 1) · OPT j−1 when compared to
the original statement in [29] disappears again, when considering the entire matching,
as then OPT j−1 = OPT0 = 0.
Lemma 11 Let P j , P j+1 , . . . , Pk be consecutive augmenting paths that are used in
the offline t-net cost algorithm and e j , e j+1 , . . . , ek the corresponding edges in M .
Then                                  
                    c(ei ) ≤ 4 + t−1 4
                                                 c(ei ) + 2(t + 1) · OPT j−1 .
               i: ei long                i: ei short

Proof To prove this lemma, we adapt the approach of [29, Lemma 2] for our more
                                                     ∗ and M ∗ , and recall from
general setting. Consider two consecutive matchings Mi−1      i
Eq. (1) that the t-net cost of the corresponding augmenting path Pi is given by
 M∗                       ∗ ) − c(P ∩ M ∗ ). The difference in cost of the two
φt i−1 (Pi ) = t · c(Pi \Mi−1      i   i−1
matchings can then be expressed as
             ∗          ∗
                                              ∗             ∗
                                                                       
       2 c(Mi ) − c(Mi−1 ) = 2 c(Pi \Mi−1 ) − c(Pi ∩ Mi−1 )
      t+1                          t+1

           M∗                             ∗
                                                           ∗               ∗
                                                                                  
        = φt i−1 (Pi ) − (t − 1) · c(Pi \Mi−1 ) + t−1
                                                   2 c(Pi \Mi−1 ) − c(Pi ∩ Mi−1 )
           M∗                         ∗                ∗
                                                          
        = φt i−1 (Pi ) − t−1
                           2 c(Pi \Mi−1 ) + c(Pi ∩ Mi−1 )
           M∗
        = φt i−1 (Pi ) − t−1
                           2 · c(Pi ).

Summing from j to k, and using the fact that OPT j−1 ≤ OPTk ≤ c(Mk∗ ) as well
as c(M ∗j−1 ) ≤ t · OPT j−1 , we get

  k 
                                       
                                         k
      M∗
                                           (c(Mi∗ ) − c(Mi−1
                                                         ∗            2
     φt i−1 (Pi ) − t−1
                     2  · c(Pi )   = t+1
                                      2                      )) ≥ 1−t
                                                                   2 · OPT j−1 .
  i= j                                        i= j
                                                                                            (2)

Denote by L and H the sets of augmenting paths with index between j and k that are
long and short, respectively. Then, Eq. (2) can be rewritten as

         M∗          (2 )                                 ∗
                                                            Mi−1
                                                                              2
         φt i−1 (Pi ) ≥ t−12   c(Pi ) +    t−1
                                            2  · c(Pi ) − φ t    (Pi )   + 1−t
                                                                            2 · OPT j−1
Pi ∈H                       Pi ∈H         Pi ∈L


123
Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841                                                                     825

                                   M∗                   2
                     ≥             φt i−1 (Pi ) + 1−t
                                                   2 · OPT j−1 ,                                   (3)
                           Pi ∈L
                                                                 
where the last inequality uses the fact that                    Pi ∈H c(Pi ) is non-negative and that
                                                          M ∗

 a long path Pi we have c(Pi ) ≥                    t−1 φt     (Pi ). Using again non-negativity of
                                                      4     i−1
for
   Pi ∈H c(Pi ), as well as Eqs. (2) and (3), we get

                           M∗          (3 )                 M∗               2
               2           φt i−1 (Pi ) ≥                    φt i−1 (Pi ) + 1−t
                                                                             2 · OPT j−1
                   Pi ∈H                        Pi ∈H ∪L
                                         (2 )            
                                          ≥ t−1
                                             2                   c(Pi ) + (1 − t 2 ) · OPT j−1
                                                    Pi ∈H ∪L
                                                    
                                         ≥ t−1
                                            2                c(Pi ) + (1 − t 2 ) · OPT j−1 .
                                                   Pi ∈L

Due to the definition of t-net cost and the triangle equality, respectively, we have
                   M∗
t · c(ei ) ≥ φt i−1 (Pi ) and c(Pi ) ≥ c(ei ). After dividing by t−1
                                                                   2 , this implies the
lemma statement
                                     
                    4t
                  t−1        c(ei ) ≥    c(ei ) − 2(t + 1) · OPT j−1 .
                              Pi ∈H              Pi ∈L

                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
Consider a level-k block B and denote by B the instance that consists of the requests
and servers that are the endpoints of edges in M belonging to B. Further denote by
MB the set of these edges. We would like to bound the cost of MB for several disjoint
blocks simultaneously using the previous lemma.
   To be able to do this, we first need to argue, that it is okay to assume, for the sake
of cost analysis, that the requests arrive in a certain order. In particular, we argue that
as long as the relative order of requests with overlapping aggregate search intervals is
preserved, the structure and cost of both the offline and the online matching somewhat
remains unchanged. Specifically, when a request arrives, in any of such arrival orders
satisfying the above, the offline and online matching are identical on the portion of
the line corresponding to the requests aggregate search interval. In particular, when
the n-th request arrives, the final matchings are identical.
Lemma 12 Let π ∈ Sn be a permutation such that i < j and Ii ⊆ I j imply π(i) <
π( j). Changing the arrival order of requests to rπ(1) , . . . , rπ(n) does not change the
final matchings M and M ∗ . In particular, after the change,
 (i) if ri and r j both belonged to block B, then so do rπ(i) and rπ( j) now, and
(ii) the cost of MB remains unchanged compared to the original arrival order.

Proof By definition of search intervals, only requests and servers inside the closure of Īi
are considered by the t-net cost algorithm, and are thus the only ones possibly affected

                                                                                                 123
826                                                              Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841


by augmentation, when request ri arrives. Therefore, we can assume by induction, that
right before the arrival of ri , the online and offline matching are identical within Īi
for any permutation π that satisfies the above requirements. The t-net cost algorithm
then uses the same path Pi for augmentation, irrespective of π , implying the lemma
statement.                                                                            
                                                                                      

We are now ready to bound the cost of M for a set of disjoint blocks.

Lemma 13 For disjoint blocks B1 , B2 , . . . , Bh , and with t = 3, we have

                              
                              h
                                    c(MBi ) ≤ 5600 · OPT.
                              i=1


Proof As we consider a set of disjoint blocks, we may use Lemma 12 and assume that
the requests that belong to the blocks B1 , B2 , . . . , Bh arrive consecutively, and that
no requests on other portions of the line have arrived yet. Denote by M L and M H the
set of long and short edges of MB1 ∪ MB2 ∪ . . . ∪ MBh , respectively, and by OPTBi
the cost of an optimal matching on Bi . Together, Lemmas 3 and 13 from [29] imply

                                         
                                         h
                        c(M H ) ≤ 99 ·         OPTBi + 47
                                                       2
                                                          · c(M L ).
                                         i=1

We then use Lemma 12 from [29] to obtain

                          c(M H ) ≤ 594 · OPT + 47
                                                2
                                                   · c(M L ).

Note that the lemma is only stated for a set of level-k blocks, but the proof carries over
verbatim for the case of arbitrary disjoint blocks. Bounding c(M L ) with Lemma 11,
we get                                                               
                 c(M H ) ≤ 594 · OPT + 47   2
                                               6 · c(M H ) + 8 · OPT ,
which in turn implies c(M H ) ≤ 798.2 · OPT. Using one last time Lemma 11, we
conclude

      
      h
             c(MBi ) = c(M H ) + c(M L ) ≤ 7 · c(M H ) + 8 · OPT ≤ 5600 · OPT.
       i=1

                                                                                             
                                                                                             

Proof of Lemma 8 To bound the cost of all active edges, recall that active edges are
precisely those edges that are contained in a top block, and further, that at any given
time any two top blocks are disjoint. Thus, we may apply Lemma 13 to the top blocks
of M. This directly implies the statement of Lemma 8, concluding the competitive
analysis of Algorithm 2.                                                              
                                                                                      

123
Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841                                                                          827




Fig. 4 An alternating instance with exponentially increasing connection costs. Edge costs are indicated
above the corresponding portion of the line (drawing not to scale). Active edges are drawn solid, inactive
edges dashed. Note that the aggregate search intervals (gray) grow exponentially in size. Therefore, a (top)
block consists of a single aggregate search interval only and every arrival of a request triggers a recourse
step, reassigning all existing inactive requests. This underlines the need for a freezing scheme




And the Recourse Budget? With the majority of requests being matched as in the
offline matching M ∗ , it should come as no surprise that Algorithm 1 performs poorly
in terms of recourse budget. To see this, consider the example in Fig. 4 showing an
alternating instance with exponentially increasing edge costs. At the arrival of any
request ri with i > 2, all requests r j with j < i are reassigned. Thus, the recourse
budget is linear and Algorithm 1 does not satisfy the requirements of Theorem 1.
However, our efforts on Algorithm 1 are not in vain, since its shortcomings in terms of
recourse budget can be remedied with a simple extension described in the following
subsection.

3.2 Adding a Freezing Scheme to Obtain Constant Recourse

Consider again Fig. 4. The exponentially increasing edge costs that thwarted our suc-
cess with Algorithm 1, turn out to also be the key to salvaging it. Intuitively, if edge
costs do not increase too much, then a top block can hold more requests, so there will
not be as many requests of different levels. As this translates directly into recourse
actions, everything is already fine with Algorithm 1. If on the other hand edge costs do
increase a lot, say exponentially as in Fig. 4, then at some point, the cost-contribution
of small edges becomes negligible. Spending recourse actions on such edges would be
absurd, so we instead choose to keep them as they are, we freeze them. We would still
like to match other inactive requests that are not frozen with respect to M ∗ . However,
since a frozen edge may block a server that, in M ∗ , is assigned to a different request
r , we are forced to make a compromise and match r to a different, farther-away server
via a detour taken along the frozen edge.
The Detour Matching We describe a way of combining two matchings that initially
seem incompatible, e.g., because some request is matched to different servers in the
two matchings. Let M̃, M be matchings such that M̃ ⊕ M consists of alternating paths

                                                                                               123
828                                                              Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841


that are augmenting with respect to M. Such a path starts in a request and ends in
a server, both of which are unmatched in M. We call the matching that consists of
precisely these request-server pairs the detour matching of M̃ with respect to M. When
clear from context, we simply refer to this matching as M̃ ⊕ M. For an illustration, see
Fig. 5. For an example, consider the t-net cost algorithm. The symmetric difference
      ∗ and M ∗ consists of one path that is augmenting w.r.t. M ∗ , namely P . The
of Mi−1          i                                                     i−1             i
detour matching of Mi∗ w.r.t. Mi−1 ∗ then consists of precisely the edge e ∈ M , the
                                                                                i        i
detour that one takes when not augmenting along Pi but connecting the ends of the
path directly. In metric spaces, it is easy to see via the triangle inequality, that the cost
of the detour matching is bounded by the sum of costs of the two generating matchings.

Observation 14 For matchings M̃, M whose symmetric difference consists of aug-
menting paths with respect to M, the detour matching M̃ ⊕ M satisfies c( M̃ ⊕ M) ≤
c( M̃) + c(M).

A Simple Freezing Scheme Denote by F ⊆ M the set of frozen edges and consider the
following simple freezing scheme for which we need to make the assumption that the
precise values of OPT and n are known a priori. Freeze all edges of M with cost OPT     n
or less and match inactive requests with respect to the detour matching M ∗ ⊕ F. Since
there are at most n edges in M , the total cost of frozen edges is bounded by OPT, so by
Observation 14, the cost of inactive edges is at most c(F)+c(M ∗ ⊕ F) ≤ (t +2)·OPT.
The cost of active edges remains in O(OPT) since nothing changed from Sect. 3.1.
One can further show, that due to this freezing scheme, any request participates in only
O(log n) recourse steps. The proof follows the intuition described above: If a request
r would take part in o(log n) recourse steps, then it is contained in o(log n) intervals of
increasing level, so edge costs are increasing exponentially and r must in fact already
be frozen.
   We would like to follow this general strategy as well. However, in the online model,
we do not know OPT or n and, thus, need a dynamic freezing scheme, targeting for
instance OPTi
              i
                as a threshold for freezing. A typical guess-and-double approach may
work concerning the costs. Yet, care has to be taken as OPT   i
                                                            i is not monotone. A major
obstacle appears to be the bounding of the recourse budget. The details of the algorithm
and dynamic freezing scheme as well as their analysis are given in the remainder of
this subsection.

3.2.1 Algorithm Description

Since the primary distinction from Algorithm 1 lies in the introduction of a freezing
scheme, we begin by describing this addition. At time i, we say an inactive edge e j ∈
M if frozen, if its cost is below OPT
                                   i2
                                      i
                                        , and denote by Fi the set of all such edges.
Furthermore, if for a previously frozen e j we have that c(e j ) > OPT i
                                                                    i , then we unfreeze
the edge and delete it from Fi . Note that we use the edge e j of the online matching to
determine whether r j is frozen, but r j is possibly matched in Mi via a different edge.
   While we generally aim to match frozen requests as in the online matching M ,
this assignment is not implemented until the request takes part in a recourse step. We
show that this prevents unnecessary recourse actions that could be caused by requests

123
Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841                                                                         829


repeatedly alternating between being frozen and unfrozen. Denote by MiF ⊆ Fi the
subset of frozen edges that is in Mi , i.e., the set of edges where the aforementioned
assignment according to M was implemented during a recourse step. When unfreezing
a request, however, there is no delay and the corresponding change must be reflected
in the matching immediately, since the cost contribution of the frozen edge is now too
high.
    With the addition of the freezing scheme, our algorithm, summarized as Algo-
rithm 2, now partitions the requests into three groups: Active requests matched
according to the online matching M , inactive, frozen requests in M F , also matched
according to M , and inactive requests that are not in M F , matched according to the
detour matching M ∗ ⊕ M F . Similarly, the algorithm itself is now divided into three
steps, that are all executed when a new request arrives:


Algorithm 2 : Matching Recourse with Freezing Scheme
Upon arrival of the i-th request ri :                               ri matched in M via ei = (ri , si )
   Matching ri
1: match ri to si as in M                                                              label ri active
   Freezing/Unfreezing
2: determine the set Fi of frozen edges
3: for inactive requests r j that become unfrozen do
                                                                            ∗
      remove e j from MiF and repair assignments on corresponding path of Mh(i,       F
4:                                                                              j) ⊕ Mi
   Recourse step
5: if there is an active r j ∈ Ii with (I j ) < (Ii ) then                     Ii creates new top block
6:     for r j ∈ Ii recently frozen do                                      label r j ∈ Ii \ {ri } inactive
7:        add e j = (r j , s j ) to MiF and reassign r j to s j
8:    for unfrozen r j ∈ Ii with j  = i do
9:                                    ∗ ⊕ MF
         reassign r j according to Mi−1     i



Matching ri Upon arrival of request ri , label it active and match it according to the
online matching M , that is, via the edge ei = (ri , si ).
Freezing/Unfreezing Update the set Fi of frozen edges according to the freezing rules.
If a previously frozen e j is unfrozen, i.e., c(e j ) > OPT i
                                                          i , then unfreeze it and delete it
                                                      ∗
from Fi and MiF . Reassign it with respect to Mh(i,     j) ⊕ Mi , with h(i, j) = max{k ≤
                                                                F

i | r j ∈ Ik and Ik is not in a top block}. For an illustration of h(i, j), see Fig. 3, where
h(i, ) = j. Reassignments due to unfreezing are efficiently implemented as follows.
    Consider an edge e = (s, r ) right before it is unfrozen. If e is already matched
according to the offline matching, then there is nothing to do. Otherwise, it must be
part of an alternating path or cycle in M ∗ ⊕ M F . In the latter case, again, no recourse
action needs to be taken as the removal of e from M F results in a path from r to s.
In the detour matching, we want to connect the ends of this path, which is already
accomplished by the edge e = (s, r ). Consider the case that e ∈ P for some alternating
path P in M ∗ ⊕ M F that starts in a request r and ends in a server s . Unfreezing e
and matching according to M ∗ ⊕ M F decomposes P into the r −s-path P1 and the r -
s -path P2 . In Algorithm 1, we implement these changes via two recourse actions: we
reassign r to s and r to s; see Fig. 5.

                                                                                             123
830                                                                          Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841




Fig. 5 Illustration of Step 4 in Algorithm 2. Edges of M ∗ are drawn in a zigzag pattern, edges of M F solid
and edges of the detour matching M ∗ ⊕ M F dashed. After unfreezing r , the removal of (r , s) splits the path
P in M ∗ ⊕ M F in two augmenting paths P1 and P2


Recourse step If there is no j < i such that I j ⊆ Ii and (I j ) = (Ii ), the arrival
of ri produces a new top block and triggers a recourse step. In this case, we assign
requests in Ii that were recently frozen according to M and add the corresponding
edge to MiF . Next, we reassign all other requests (unfrozen, inactive) that lie in Ii
according to Mi−1∗ ⊕ M F , the detour matching.
                        i


3.3 Algorithm Analysis

We start again by verifying that Algorithm 2 produces a matching after each iteration.
As before, ri can be matched to si in Step 1. Similarly, active edges do not interfere
in the unfreezing procedure (Step 4) due to the definition of h(i, j). It remains to
argue that we can indeed construct the detour matching as described. To this end, we
consider the symmetric difference M ∗ ⊕ M F and show that, for an unfrozen request r ,
there is an augmenting path P from r to a server s not covered by M F . To see this,
note that in M ∗ ⊕ M F the unfrozen r is incident only to an edge (r , s) ∈ M ∗ , so it
cannot be contained in a cycle. Additionally, the path starting with (r , s) cannot end
at a request, since the remaining requests on the path are covered by an edge of M F
and M ∗ each. Thus, it must end at a server s that is not matched in M F , as required.
Observation 15 At the end of each iteration, Algorithm 2 produces a feasible matching
Mi .
   When bounding the competitive ratio, we may use the results from Sect. 3.1. By
Lemma 8, the cost of active edges is in O(OPT). Using Observation 14 and the
definition of the freezing scheme, we bound the cost of inactive edges by c(M F ) +
c(M ∗ ⊕ M F ) ≤ (t + 2) · OPT. Together, this implies a constant competitive ratio.
Corollary 16 Algorithm 2 has a competitive ratio of O(1).
Bounding the recourse Due to delaying reassignments until an appropriate recourse
step, freezing a request r does not cause any immediate recourse actions. Unfreezing r ,
on the other hand, may cause reassignments (Step 4), namely of r and possibly one
additional request, see Fig. 5. We charge these two recourse actions to r , and in partic-
ular, to the last recourse step it participated in. However, recourse due to unfreezing r
happens at most once between two consecutive recourse steps of r . This implies, that
a request is charged at most three times per recourse step it participates in, once for
the recourse step itself and possible two times more for a subsequent unfreezing.
Observation 17 A request is charged at most three times the number of recourse steps
it is involved in.

123
Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841                                                                831


For a request that gets frozen at time i and unfrozen at time j > i, we have c(e) ≤ OPT
                                                                                     i2
                                                                                        i

              OPT
and c(e) > j j for the corresponding edge e ∈ M . Since OPTi ≤ OPT j , this implies
the following.

Observation 18 A request frozen at time i stays frozen at least until time i 2 .

On the other hand, the number of recourse steps in which a continuously unfrozen
request takes part in can be bounded from above.

Lemma 19 If a request r ∈ Ii ⊆ I j is not frozen from time i to time j, then it holds
that (I j ) − (Ii ) = O(log j). In particular, between time i and j, there are O(log j)
recourse steps in which r can participate.

Proof Consider the search interval Ī j = (s Lj , s Rj ). By definition of search intervals,
there exist augmenting paths P jL , P jR connecting r j to s Lj and s Rj with the same t-net
cost as P j , the path used by the t-net cost algorithm. We bound the length of P j ∈
{P jL , P jR } by

                  c(P j ) = c(P j ∩ M ∗j−1 ) + c(P j ∩ M ∗j ) ≤ 2t · OPT j .                  (4)

Without loss of generality, assume P j = P jL . Interpreting the point s Rj as a virtual
server and assuming that it is contained in S, we could augment M ∗j−1 also along P jR
yielding a different matching M̃ ∗j . By definition of P jR and Eq. (1), we have

                                                     M∗                 M∗
        t · c(P j ∩ M ∗j ) − c(P j ∩ M ∗j−1 ) = φt j−1 (P j ) = φt j−1 (P jR )
                                                = t · c(P jR ∩ M̃ ∗j ) − c(P jR ∩ M ∗j−1 ).

Thus,

                     c(P jR ) = c(P jR ∩ M ∗j−1 ) + c(P jR ∩ M̃ ∗j )
                             ≤ c(P jR ∩ M ∗j−1 ) + c(P j ∩ M ∗j ) + 1t c(P jR ∩ M ∗j−1 )
                             ≤ 3t · OPT j .

From Eq. (4), we get |Ī j | ≤ c(P jL ) + c(P jR ) ≤ 5t · OPT j , which implies |I j | ≤

  k≤ j |Īk | ≤ 5t · j · OPT j . On the other hand, the cost of |Ii | can be bounded from
below by c(e), where e is the edge in M incident to r , as both endpoints of e are
contained in the interval. We then obtain

                                 |I j |   5t · j · OPT j
                                        ≤                < 5t · j 3 .
                                 |Ii |         c(e)

The last inequality follows from the assumption that r is not frozen at time j, imply-
             OPT
ing c(e) > j 2 j . Recall that |Ii | < (1 + ε) (Ii ) and (1 + ε) (I j )−1 ≤ |I j |. We

                                                                                       123
832                                                                       Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841


conclude
                                                                            3 log j
 (I j ) − (Ii ) ≤ 1 + log(1+ε) (5t · j 3 ) = 1 + log(1+ε) (5t) +                     ≤ c · log j,
                                                                          log(1 + ε)
                                                                                                (5)

for some constant c. Regarding the second claim, recall that r participates in a recourse
step when an interval containing r opens a new top block (i.e. a new level) while r is
not (freshly) frozen. Between time i and time j, this can only happen for intervals Ih
of distinct levels for which Ii ⊆ Ih ⊆ I j . The claim then directly follows Eq. (5).  
   Lemma 19 and Observation 18 bound the total number of recourse actions taken
by Algorithm 2.
Lemma 20 Algorithm 2 uses a recourse budget of at most O(log n).
Proof Consider a request r . By Observation 17, it suffices to bound the number of
recourse steps that r is involved in. Let [i hU , i hF ], for h = 0, 1, . . . , k, be maximal
intervals of consecutive time points during which r is not frozen, i.e., r is not frozen
only at the time points i with i ∈ [i hU , i hF ] for some h. We use induction on k to
show that r participates in at most 2c · log(i kF ) recourse steps, where c is the constant
from Eq. (5). The base case, k = 0, follows directly from Lemma 19. For k ≥ 1, we
        F )2 ≤ i U ≤ i F due to Observation 18. By induction hypothesis, the number
have (i k−1      k     k
of reassignments that involve r in the first k − 1 time intervals is at most
                                                            
                    2c · log(i k−1
                               F
                                   ) ≤ 2c · log       i kF       = c · log(i kF ).

For the last time interval, we have at most c · log(i kF ) many such recourse steps by
Lemma 19. Since i kF ≤ n, this concludes the proof.                                  
                                                                                     
Proof of Theorem 1 Corollary 16 and Lemma 20, together, directly imply the validity
of Theorem 1. This concludes the analysis of Algorithm 2.                         
                                                                                  

3.4 A Scalable Algorithm

With Algorithm 2, we have given an algorithm that has a constant competitive ratio at
the price of a recourse budget that is bounded by O(log n). While the focus was on the
former, i.e., on achieving a constant competitive ratio, it may be of practical interest to
more flexibly balance the cost performance of the algorithm with its recourse budget
instead, as described in Theorem 2. Indeed, all the building blocks needed for the
proof of this theorem have already been established in the previous subsections. As
we now show, a slight alteration to Algorithm 2 already yields the tradeoff between
cost and recourse we desire.
Theorem 2 For any function f : N −→ N with 1 ≤ f (n) ≤ log n, there is an algo-
rithm for online metric matching on the line that is O( f (n))-competitive and has an
amortized recourse budget of O( log  n
                                 f (n) ).


123
Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841                                                           833


Proof To obtain an algorithm that is O( f (n))-competitive and uses a recourse budget
of O( log  n
       f (n) ), we alter Algorithm 2 as follows. Intuitively, and in the terms of the high-
level overview from the beginning of this section, we want the input buffers (top
blocks) to have a higher capacity (more active requests), leading to a larger cost due
to the contribution of edges in M but lower recourse due to less frequent updates.
We achieve this by “vertically” (consider the visualization in Fig. 3) enlarging the area
of top blocks and allowing the requests of several non-disjoint blocks to be active.
However, intersecting active blocks may not differ in their level by more than f (n),
which specifies the “height” of the input buffer.
   Specifically, all we do is change Step 5 of Algorithm 2 as follows.

   5: if there is an active r j ∈ Ii such that (I j ) ≤ (Ii ) − f (n) then

It is easy to see, that the cost of active edges is then in O( f (n) · OPT), since the set of
blocks with active requests can be partitioned into at most f (n) sets of disjoint blocks
to which our original analysis can be applied separately.
    Similarly, when considering the recourse budget, note that the first part of the
statement of Lemma 19 remains true, but now implies that an unfrozen request can
participate in at most O( log     j
                              f (n) ) recourse steps. Lemma 20 can easily be adapted to
                                       1
account for the additional factor of f (n) which concludes the proof of the theorem. 
                                                                                     

   To see that our analysis is asymptotically optimal, we consider the family of lower
bound instances (for the online setting) described in [2] and give a brief sketch of its
construction. An instance of the family consists of n = 2h − 1 requests and n + 1
servers that alternate on the line. That is, requests are placed at points 2i −1 for i ∈ [n]
and servers at points 2i −2 for i ∈ [n +1], where [n] denotes the set {1, 2, . . . , n}. The
requests appear in h batches, each of which contains every second request of those
that have not appeared yet: Initially, requests 4i − 3 for i ∈ [2h−2 ], then requests
8i − 5 for i ∈ [2h−3 ], and so on. Restricting the class of considered algorithms by
some assumptions, which are satisfied for all known deterministic online algorithms
to date, one can show the following properties. Any such algorithm matches a requests
of batch i at minimum cost to either the nearest free server to the left or to the right.
When partitioning requests of a batch into pairs of consecutive requests, the requests of
a pair match towards each other, i.e., to the two free servers between the two requests.
Between those two servers, in turn, always lies a single request which is contained in
the next batch. Thus, the cost of an edge in batch i is precisely 2i−1 , which shows the
lower bound. For details, see [2].
   Structurally, the exponentially increasing edge costs mean that every arriving
request creates a new top block, similarly as in Fig. 4. Additionally, the structure
of aggregate search intervals resembles a full binary tree. Specifically, there are log n
                                                                        log n
levels and all n+1 2 requests on the lowest level will participate in f (n) recourse steps
due to the arrival of their higher level ancestors. At the same time, no request is frozen,
as OPTi = i and the minimum cost of an edge is 1. Therefore, we have a lower bound
of ( log  n
       f (n) ) for the recourse budget of our algorithm.


                                                                                  123
834                                                                     Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841


4 A Near-Optimal Algorithm on Alternating Instances

In this section, we consider alternating instances, i.e., instances on which requests and
servers alternate on the line. We assume without loss of generality that |S| = |R|. For
such instances, an optimum (offline) matching assigns all requests either to the server
directly to their left or all requests to the server on their right. Denote these matchings
by M L and M R , respectively, and call their edges minimal.
    We describe a (1 + ε)-competitive algorithm for alternating instances that reas-
signs each request at most a constant number of times. In addition to its output M, it
maintains M ∗ , the matching produced by the offline t-net cost algorithm, and a set of
frozen edges M F . In contrast to Algorithm 2, we are not only able to disregard M ,
but furthermore we can employ a much simpler freezing scheme. Specifically, a request
is frozen when it is reassigned for the k-th time, for some k only depending on ε. The
request remains matched to its current server perpetually and the corresponding edge
is added to M F . Non-frozen requests are matched according to the detour match-
ing M ∗ ⊕ M F as described in Sect. 3. By design, the recourse budget per request
is constant, only the competitive analysis remains. The algorithm is summarized as
Algorithm 3.
    Observe that when considered as line segments, the augmenting paths Pi used by
the t-net cost algorithm have a laminar structure on alternating instances, since after
time i, there are no free requests or servers in the portion of the line corresponding
to Pi . This allows us to view augmenting paths as nodes of a forest, the path forest,
where Pi is a child of the minimal augmenting path that properly contains it, or a
root if no such path exists (see Fig. 6). The depth of a path Pi denotes its distance to
the root of its tree and determines the number of reassignments of the corresponding
request ri in M ∗ .
    The intuition why such an extremely simple freezing scheme as utilized in Algo-
rithm 3 works on alternating instances, relies on the fact that, here, we can draw a
direct connection between the length of a path Pi and its depth in the path forest.
Specifically, we will show in Lemma 23, that the lengths of augmenting paths grow
exponentially when moving from a leaf of the path forest to the corresponding root.
Since ancestors of a request correspond to reassignments in M ∗ , we can charge the cost
of frozen edges of a certain depth as well as possible detours to higher level ancestors.
The per-request recourse budget is thus directly connected to the competitive ratio



Algorithm 3 : Algorithm for alternating instances with per-request recourse budget
k∈N
initialize recourse counter h r ← 0 for all r ∈ R, M F ← ∅
Upon arrival of the i-th request ri :
1: update Mi−1∗ by augmenting along P , and set h ← h + 1, for all r ∈ P
                                        i           r      r              i
2: for all r ∈ Pi with h r > k do                                                            r frozen
3:    M F ← M F ∪ {(r , s)}, where s is the server currently matched to r
4: for all r ∈ Pi with h r ≤ k do                                                        r not frozen
5:    reassign r with respect to Mi∗ ⊕ M F



123
 Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841                                                                          835




 Fig. 6 Illustration of a path tree in an alternating instance. Paths not chosen for augmentation are dashed.
 Servers are depicted as squares and requests as filled circles


 since a larger recourse budget means charging to a higher ancestor with exponentially
 larger cost.
 Notation We use a similar interval structure as before and keep the notation. The
 definition of the intervals is slightly changed as follows. Consider intervals Ii =
 [siL , siR ], where siL , siR ∈ S are the closest free servers on the line to the left and right
 of ri respectively at the time of its arrival. For this to be well-defined, we possibly
 need place an additional server at ∞ or −∞. Denote by PiL , PiR the alternating paths
 connecting r to siL and siR , respectively, that have shortest t-net cost. Recall, that for the
 t-net cost algorithm there are no free servers inside the search interval. Thus, Īi ⊆ Ii
 and the following observation holds.
 Observation 21 We have Pi ∈ {PiL , PiR }.
    The following lemma establishes some properties of the offline t-net cost algorithm
 on alternating instances.
 Lemma 22 (i) Paths PiL , PiR and matching Mi∗ only use minimal edges.
(ii) If Pi = PiX, for X ∈ {L, R}, on Ii , locally, we have that Mi∗ = M X .
                                       M∗                  Y
      Specifically, this implies φt i−1 (Pi ) = φtM (Pi ) for X = Y ∈ {L, R}.
(iii) If P j is a child of Pi , then Pi = PiL if and only if P j = P jR .
      In particular, we have I j ⊆ Pi and I j ∩ M ∗j ∩ Mi∗ = ∅.

 Proof Due to symmetry, we assume without loss of generality that Pi = PiR .
    (i): We use induction on i. The base case, i = 1, is easy, so let i ≥ 2. Suppose, for
 sake of contradiction, that Pi contains a non-minimal edge. Given a choice, consider
 the non-minimal edge e which is closest to si on Pi . Moving from ri to si along Pi ,
 edges leading from a server to a request are in Mi−1          ∗    and by induction hypothesis
                                       ∗
 minimal. Thus, e = (r , s) ∈ Mi leads from r to s.
    Consider the server s directly to the right of r . Since e is not minimal, we have r <
 s < r < s, with r being the request right of s . We first consider the case that s is free.
 Observation 21 implies that s = si . We show that altering Pi to go from r directly to s
 would yield a path of strictly lower t-net cost. To this end, first note that the remaining
 edges on Pi after s are minimal since e is closest to si . Thus, the t-net cost of the subpath
 of Pi starting at r is at least t ·c(r , s)−c(s , s) = t ·c(r , s )+(t −1)·c(s , s) > t ·c(r , s ),
 with the last term being the t-net cost of connecting r directly to s .
    If s is matched on the other hand, then it must be matched to r by induction
 hypothesis. Therefore, replacing e by (r , s ), (s , r ), (r , s) reduces the t-net cost by
 (t + 1) · c(s , r ), contradicting the minimality of Pi .

                                                                                                123
836                                                                         Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841


   (ii): By Statement (i), PiL and PiR only consist of minimal edges. Moving along Pi
from left to right, edges from server to request are in Mi−1  ∗ and edges from request to
              ∗
server in Mi . This is simply due to the fact that Pi is a path that augments Mi−1    ∗ to
          ∗
form Mi , and it starts at a request and ends at a server. We therefore have Mi−1     ∗ ∩

Pi ⊆ M . With a symmetrical argument, we obtain Pi ∩ Mi−1 ⊆ M . After
  R         L                                                     L      ∗         R

augmenting Mi−1    ∗  along Pi , the edges point in the opposite direction and the claim
follows.
   (iii): By (ii), we know that M ∗j ∩I j = M X , say X = R, so edges are of the form (r , s)
with r < s. Due to Statement (i), only augmenting paths leading from right to left
can augment along such edges. If this happens, all of I j is traversed as there is no
free server in its interior. As parent of P j , Pi is the first path to properly contain P j
and thus Pi = PiL , and in particular, I j ⊆ Pi . The equation I j ∩ M ∗j ∩ Mi∗ = ∅ then
follows directly from (ii).                                                                
                                                                                           
   Note that due to Lemma 22 (i), the sum of edge costs of an augmenting path is
exactly equal to the length of the corresponding line segment. In particular, we have
c(PiL ) + c(PiR ) = |Ii |. For simplicity, we abuse notation and use Ii to denote both,
the interval on the line, and the set of edges PiL ∪ PiR .
   Lemma 22 can further be used to show that when considering the sum of lengths
of augmenting paths of a certain depth in the path forest, then this number increases
exponentially as the depth decreases, i.e., towards a root. Fix an augmenting path Ph
and consider the induced subtree of augmenting paths with root Ph . Denote by Hk the
set of indices of paths at depth k with Ph being at depth 0.
Lemma 23 Consider a path Ph and its grandchildren, i.e., P j with j ∈ H2 . Then
                                                   
                                    c(Ph ) ≥ 2 − 1t ·  c(P j ).
                                                            j∈H2

Proof Denote by Pi , i ∈ I = H1 , the children of Ph in the path-forest and by Ji ⊆
J = H2 the sets of indices of their respective children. Without loss of generality,
assume Ph = PhR . Lemma 22 (iii), implies Pi = PiL , and P j = P jR , for i ∈ I, j ∈ J ;
                                                                            M∗                   M∗
see Fig. 6. With again Lemma 22 (iii), and using the fact that φt i−1 (PiR ) ≥ φt i−1 (PiL ),
by definition of the t-net cost algorithm, we get
                                           
      t · c(Ph ) ≥ t ·     c(PiL ) + c(PiR )
                         i∈I
                                                 M∗
                ≥t·            c(PiL ) +         φt i−1 (PiR )
                         i∈I               i∈I
                                                                                       M∗
                ≥t·            c(P jR ) + t ·          c(PiL \(∪ j∈Ji P jR )) +         φt i−1 (PiL ).   (6)
                         j∈J                     i∈I                              i∈I

Using Lemma 22 (ii), we get

          M∗         (ii)       R
        φt i−1 (PiL ) = φtM (PiL )

123
Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841                                                                 837

                               R               R
                                                              R
                          =     φtM (P jL ) + φtM (P jR ) + φtM (Pi \(∪ j∈Ji I j ))
                              j∈Ji
                          (ii)   M ∗j−1              R
                                                               
                          ≥         φt    (P jL ) + φtM (P jR ) − t · c(Pi \(∪ j∈Ji I j )).
                               j∈Ji

          M∗                  M∗                     L
Since φt j−1 (P jL ) ≥ φt j−1 (P jR ) = φtM (P jR ), the above together with Inequality (6)
implies
                                          L             R
                                                                               
   t · c(Ph ) ≥           t · c(P jR ) + φtM (P jR ) + φtM (P jR ) ≥ (2t − 1) ·   c(P jR ),
                    j∈J                                                              j∈J


where last inequality follows from the observation that, due to Eq. (1), it holds that
   L           R
φtM (P) + φtM (P) = (t − 1) · c(P).                                                 
                                                                                    

We are now equipped to prove Theorem 3.

Theorem 3 For alternating instances of online metric matching on the line, there is
a (1 + ε)-competitive algorithm that reassigns each request O( ε12 ) times.

Proof Fix an augmenting path Ph and consider its descendants P j at depth 2k + 2
in the path tree rooted at Ph , i.e., j ∈ H2k+2 . The intervals I j are contained in
paths P j , j ∈ H2k+1 , by Lemma 22 (iii). Lemma 23 implies
                                                                  −k 
                              |I j | ≤              c(P j ) ≤ 2 − 1t    ·  c(Pi ).             (7)
                   j∈H2k+2               j ∈H2k+1                         i∈H1


Raghvendra [28] shows that the t-net cost of augmenting paths is always non-negative.
                    M∗
In particular, φt h−1 (Ph ) = t · c(Ph ∩ Mh∗ ) − c(Ph ∩ Mh−1
                                                         ∗ ) ≥ 0. Thus,

   
          c(Pi ) ≤ c(Ph ) = c(Ph ∩ Mh∗ ) + c(Ph ∩ Mh−1
                                                   ∗
                                                       ) ≤ (t + 1)·c(Ph ∩ Mh∗ ).               (8)
   i∈H1

Similarly,
                                            
                    c(Pi ) ≤ (t + 1) ·              c(Pi ∩ Mi∗ ) ≤ (t + 1) · c(Ph ∩ Mi∗ ).     (9)
             i∈H1                           i∈H1


On an interval Ii with i ∈ H1 , locally, Mh∗ = M L if and only if Mi∗ = M R by
Lemma 22 (ii). For X = L and X = R, Eq. (7) together with Eqs. (8) and (9),
respectively, implies
                                               −k                      
                                 |I j | ≤ 2 − 1t     · (t + 1) · c Ph ∩ M X .
                      j∈H2k+2


                                                                                             123
838                                                               Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841


Rearranging, we obtain

                        k                                                    
             1
            t+1    2 − 1t − 1 ·             |I j | ≤ c Ph \(∪ j∈H2k+2 I j ) ∩ M X .       (10)
                                  j∈H2k+2


Denote by α(k, t) the term in square brackets. When a (minimal) edge (r , s) is frozen,
the remaining instance on S\{s} × R\{r } is again alternating and at most one request
will take a detour due to (r , s) being frozen. The additionally incurred cost when com-
pared to M ∗ is bounded by 2·|Ir | and can, via Inequality (10), be charged to non-frozen
parts of M OPT (recall that M OPT ∈ {M L , M R }). The set difference Ph \(∪ j∈H2k+2 I j ) in
Inequality (10) ensures that the portion Ph ∩ M OPT of M OPT is charged at most 2k + 2
times before Ph itself is frozen and the cost is charged to another portion of M OPT .
This leads to a competitive ratio of (t + α(k,t)
                                             2k+2
                                                  ).
   We set t = 1 + ε and show that this results in a competitive ratio of 1 + 2ε for an
appropriate choice of k. This is equivalent to showing that

                                                                    k
                                               ε        ε
                   2k + 2 ≤ ε · α(k, t) =         · 1+                  − ε.
                                              2+ε      1+ε

                                4
                              ε   ε
Assuming ε < 2 and using 1 + 1+ε    ≥ e for ε < 2, this can be further simplified
to
                                 10      ε
                              k·    ≤ (e 4 )k .
                                  ε
Setting k = 30 · ε−2 , this statement is true for all ε < 2. This concludes the proof of
the theorem.                                                                          
                                                                                      

   As a byproduct, we show, for this special class of instances, a result in the online
setting without recourse. It relates the competitive ratio to the cost metric, i.e., the
maximum difference in edge cost for connecting a request to a server and refines
the best known competitive ratio of O(log n) by Raghvendra [29]. The proof of the
following theorem additionally contains a proof for an upper bound of O(log n) for
alternating instances that is much simpler than the general proof by Raghvendra [29].

Theorem 24 The online t-net cost algorithm is O(min{log n, log })-competitive,
                           c(r ,s)
with  = maxr ,r ∈R,s,s ∈S c(r ,s ) , for alternating instances of online metric matching
on the line.


Proof Consider an edge ei of M and assume Pi = PiR . By Lemma 22 (ii) and the
definition of the t-net cost algorithm,

                                         M∗
 t · c(PiL ∩ M L ) − c(PiL ∩ M R ) = φt i−1 (PiL )
                                         M∗
                                    ≥ φt i−1 (PiR ) = t · c(PiR ∩ M R ) − c(PiR ∩ M L ),


123
Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841                                                                           839




Fig. 7 A non-alternating instance, where the strategy from Sect. 4 fails. Edge costs are indicated above the
corresponding portion of the line and the paths Pi are the minimum t-net-cost paths chosen by the offline
matching M ∗ for augmentation (t = 1 + ε). In each iteration, request r1 is reassigned. However, the cost
                                                                                                   j·ε
of the optimum solution does not increase exponentially. More precisely, OPTi = 1 + i−1       j=1 1+ε . It is
therefore not possible to freeze request r1 after a constant number of reassignments. Note, however, that
the amortized recourse budget is constant, even without freezing


which implies

                      c(PiR ∩ M R ) ≤ 1t · c(PiR ∩ M L ) + c(PiL ∩ M L ).

Therefore,

                       c(Pi ) = c(PiR ∩ M L ) + c(PiR ∩ M R )
                                     
                              ≤ 1 + 1t · c(PiR ∩ M L ) + c(PiL ∩ M L ).                                (11)

                              M∗
As in Eq. (8), we use φt i−1 (Pi ) = t · c(Pi ∩ Mi∗ ) − c(Pi ∩ Mi−1
                                                                ∗ ) ≥ 0 to obtain


                              c(Pi ) = c(Pi ∩ Mi∗ ) + c(Pi ∩ Mi−1
                                                              ∗
                                                                  )
                                                         ∗
                                     ≤ (t + 1) · c(Pi ∩ Mi )
                                      = (t + 1) · c(Pi ∩ M R ).                                        (12)

Together, Inequalities (11) and (12) imply

                     c(ei ) = c(Pi ) ≤ c(Ii ∩ M OPT ) · max{t + 1, 1 + 1t }.

   Since intervals corresponding to the same depth in the path-forest are disjoint, we
can bound the lengths of paths which are of identical depth by max{t +1, 1+ 1t }·OPT.
As there are at most 2 · log(2−1/t)  different depths in total due to Lemma 23, this
bounds the competitive ratio by O(log ).
   Further, using the same approach, we can directly obtain the upper bound of
O(log n) from Raghvendra [29]. Specifically, we bound the cost of the nodes of depth

                                                                                                123
840                                                                         Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841


O(log n) or lower in the path forest by O(log n) · max{t + 1, 1 + 1t } · OPT as above.
For nodes P j of larger depth, we denote by Pi the root of the corresponding path tree
and apply Lemma 23 repeatedly, O(log n) times, to bound their cost by

                              c(P j ) ≤ O( n1 ) · c(Pi ) ≤ n1 · O(OPT).

Noting that there are less than n such edges completes the proof We close this section
by showing that the strategy that we have proposed in Sect. 4 fails in the general case.
Figure 7 demonstrates an example.                                                     
                                                                                      


5 Conclusion

In this paper, we give non-trivial results for the online metric bipartite matching prob-
lem with recourse. The results were obtained simultaneously with and independently of
Gupta et al. [15] who consider also more general metrics than the line. We confirm that
an average recourse of O(log n) per request is sufficient to obtain an O(1)-competitive
matching on the line. It remains open if such a result can be obtained in a non-amortized
setting, where the recourse is available only per iteration. Our algorithm is clearly
designed for the amortized setting as it buffers online matching decisions and repairs
them in batches.
   Further, it remains open whether constant recourse per request suffices for maintain-
ing an O(1)-competitive matching on the line, as for the case of alternating requests.
This may be very well possible as there is, currently, no lower bound that rules this out.
While the strategy proposed in Sect. 4 fails in the general case, we nevertheless hope
that the ideas provided in this paper still prove helpful for solving this open question.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL. The research was partially
supported by the German Science Foundation (DFG) under contract ME 3825/1.


Declarations
Conflict of interest The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included
in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

References
 1. Angelopoulos, S., Dürr, C., Jin, S.: Online maximum matching with recourse. In: MFCS, volume 117
    of LIPIcs, pp. 8:1–8:15 (2018)
 2. Antoniadis, A., Fischer, C., Tönnis, A.: A collection of lower bounds for online matching on the line.
    In: LATIN, volume 10807 of LNCS, pp. 52–65 (2018)


123
Algorithmica (2025) 87:813–841                                                                         841


 3. Bansal, N., Buchbinder, N., Gupta, A., Naor, J.: A randomized O(log2 k)-competitive algorithm for
    metric bipartite matching. Algorithmica 68(2), 390–403 (2014)
 4. Bernstein, A., Dudeja, A.: Online matching with recourse: random edge arrivals. In: FSTTCS, volume
    182 of LIPIcs, pp. 11:1–11:16 (2020)
 5. Bernstein, A., Holm, J., Rotenberg, E.: Online bipartite matching with amortized O(log2 n)
    replacements. J. ACM 66(5), 37:1-37:23 (2019)
 6. Bosek, B., Leniowski, D., Sankowski, P., Zych, A.: Online bipartite matching in offline time. In: FOCS,
    pp. 384–393 (2014)
 7. Chaudhuri, K., Daskalakis, C., Kleinberg, R., Lin, H.: Online bipartite perfect matching with
    augmentations. In: INFOCOM, pp. 1044–1052 (2009)
 8. Duan, R., Pettie, S.: Linear-time approximation for maximum weight matching. J. ACM 61(1), 1:1-1:23
    (2014)
 9. Gairing, M., Klimm, M.: Greedy metric minimum online matchings with random arrivals. Oper. Res.
    Lett. 47(2), 88–91 (2019)
10. Grove, E., Kao, M., Krishnan, P., Vitter, J.: Online perfect matching and mobile computing. In: WADS,
    volume 955 of LNCS, pp. 194–205 (1995)
11. Gu, A., Gupta, A., Kumar, A.: The power of deferral: maintaining a constant-competitive Steiner tree
    online. SIAM J. Comput. 45(1), 1–28 (2016)
12. Gupta, A., Guruganesh, G., Peng, B., Wajc, D.: Stochastic online metric matching. In: ICALP, volume
    132 of LIPIcs, pp. 67:1–67:14 (2019)
13. Gupta, A., Kumar, A., Stein, C.: Maintaining assignments online: matching, scheduling, and flows. In:
    SODA, pp. 468–479 (2014)
14. Gupta, A., Lewi, K.: The online metric matching problem for doubling metrics. In: ICALP, volume
    7391 of LNCS, pp. 424–435 (2012)
15. Gupta, V., Krishnaswamy, R., Sandeep, S.: Permutation strikes back: the power of recourse in online
    metric matching. In: APPROX-RANDOM, volume 176 of LIPIcs, pp. 40:1–40:20 (2020)
16. Imase, M., Waxman, B.: Dynamic Steiner tree problem. SIAM J. Discrete Math. 4(3), 369–384 (1991)
17. Kalyanasundaram, B., Pruhs, K.: Online weighted matching. J. Algorithms 14(3), 478–488 (1993)
18. Karp, R., Vazirani, U., Vazirani, V.: An optimal algorithm for on-line bipartite matching. In: STOC,
    pp. 352–358 (1990)
19. Khuller, S., Mitchell, S., Vazirani, V.: On-line algorithms for weighted bipartite matching and stable
    marriages. Theor. Comput. Sci. 127(2), 255–267 (1994)
20. Kuhn, H.W., Yaw, B.: The Hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval Res. Logist. Quart.
    2, 83–97 (1955)
21. Lacki, J., Oćwieja, J., Pilipczuk, M., Sankowski, P., Zych, A.: The power of dynamic distance oracles:
    efficient dynamic algorithms for the Steiner tree. In: STOC, pp. 11–20 (2015)
22. Matuschke, J., Schmidt-Kraepelin, U., Verschae, J.: Maintaining perfect matchings at low cost. In:
    ICALP, volume 132 of LIPIcs, pp. 82:1–82:14 (2019)
23. Megow, N., Nölke, L.: Online minimum cost matching with recourse on the line. In: APPROX-
    RANDOM, volume 176 of LIPIcs, pp. 37:1–37:16 (2020)
24. Megow, N., Skutella, M., Verschae, J., Wiese, A.: The power of recourse for online MST and TSP.
    SIAM J. Comput. 45(3), 859–880 (2016)
25. Mehta, A.: Online matching and ad allocation. Found. Trends Theor. Comput. Sci. 8(4), 265–368
    (2013)
26. Nayyar, K., Raghvendra, S.: An input sensitive online algorithm for the metric bipartite matching
    problem. In: FOCS, pp. 505–515 (2017)                               √
27. Peserico, E., Scquizzato, M.: Matching on the line admits no o( log n)-competitive algorithm. In:
    ICALP, volume 198 of LIPIcs, pp. 103:1–103:3 (2021)
28. Raghvendra, S.: A robust and optimal online algorithm for minimum metric bipartite matching. In:
    APPROX-RANDOM, volume 60 of LIPIcs, pp. 18:1–18:16 (2016)
29. Raghvendra, S.: Optimal analysis of an online algorithm for the bipartite matching problem on a line.
    In: SoCG, volume 99 of LIPIcs, pp. 67:1–67:14 (2018)
30. Shin, Y., Kim, K., Lee, S., An, H.: Online graph matching problems with a worst-case reassignment
    budget (2020). CoRR arXiv:2003.05175


Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.


                                                                                              123
