                                         A Structural Investigation of the Approximability
                                         of Polynomial-Time Problems
                                         Karl Bringmann
                                         Saarland University and Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus,
                                         Saarbrücken, Germany

                                         Alejandro Cassis
                                         Saarland University and Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus,
                                         Saarbrücken, Germany

                                         Nick Fischer
                                         Saarland University and Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus,
                                         Saarbrücken, Germany
arXiv:2204.11681v1 [cs.DS] 25 Apr 2022




                                         Marvin Künnemann
                                         TU Kaiserslautern, Germany

                                               Abstract
                                         An extensive research effort targets optimal (in)approximability results for various NP-hard
                                         optimization problems. Notably, the works of (Creignou’95) as well as (Khanna, Sudan, Trevisan,
                                         Williamson’00) establish a tight characterization of a large subclass of MaxSNP, namely Boolean
                                         MaxCSPs and further variants, in terms of their polynomial-time approximability. Can we obtain
                                         similarly encompassing characterizations for classes of polynomial-time optimization problems?
                                             To this end, we initiate the systematic study of a recently introduced polynomial-time analogue
                                         of MaxSNP, which includes a large number of well-studied problems (including Nearest and
                                         Furthest Neighbor in the Hamming metric, Maximum Inner Product, optimization variants of
                                         k-XOR and Maximum k-Cover). Specifically, for each k, MaxSPk denotes the class of O(mk )-time
                                         problems of the form maxx1 ,...,xk #{y : φ(x1 , . . . , xk , y)} where φ is a quantifier-free first-order
                                         property and m denotes the size of the relational structure. Assuming central hypotheses about
                                         clique detection in hypergraphs and exact Max-3-SAT, we show that for any MaxSPk problem
                                         definable by a quantifier-free m-edge graph formula φ, the best possible approximation guarantee in
                                         faster-than-exhaustive-search time O(mk−δ ) falls into one of four categories:
                                             optimizable to exactness in time O(mk−δ ),
                                             an (inefficient) approximation scheme, i.e., a (1 + ε)-approximation in time O(mk−f (ε) ),
                                             a (fixed) constant-factor approximation in time O(mk−δ ), or
                                             an mε -approximation in time O(mk−f (ε) ).
                                         We obtain an almost complete characterization of these regimes, for MaxSPk as well as for an
                                         analogously defined minimization class MinSPk . As our main technical contribution, we show
                                         how to rule out the existence of approximation schemes for a large class of problems admitting
                                         constant-factor approximations, under a hypothesis for exact Sparse Max-3-SAT algorithms posed
                                         by (Alman, Vassilevska Williams’20). As general trends for the problems we consider, we observe:
                                         (1) Exact optimizability has a simple algebraic characterization, (2) only few maximization problems
                                         do not admit a constant-factor approximation; these do not even have a subpolynomial-factor
                                         approximation, and (3) constant-factor approximation of minimization problems is equivalent to
                                         deciding whether the optimum is equal to 0.

                                         2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Problems, reductions and completeness;
                                         Theory of computation → Approximation algorithms analysis

                                         Keywords and phrases Classification Theorems, Hardness of Approximation in P, Fine-grained
                                         Complexity Theory

                                         Funding Karl Bringmann, Alejandro Cassis, Nick Fischer: This work is part of the project TIPEA
                                         that has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Unions
2   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


    Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No. 850979). Marvin Künnemann:
    Part of this research was performed at ETH Zürich, Institute for Theoretical Studies, supported by
    Dr. Max Rössler, by the Walter Haefner Foundation, and by the ETH Zürich Foundation.




     1        Introduction

    For many optimization problems, the best known exact algorithms essentially explore the
    complete search space, up to low-order improvements. While this holds true in particular for
    NP-hard optimization problems such as maximum satisfiability, also common polynomial-time
    optimization problems like Nearest Neighbor search are no exception. When facing such
    a problem, the perhaps most common approach is to relax the optimization goal and ask
    for approximations rather than optimal solutions. Can we obtain an approximate value
    significantly faster than exhaustive search, and if so, what is the best approximation guarantee
    we can achieve?
        Even considering polynomial-time problems only, the study of such questions has led to
    significant algorithmic breakthroughs, such as locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) [58, 50, 16],
    subquadratic-time approximation algorithms for Edit Distance [66, 24, 23, 25, 19, 17, 33,
    64, 28, 52, 18], scaling algorithms for graph problems [46, 83, 43], and fast approximation
    algorithms via the polynomial method [9, 10] (which lead to the currently fastest known
    exponential-time approximation schemes for MaxSAT).
        These algorithmic breakthroughs have recently been complemented by exciting tools for
    proving hardness of approximation in P: Most notably, the distributed PCP framework [7]
    has lead to strong conditional lower bounds, including fundamental limits for Nearest
    Neighbor search [74], as well as tight approximability results for the Maximum Inner Product
    problem [36]. Other technical advances include evidence against deterministic approximation
    schemes for Longest Common Subsequence [2, 6, 37], strong (at times even tight) problem-
    specific hardness results such as [73, 29, 22, 32, 61], the first fine-grained equivalences of
    approximation in P results [38, 37], and related works on parameterized inapproximability [34,
    60, 69], see [45] for a survey.
        These strong advances from both sides shift the algorithmic frontier and the frontier of
    conditional hardness towards each other. Consequently, it becomes increasingly important
    to generalize isolated results – both algorithms and reductions – towards making these
    frontiers explicit: A more comprehensive description of current techniques might enable us
    to understand general trends underlying these works and to highlight the most pressing
    limitations of current methods. In fact, we view this as one of the fundamental tasks and
    uses of fine-grained algorithm design & complexity.



    Optimization Classes in P To study (hardness of) approximation in P in a general way,
    we study a class MaxSPk recently introduced in [30] (see Section C.1 for a comparison to
    the classic class MaxSNP, which motivated the definition of MaxSPk ). This class consists
    of polynomial-time optimization problems of the form:


          max #{y : φ(x1 , . . . , xk , y)},
         x1 ,...,xk
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                            3


where φ is a quantifier-free first-order property.1 One obtains an analogous minimization
class MinSPk by replacing maximization by minimization. A large number of natural and
well-studied problems can be expressed this way: In particular, we may think of each xi
ranging over a set Xi of n vectors in {0, 1}d , and the task is to maximize (or minimize) the
number of coordinates y satisfying an arbitrary Boolean function over the coordinate values
x1 [y], . . . , xk [y] (here, φ is defined using a binary relation R ⊆ (X1 ∪ · · · ∪ Xk ) × Y that
expresses whether the y-th coordinate of xi is 0 or 1; see Section 2 for details). In particular,
this class of problems includes:
    (Offline) Furthest/Nearest Neighbor search in the Hamming metric
    (maxx1 ,x2 / minx1 ,x2 dH (x1 , x2 )),
    Maximum/Minimum Inner Product; the latter is the optimization formulation of the
    Most-Orthogonal Vectors problem [3]
    (maxx1 ,x2 / minx1 ,x2 hx1 , x2 i),
    A natural similarity search problem that we call Maximum k-Agreement
    (maxx1 ,...,xk #{y : x1 [y] = · · · = xk [y]}),
    Maximum k-Cover [44, 40, 69] and its variation Maximum Exact-k-Cover [63]
    (maxx1 ,...,xk #{y : xi [y] = 1 for some i}, maxx1 ,...,xk #{y : xi [y] = 1 for exactly one i})2 ,
    The canonical optimization variants of the k-XOR problem [59, 42]
    (maxx1 ,...,xk / minx1 ,...,xk #{y : x1 [y] ⊕ · · · ⊕ xk [y] = 0}).
    By the standard split-and-list technique [78], it is easy to see that any c-approximation for
    Maximum k-XOR or Minimum k-XOR in time O(nk−δ poly(d)) gives a c-approximation
    for Max-LIN (maximize the number of satisfied constraints of a linear system over F2 ,
    see [54, 78, 10]) or the Minimum Distance Problem3 (finding the minimum weight of a
                                                                                             0
    non-zero code word of a linear code over F2 , see [75]), respectively, in time O(2n(1−δ ) ).

   By a simple baseline algorithm, all of these problems can be solved in time O(mk ), where
m denotes the input size (for the above setting of k sets of n vectors in {0, 1}d we have
m = O(nd)). A large body of work addresses problems with k = 2, typically inventing or
adapting strong techniques to each specific problem as needed:
   Abboud, Rubinstein, and Williams introduced the distributed PCP in P framework
   and ruled out almost-polynomial approximations for the Maximum Inner Product
   problem assuming the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH). Subsequently,
   Chen [36] strengthened the lower bound and gave an approximation algorithm resulting
   in tight bounds on the approximability in strongly subquadratic time, assuming SETH.
   Corresponding inapproximability results for its natural generalization to k-Maximum
   Inner Product have been obtained in [60].
   In contrast, strong approximation algorithms have a rich history for the Nearest Neighbor
   search problem: Using LSH, we can obtain an (1+ε)-approximation in time O(n2−Θ(ε) ) [53,
   14, 15, 20].
            √
                   Using further techniques,
                                    √
                                                   the dependence on ε has been improved to
        2−Ω( ε)                2−Ω̃( 3 ε)
   O(n          ) [76] and O(n            ) [9, 10]. On the hardness side, Rubinstein [74] shows
   that the dependence on ε cannot be improved indefinitely, by proving that for every δ,
   there exists an ε such that (1 + ε)-approximate Nearest Neighbor search requires time


1
  Note that [30] more generally defines classes MaxSPk,` for ` ≥ 1. We focus on MaxSPk = MaxSPk,1 ,
  as it was determined as computationally harder than MaxSPk,` with ` ≥ 2, and contains many natural
  problems (see below).
2
  These problems are typically studied in the setting where k is part of the input, while we consider them
  for a fixed constant k.
3
  In fact, even for the Nearest Codeword Problem over F2 .
4   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


         Ω(n2−δ ) assuming SETH. In particular, this rules out poly(1/ε)n2−δ -time algorithms
         with δ > 0.
         For the dual problem of Furthest Neighbor search (i.e., diameter in the Hamming metric),
                               2
         [27] gives a O(n2−Θ(ε ) )-time algorithm, which was improved to O(n2−Θ(ε) ) via reduction
         to Nearest Neighbor search√
                                           in [56]. Following further improvements [51, 57], also here
                             2−Ω̃( 3 ε)
         [9, 10] give an O(n            )-time algorithm. Analogous inapproximability to Rubinstein’s
         result are given in [38].
         For Minimum Inner Product, the well-known Orthogonal Vectors hypothesis [77] (which
         is implied by SETH [78]) is precisely the assumption that already distinguishing whether
         the optimal value is 0 or at least 1 cannot be done in strongly subquadratic time.
         Interestingly, Chen and Williams [38] show a converse: a refutation of the Orthogonal
         Vectors hypothesis would give a subquadratic-time constant-factor approximation for
         Minimum Inner Product.
        In the above list, we focus on the difficult case of moderate dimension d = no(1) (when
    measuring the time complexity with respect to the input size). Lower-dimensional settings
    such as d = Θ(log n), d = Θ(log log n) or even lower are addressed in other works [81, 38].
        While the above collection of results gives a detailed understanding of isolated problems,
    we know little about general phenomena of (in)approximability in MaxSPk and MinSPk
    using faster-than-exhaustive-search algorithms: Are there problems for which constant-factor
    approximations are best possible? Is maximizing (or minimizing) Inner Product the only
    problem without a constant-factor approximation? Which problems can we optimize exactly?
        There are precursors to our work that show fine-grained equivalence classes of approxima-
    tion problems in P [37, 38]. However, establishing membership of a problem in these classes
    requires a problem-specific proof, while we are interested in syntactically defined classes,
    where class membership can be immediately read off from the definition of a problem. Our
    aim is to understand the approximability landscape of such classes fully. Finally, the previous
    works either focus on lower-dimensional settings [38]4 , or target more powerful problems
    than we consider, such as Closest-LCS-Pair [37].

    MaxSPk as Polynomial-Time Analogue of MaxSNP Investigating NP-hard optimization
    problems, Papadimitriou and Yannakakis [71] introduced the class MaxSNP, which motivates
    the definition of MaxSPk as a natural polynomial-time analogue (see [30] and Section C.1 for
    details). As a general class containing prominent, constant-factor approximable optimization
    problems, MaxSNP was introduced to give the first evidence that Max-3-SAT does not
    admit a PTAS, by proving that Max-3-SAT belongs to the hardest-to-approximate problems
    in MaxSNP.
        Ideally, one would like to understand the approximability landscape in MaxSNP fully
    and give tight approximability results for each such problem. Major advances towards this
    goal have been achieved by Creignou [41] and Khanna, Sudan, Trevisan, and Williamson [62]
    who gave a complete classification of a large subclass of MaxSNP, namely, maximum
    Boolean Constraint Satisfaction Problems (MaxCSP): Each Boolean MaxCSP either is
    polynomial-time optimizable or it does not admit a PTAS unless P = NP, rendering a
    polynomial-time constant-factor approximation best possible. For minimization analogues,
    including Boolean MinCSPs, the situation is more diverse with several equivalence classes
    needed to describe the result [62].


    4
        Chen and Williams also give some results for the moderate-dimensional case; we discuss these in
        Section 3.
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                  5


   We initiate the study of the same type of questions in the polynomial-time regime. Our
aim is to achieve a detailed understanding of MaxSPk and MinSPk akin to the classification
theorems achieved for MaxCSPs and MinCSPs [41, 62].

1.1      Our Results
We approach the classification of MaxSPk and MinSPk by considering the simplest, yet
expressive case of a single, binary relation involved in the first-order formula; this route was
also taken in earlier classification work for first-order properties [31]. We may thus view the
relational structure as a graph, and call such a formula a graph formula. Note that despite its
naming, this includes problems not usually viewed as graph problems, such as all examples
given in the introduction, which are natural problems on sets of vectors in {0, 1}d .
    We obtain a classification of each graph formula into one of four regimes, assuming
central fine-grained hardness hypotheses whose plausibility we detail in Section B. All of our
hardness results are implied by the Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis [12], which states that
for all δ > 0 there is some c > 0 such that Max-3-SAT on n variables and cn clauses has
no O(2n(1−δ) )-time algorithm.5 (Actually, most of our hardness results already follow from
weaker assumptions. For a discussion, see Section B.)

I Theorem 1. Let ψ be a MaxSPk or MinSPk graph formula. Assuming the Sparse
Max-3-SAT hypothesis, ψ belongs to precisely one of the following regimes:
R1 Efficiently optimizable:
   There is some δ > 0 such that ψ can be solved exactly in time O(mk−δ ).
R2 Admits an approximation scheme, but not an efficient one:
   For all ε > 0, there is some δ > 0 such that ψ can be (1 + ε)-approximated in time
   O(mk−δ ). However, for all δ > 0, there is some ε > 0 such that ψ cannot be (1 + ε)-
   approximated in time O(mk−δ ).
R3 Admits a constant-factor approximation, but no approximation scheme:
   There are ε, δ > 0 such that ψ can be (1 + ε)-approximated in time O(mk−δ ). However,
   there also exists an ε > 0 such that for all δ > 0, ψ cannot be (1 + ε)-approximated in
   time O(mk−δ ).
R4 Arbitrary polynomial-factor approximation is best possible (maximization):
   For every ε > 0, there is some δ > 0 such that ψ can be O(mε )-approximated in time
   O(mk−δ ). However, for every δ > 0, there exists some ε > 0 such that ψ cannot be
   O(mε )-approximated in time O(mk−δ ).
      No approximation at all (minimization):
      For all δ > 0, we cannot decide whether the optimum value of ψ is 0 or at least 1 in time
      O(mk−δ ).

   Note that the characteristics of the fourth (i.e., hardest) regime differ between the
maximization and the minimization case.
   This theorem has immediate consequences for the approximability landscape in MaxSPk
and MinSPk , based on fine-grained assumptions: In particular, while any MaxSPk graph
formula can be approximated within a subpolynomial factor O(mε ), we can rule out optimal
approximation ratios that grow with m but are strictly subpolynomial (i.e., there are no
graph formulas whose optimal approximability within O(mk−Ω(1) ) time is Θ(log log m),


5
    This hypothesis is a stronger version of the Max-3-SAT hypothesis [68].
6   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems




                Hdeg (ψ) ≤ 2                                           3 ≤ Hdeg (ψ) ≤ k
                 (Hdeg (ψ) ≤ 1)                                          (Hdeg (ψ) = 2)



                                   Hand (ψ) ≤ 1        Hand (ψ) = 2             3 ≤ Hand (ψ) < k          Hand (ψ) = k
                                    (Hand (ψ) ≤ 1)         (empty)                    (empty)              (Hand (ψ) = 2)
      Max(ψ)




               R1:                R2:                 R2 or R3:          R3:                          R4:
                 exact solvable     AS                  constant approx.   constant approx.             poly. approx.
                                    no efficient AS     no efficient AS    no AS                        no subpoly. approx.
      Min(ψ)




               R1:                R2:                 R2 or R3:          R4:
                 exact solvable     AS                  constant approx.   no approximation
                                    no efficient AS     no efficient AS




        Figure 1 Visualizes our classification of first-order optimization problems Max(ψ) and Min(ψ)
    for all k ≥ 3, in terms of the hardness parameters Hand and Hdeg (as defined in Definitions 4 and 6).
    See Definition 10 for the precise definition of an (efficient) approximation scheme (AS). The pale
    labels indicate how to change the conditions to obtain the picture for k = 2.




        Table 1 Some interesting examples classified according to Figure 1. For each problem ψ, an
    instance consists of k sets of n vectors X1 , . . . , Xk ⊆ {0, 1}d . We write ψ = maxx1 ,...,xk / minx1 ,...,xk φ
    and only list the inner formulas φ in the table. The computations of Hdeg (ψ) and Hand (ψ) are
    carried out in Appendix A.

     Problem ψ                        φ                                     Hdeg (ψ)       Hand (ψ)     Hardness regime

     Maximum/Minimum
                                      #{y : x1 [y] = x2 [y]}                2              1                           R2
     2-Agreement
     Maximum/Minimum
                                      #{y : x1 [y] = x2 [y] = x3 [y]}       2              2                           R1
     3-Agreement
     Maximum
                                      #{y : x1 [y] = · · · = xk [y]}        2b k2 c        k−1                         R3
     k-Agreement, k ≥ 4
     Minimum
                                      #{y : x1 [y] = · · · = xk [y]}        2b k2 c        k−1                         R4
     k-Agreement, k ≥ 4
     Maximum/Minimum
                                      #{y : x1 [y] ⊕ · · · ⊕ xk [y]}        k              1                           R2
     k-XOR
     Maximum
                                      #{y : x1 [y] ∧ · · · ∧ xk [y]}        k              k                           R4
     k-Inner Product
     Minimum
                                      #{y : x1 [y] ∧ · · · ∧ xk [y]}        k              k                           R4
     k-Inner Product
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                7

                  √
Θ(log2 m) or 2Θ( log m) ). Furthermore, there are no graph formulas with an f (1/ε)mk−Ω(1)
approximation scheme that cannot already be optimized to exactness in time mk−Ω(1) .
    In fact, beyond Theorem 1 we even give an almost complete characterization of each regime:
Specifically, we introduce integer-valued hardness parameters 0 ≤ Hand (ψ) ≤ Hdeg (ψ) ≤ k
(defined in Section 3). As illustrated in Figure 1, we show how to place any graph formula ψ
into its corresponding regime depending solely on Hand (ψ) and Hdeg (ψ) – with the single
exception of formulas ψ with Hand (ψ) = 2 and Hdeg (ψ) ≥ 3. For these formulas (e.g.,
Maximum Exact-3-Cover), it remains open whether they belong to Regime 2 or 3, i.e.,
whether or not they admit an approximation scheme (see Open Problem 1).
    In Table 1 we give natural problems for each regime (showing in particular that each
regime is indeed non-empty). A particular highlight is that we can prove existence of
constant-factor approximable formulas that do not admit an approximation scheme, such as
Maximum-4-Agreement (see Section 3, Theorem 11 for a technical discussion of the lower
bound). We give the details on how to calculate the hardness parameters Hand (ψ) and
Hdeg (ψ) for each example in Table 1 in Appendix A.
    While the approximability of problems in the third and fourth regime seem rather
unsatisfactory, we also consider the setting of additive approximation, and show that for
every MaxSPk and MinSPk graph formula, there is an additive approximation scheme;
however, assuming the Sparse MAX-3-SAT hypothesis it cannot be an efficient one unless we
can optimize the problem exactly.

I Theorem 2 (Additive Approximation). For every ψ, we give an additive approximation
scheme, i.e., for every ε > 0, there is a δ > 0 such that we compute the optimum value up to
an additive ε|Y | error in time O(mk−δ ).
    If ψ does not belong to Regime 1, we show that unless the Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis
fails, for every δ > 0, there is some ε > 0 such that we cannot compute the optimum value
up to an additive ε|Y | error in time O(mk−δ ).

   Finally, we remark that our classification identifies general trends in MaxSPk and
MinSPk , including that exact optimizability is described by a simple algebraic criterion,
and that constant-factor approximation for minimization problems is equivalent to testing
whether the optimum is 0. We address these trends in Section 3.

On Plausibility of the Hypotheses As tight unconditional lower bounds for polynomial-
time problems are barely existent, we give conditional lower bounds, based on established
assumptions in fine-grained complexity theory, such as SETH (see [77] for an excellent
survey). The essentially only exception is the only recently introduced Sparse Max-3-SAT
hypothesis [12]; we use this hypothesis only for giving evidence against approximation
schemes and for ruling out certain additive approximation schemes. While it is possible that
this hypothesis could ultimately be refuted, our classification describes the frontier of the
current state of the art. At the very least, our conditional lower bound for approximation
schemes reveals a rather surprising connection: To obtain an approximation scheme for
polynomial-time problems such as Maximum 4-Agreement, we need to give an exponential-time
improvement for exact solutions for Sparse Max-3-SAT!

On the Use of Fast Matrix Multiplication From our hardness parameters, it is easy to
read off which of our algorithms require the use of fast matrix multiplication. In fact, this
connection also works in the other direction: Since fast matrix multiplication techniques are
at times deemed too sophisticated to be used in practice, we might want to disallow the use
8   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


    of these techniques. If we do this, it is plausible to assume that also Sparse Max-2-SAT
    has no O(2n(1−δ) )-time algorithms, and the remaining gap in our classification disappears!
    Specifically, any formula for which we know that it belongs to regime 2 or 3 would be placed
    into regime 3.
        At the very least, this connection suggests that to close the remaining gap of our
    classification, we need to use fast matrix multiplication.

    1.2      Further Related Work
    Parameterized Inapproximability The problem settings we consider are related to a recent
    and strong line of research on parameterized inapproximability, including [34, 60, 40, 69, 67]
    (see [45] for a recent survey). In these contexts, one seeks to determine optimal approxi-
    mation guarantees within some running time of the form f (k)ng(k) (such as FPT running
    time f (k) poly(n) or running time no(k) ) for some parameter k (such as the solution size).
    Unfortunately, many of these results do not immediately establish hardness for specific values
    of k. An important exception is work by Karthik, Laekhanukit, and Manurangsi [60], which
    among other results establishes inapproximability of k-Dominating Set and the Maximum k-
    Inner Product within running time O(nk−ε ), assuming SETH. We give a detailed comparison
    of our setting to notions used in Karthik et al.’s work in Section C.2.

    Fine-Grained Complexity of First-Order Properties Studying the fine-grained complexity
    of polynomial-time problem classes defined by first-order properties has been initiated
    in [80, 49], with different settings considered in [48, 47]. In particular, for model-checking
    first-order properties, [49] provides a completeness result (a fine-grained analogue of the
    Cook-Levin Theorem) and [31] provides a classification theorem (a fine-grained analogue of
    Schaefer’s Theorem, see also Section 3.1).
        For optimization in P, [30] provides completeness theorems for MaxSPk (a fine-grained
    analogue of MaxSNP-completeness of Max-3-SAT [71]). In contrast, the present paper gives
    a classification theorem (building a fine-grained analogue of the approximability classifications
    of optimization variants of CSPs [41, 62]).


     2       Preliminaries
    For an integer k ≥ 0, we set [k] = {1, . . . , k}. For a set A and integer k ≥ 0 we denote by A
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                      k
    the set of all size-k subsets of A. Let φ(z1 , . . . , zk ) a Boolean function, and let S ⊆ [k]. Any
    function obtained by instantiating all variables zi (i 6∈ S) in φ by constant values is called
    an S-restriction of φ. Finally, we write Õ(·) to hide poly-logarithmic factors and denote by
    ω < 2.373 the exponent of square matrix multiplication [13].

    2.1      First-Order Model-Checking
    A relational structure consists of n objects and relations R1 , . . . , R` (of arbitrary arities)
    between these objects. A first-order formula is a quantified formula of the form

         ψ = (Q1 x1 ) . . . (Qk+1 xk+1 ) φ(x1 , . . . , xk+1 ),

    where φ is a Boolean formula over the predicates R(xi1 , . . . , xi` ) and each Qi is either a
    universal or existential quantifier. Given a (k + 1)-partite structure on objects X1 ∪ · · · ∪ Xk+1 ,
    the model-checking problem (or query evaluation problem) is to check whether ψ holds on
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                     9


the given structure, that is, for xi ranging over Xi and by instantiating the predicates
R(xi1 , . . . , xi` ) in φ according to the structure, ψ is valid.
     Following previous work in this line of research [49, 31], we usually assume that the input
is represented sparsely – that is, we assume that the relational structure is written down as
an exhaustive enumeration of all records in all relations; let m denote the total number of
such entries6 . The convention is reasonable as this data format is common in the context of
database theory and also for the representation of graphs (where it is called the adjacency
list representation), see Section 4 for a further discussion.
     A first-order formula ψ is called a graph formula if it is defined over a single binary
predicate E(xi , xj ). Many natural problems fall into this category; see [31] for a detailed
discussion on the subject.

2.2      MaxSPk and MinSPk
In analogy to first-order properties with quantifier structure ∃k ∀ (with maximization instead
of ∃ and counting instead of ∀) and following the definition in [30], we now introduce the
class of optimization problems. Let MaxSPk be the class containing all formulas of the form


     ψ = max # φ(x1 , . . . , xk , y),                                                         (1)
          x1 ,...,xk y

where, as before, φ is a Boolean formula over some predicates R(xi1 , . . . , xi` ). We similarly
define MinSPk with “min” in place of “max”. Occasionally, we write OptSPk to refer to
both of these classes simultaneously, and we write “opt” as a placeholder for either “max” or
“min”. In analogy to the model-checking problem for first-order properties, we associate to
each formula ψ ∈ OptSPk an algorithmic problem:
I Definition 3 (Max(ψ) and Min(ψ)). Let ψ ∈ MaxSPk be as in (1). Given a (k + 1)-
partite structure on objects X1 ∪ · · · ∪ Xk ∪ Y , the Max(ψ) problem is to compute
     OPT =           max         # φ(x1 , . . . , xk , y).
              x1 ∈X1 ,...,xk ∈Xk y∈Y

We similarly define Min(ψ) for ψ ∈ MinSPk . Occasionally, for ψ ∈ OptSPk , we write
Opt(ψ) to refer to both problems simultaneously.
    For convenience, we introduce some further notation: For objects x1 ∈ X1 , . . . , xk ∈ Xk ,
we denote by Val(x1 , . . . , xk ) = #y∈Y φ(x1 , . . . , xk , y) the value of (x1 , . . . , xk ).
    The problem Opt(ψ) can be solved in time O(mk ) for all OptSPk formulas ψ, by a
straightforward extension of the model-checking baseline algorithm; see [30] for details. As
this is clearly optimal for k = 1, we will often implicitly assume that k ≥ 2 in the following.
    For a clean analogy between model-checking and the optimization classes MaxSPk and
MinSPk , we will from now view model-checking as “testing for zero”. More precisely, the
model-checking problem of ∃x1 . . . ∃xk ∀y ¬φ(x1 , . . . , xk , y) is equivalent to testing whether
Min(ψ) has optimal solution OPT = 0, where ψ = minx1 ,...,xk #y φ(x1 , . . . , xk , y). We refer
to the latter problem as Zero(ψ).
    Definition 3 introduces Max(ψ) and Min(ψ) as exact optimization problems (i.e., OPT
is required to be computed exactly). We say that an algorithm computes a (multiplicative)
c-approximation for Max(ψ) if it computes any value in the interval [c−1 · OPT, OPT].
Similarly, a (multiplicative) c-approximation for Min(ψ) computes a value in [OPT, c·OPT].


6
    By ignoring objects not occurring in any relation, we may always assume that n ≤ O(m).
10   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


      3     Technical Overview
     This section serves the purpose of stating our results formally, to provide the main proof ideas
     and techniques, and to convey some intuition whenever possible. We postpone the precise
     hypotheses for our conditional lower bounds along with a discussion on their plausibility to
     Appendix B.
        We first introduce our hardness parameters: the and-hardness Hand (ψ) borrowed from
     previous work [31] (reviewed below), as well as a novel algebraic parameter that we call
     degree-hardness Hdeg (ψ). In the subsequent sections, we give an overview over our various
     algorithmic and hardness results based on the values Hdeg (ψ), Hand (ψ) (see Figure 1), with
     the formal proof of Theorem 1 given at the end of this section.

     3.1    Bringmann et al.’s Model-Checking Dichotomy
     Bringmann, Fischer and Künnemann [31] established a fine-grained classification of all ∃k ∀-
     quantified graph properties into computationally easy and hard model-checking problems.
     As our work extends that classification (and also since our results are of a similar flavor), we
     briefly summarize their results. The hardness parameter presented in Definition 4 forms the
     basis for the dichotomy.
         Here, and for the remainder of this section, we write ψ0 to denote the Boolean function
     obtained from ψ in the following way: Let ψ = optx1 ,...,xk #y φ(x1 , . . . , xk , y) be any
     graph formula, where φ is a propositional formula over the atoms E(xi , xj ) (i, j ∈ [k])
     and E(xi , y) (i ∈ [k]). Consider the Boolean function obtained from φ by replacing
     every atom E(xi , xj ) (i, j ∈ [k]) by false. What remains is a Boolean function over
     the k atoms E(xi , y) (i ∈ [k]) and we denote this formula by ψ0 . For example, if ψ =
     maxx1 ,x2 #y (¬E(x1 , x2 ) ∧ E(x1 , y) ∧ E(x2 , y)) then we define ψ0 : {0, 1}2 → {0, 1} by
     ψ0 (a1 , a2 ) = a1 ∧ a2 .
         As apparent in Definition 4, the core difficulty of a formula ψ is captured by ψ0 and thus
     not affected by the predicates E(xi , xj ). We elaborate on this phenomenon in Appendix D.

     I Definition 4 (And-Hardness). Let φ be a Boolean function on k inputs. The and-hardness
     Hand (φ) of φ is the largest integer 0 ≤ h ≤ k such that, for any index set S ∈ [k]
                                                                                         
                                                                                        h , there
     exists some S-restriction of φ with exactly one satisfying assignment. (Set Hand (φ) = 0 for
     constant-valued φ.) For an OptSPk graph formula ψ, we define Hand (ψ) = Hand (ψ0 ).

        This hardness parameter essentially specifies the computational hardness of the model-
     checking problems Zero(φ); here, Hand (ψ) ≤ 2 is the critical threshold:

     I Theorem 5 (Model-Checking, [31]). Let ψ be a MinSPk graph formula.
        If Hand (ψ) ≤ 2 and Hand (ψ) < k, then Zero(ψ) can be solved in time O(mk−δ ) for some
        δ > 0.
        If 3 ≤ Hand (ψ) or Hand (ψ) = k, then Zero(ψ) cannot be solved in time O(mk−δ ) for
       any δ > 0 unless the Max-3-SAT hypothesis fails.

     3.2    Exact Optimization
     We are now ready to detail our results. Our main contribution is a dichotomy for the exact
     solvability and approximability of Max(ψ) and Min(ψ) for all MaxSPk and MinSPk graph
     formulas ψ. For the exact case, the decisive criterion for the hardness of some formula ψ can
     be read off the polynomial extension of the function ψ0 . Specifically, for any Boolean function
     φ there exists a (unique) multilinear polynomial with real coefficients that computes φ on
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                           11


binary inputs. By abuse of notation, we refer to that polynomial by writing φ as well. The
degree deg(φ) of φ is the degree of its polynomial extension.
    As an example, consider the Exact-3-Cover property: φ(z1 , z2 , z3 ) is true if and only if
exactly one of its inputs z1 , z2 or z3 is true. Then its unique multilinear polynomial extension
is

     φ(z1 , z2 , z3 ) = 3z1 z2 z3 − 2(z1 z2 + z2 z3 + z3 z1 ) + (z1 + z2 + z3 ),

and therefore deg(φ) = 3.

I Definition 6 (Degree Hardness). Let φ be a Boolean function on k inputs. The degree
hardness Hdeg (φ) of φ is the largest integer 0 ≤ h ≤ k such that, for any index set S ∈ [k]
                                                                                            
                                                                                          h ,
there exists some S-restriction of φ of degree h. For an OptSPk graph formula ψ, we define
Hdeg (ψ) = Hdeg (ψ0 ).

   It always holds that Hand (ψ) ≤ Hdeg (ψ) (see Proposition 36), but in general these
parameters behave very differently (see Appendix A for a list of examples). With Hdeg in
place of Hand , we are able to recover the same classification as Theorem 5 for both exact
maximization and minimization:

I Theorem 7 (Exact Optimization). Let ψ be an OptSPk graph formula.
   If Hdeg (ψ) ≤ 2 and Hdeg (ψ) < k, then Opt(ψ) can be solved in time O(mk−δ ) for some
   δ > 0.
   If 3 ≤ Hdeg (ψ) or Hdeg (ψ) = k, then Opt(ψ) cannot be solved in time O(mk−δ ) for any
   δ > 0 unless the Max-3-SAT hypothesis fails.

     We will formally prove Theorem 7 in Appendix E. The algorithmic part is along the
same lines as [31]: We first brute-force over all but k = 3 quantifiers, and solve the remaining
problem by a reduction to maximum-weight triangle detection with small edge weights.
Intuitively, since the degree of the resulting 3-variable problem is at most 2, we can express
the objective as a sum of three parts depending on two variables each (this approach is also
used in a similar context in [79, Chapter 6.5]). This allows us to label the edges of a triangle
instance with corresponding parts, which can be shown to yield average edge weight O(1).
     The conditional lower bound is more interesting. Our reduction is inspired by a standard
argument proving quadratic-time hardness of the Maximum Inner Product problem (MaxIP).
That lower bound is based on the OV hypothesis, so it consists of a reduction from an
OV instance X1 , X2 ⊆ {0, 1}d to an instance of MaxIP. The idea is to use a gadget that
maps every entry in xi ∈ Xi to a constant number of new entries;7 let x0i ∈ {0, 1}O(d)
denote the vector after applying the gadget coordinate-wise. The crucial property is that
hx01 , x02 i = d − hx1 , x2 i, and thus a pair of orthogonal vectors x1 , x2 corresponds to a pair of
vectors x01 , x02 of maximum inner product.
     To mimic the reduction for all problems which are hard in the sense of Theorem 7, we
settle for the weaker but sufficient property that the value of (x01 , x02 ) equals β1 d − β2 hx1 , x2 i,
for some positive integers β1 , β2 . It follows from our algebraic characterization of hard
functions that a gadget with such guarantees always exists (Lemma 38). Ultimately, our
hardness proof makes use of that gadget in a similar way as for MaxIP (Lemmas 39 and 40).


7
    Every entry a in x1 is replaced by three new coordinates (a, 1 − a, 1 − a) and every entry b in x2 is
    replaced by (1 − b, b, 1 − b). The contribution to the inner product of the new vectors is equal to
    a(1 − b) + (1 − a)b + (1 − a)(1 − b) = 1 − ab.
12   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


        The hardness part of Theorem 7 can in fact be stated in a more fine-grained way: If
     some problem Opt(ψ) has degree hardness h = Hdeg (ψ) ≥ 3, then the hardness proof can
     be conditioned on the weaker h-Uniform HyperClique assumption. That connection can
     be complemented by a partial converse, thus revealing a certain equivalence between exact
     optimization and hyperclique detection. An analogous equivalence for model-checking graph
     formulas could not be proved and was left as an open problem in [31]. We postpone the
     proof of Theorem 8 to subsection E.3.

     I Theorem 8 (Equivalence of Opt(ψ) and HyperClique). Let ψ be an OptSPk graph
     formula of degree hardness h = Hdeg (ψ) ≥ 2.
        If Opt(ψ) can be solved in time O(mk−δ ) for some δ > 0, then, for some (large)
                                                                                  0  0
        k 0 = k 0 (k, h, δ), h-Uniform k 0 -HyperClique can be solved in time O(nk −δ ) for some
        δ 0 > 0.
        If h-Uniform (h + 1)-HyperClique can be solved in time O(nh+1−δ ) for some δ > 0,
                                                     0
        then Opt(ψ) can be solved in time O(mk−δ ) for some δ 0 > 0.

     3.3     Approximation
     Since Theorem 7 gives a complete classification for the exact solvability of Opt(ψ), the next
     natural question is to study the approximability of properties which are hard to compute
     exactly. Unlike the exact case, we use different techniques and tools to give our classification
     for maximization and minimization problems.

     3.3.1    Maximization
     We obtain a simple classification of all constant-factor approximable maximization problems,
     conditioned on the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH).

     I Theorem 9 (Constant Approximation – Maximization). Let ψ be a MaxSPk graph formula.
        If Hand (ψ) < k (or equivalently, if ψ0 does not have exactly one satisfying assignment),
       then there exists a constant-factor approximation for Max(ψ) in time O(mk−δ ) for some
        δ > 0.
        Otherwise, if Hand (ψ) = k (or equivalently, ψ0 has exactly one satisfying assignment),
       then there exists no constant-factor approximation for Max(ψ) in time O(mk−δ ) for any
        δ > 0, unless SETH fails.

         The algorithmic part of Theorem 9 is detailed in subsection F.1, and the lower bound
     in subsection I.2. Here we give a high-level explanation of our proof by focusing on two
     representative problems: On the one hand, strong conditional hardness results have been
     shown for the MaxIP problem [7, 36]. When ψ0 has a single satisfying assignment, Max(ψ)
     is equivalent (up to complementation) to MaxIP, so we adapt the hardness results for our
     setting (subsection I.2).
         On the other hand, consider the Furthest Neighbor problem: Given two sets of
     bit-vectors X1 , X2 ⊆ {0, 1}d , compute the maximum Hamming distance between vectors
     x1 ∈ X1 and x2 ∈ X2 . There exists a simple linear-time 3-approximation for this problem:
     Fix some x1 ∈ X1 and compute its furthest neighbor x2 ∈ X2 . Then compute the furthest
     neighbor x01 ∈ X1 of x2 and return the distance between x01 and x2 as the answer. By applying
     the triangle inequality twice, it is easy to see that this indeed yields a 3-approximation. That
     argument generalizes for approximating Max(φ) whenever ψ0 satisfies the following property:
     If α is a satisfying assignment of ψ0 , then the component-wise negation of α is also satisfying
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                              13


(Lemma 46). Finally, if ψ0 has at least two satisfying assignments, then Max(ψ) can be
reduced to this special case via a reduction which worsens the approximation ratio by at
most a constant factor (Lemmas 48 and 45). The essential insight for that last step is that
we can always “cover” all satisfying assignments by only two satisfying assignments, as there
always exists one satisfying assignment which contributes a constant fraction (depending on
k) to the optimal value.
    We give a finer-grained view of the classification in Theorem 9 in two ways. First, we
want to isolate properties which admit arbitrarily good constant-factor approximations. We
make that notion precise in the following definition:

I Definition 10 (Approximation Scheme). Let ψ be an OptSPk formula. We say that Opt(ψ)
admits an approximation scheme if for any ε > 0 there exists some δ > 0 and an algorithm
computing a (1 + ε)-approximation of Opt(ψ) in time O(mk−δ ).8

   In the following theorem, we identify some formulas which admit such an approximation
scheme, and some formulas for which this is unlikely:

I Theorem 11 (Approximation Scheme – Maximization). Let ψ be a MaxSPk graph formula.
   If Hand (ψ) ≤ 1, then there exists a randomized approximation scheme for Max(ψ).
   If 3 ≤ Hand (ψ) or Hand (ψ) = k, then there exists no approximation scheme for Max(ψ)
  unless the Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis fails.

    Unfortunately, we were not able to close the gap in Theorem 11, and it remains open
whether problems with Hand (φ) = 2 admit approximation schemes. In section 4, we give a
specific example falling into this category.
    For the first item, we give approximation schemes for any Max(ψ) with Hand (ψ) = 1 via
a reduction to Furthest Neighbor, which, as mentioned in the introduction, admits an
approximation scheme (Lemma 51).
    The lower bound is more interesting: By Theorem 9 we know that if ψ has and-hardness
Hand (ψ) < k, then it admits a constant-factor approximation. Nevertheless, the lower
bound in Theorem 9 only addresses formulas of and-hardness Hand (ψ) = k. In particular,
Theorem 11 identifies a class of problems for which some (fixed) constant-factor approximation
is best-possible in terms of approximation.
    At a technical level, we make use of interesting machinery to obtain the lower bound
(subsection I.3). The starting point is the distributed PCP framework, which was introduced
in [7] and further strengthened in [74, 36] to give hardness of approximation for Maximum
k-Inner Product (k-MaxIP). In this case, we cannot use this tool directly, since it crucially
relies on the fact that the target problem Max(ψ) has full hardness Hand (ψ) = k.9 Instead,
we first show Max-3-SAT-hardness of the following intermediate problem:

I Problem 12 ((k, 3)-OV). Given sets of n vectors X1 , . . . , Xk ⊆ {0, 1}d , where each
coordinate y ∈ [d] is associated to three active indices a, b, c ∈ [k], detect if there are vectors
x1 ∈ X1 , . . . , xk ∈ Xk such that for all y ∈ [d], it holds that xa [y] · xb [y] · xc [y] = 0 where
a, b, c are the active indices at y.

    We then provide a gap introducing reduction from (k, 3)-OV to Max(ψ), in the same
spirit as the PCP reduction gives such a reduction from k-OV to k-MaxIP. This involves


8
    We stress that in our work, ε is always a constant and cannot depend on m.
9
    More precisely, the reduction exploits the fact that ψ0 has a unique satisfying assignment to encode the
    communication protocol used in the reduction (Lemma 83).
14   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems



           Max-3-SAT                                           (k, 3)-OV                                     Approx. Max(ψ)
          on O(n) clauses                                   low-dimensional                                   with 3 ≤ Hand (ψ)


                                      Lemma 72                                            Lemma 74
                  split                                           re-
                  & list                                        combine
                                          Lemma 71                                       Distributed PCP
                                             [38]                                               [7]
                          3-ExactIP                      3-OV                      3-OV                    3-MaxIP


                      k
                                               k
                                                                         k
                                                                                                  k
                                                                                                       
                      3       instances         3       instances         3       instances        3       instances




        Figure 2 The chain of reductions from Sparse Max-3-SAT to VMax(ψ). The main steps are
     proven in Lemmas 72 and 74 and both proofs involve several intermediate steps as illustrated in the
     gray parts. In Appendix I we briefly discuss an alternative approach to this reduction.


     several technical steps as outlined in Figure 2. At a high level, we decompose a (k, 3)-OV
     instance into a combination of multiple 3-OV instances and use the PCP reduction as a black
     box on each of these. After combining the outputs of the reduction, we obtain instances
     of Max(ψ) with the desired gap. The issue with this approach is that the PCP reduction
     blows up the dimension of the input vectors exponentially,10 which makes the reduction
     inapplicable to our case if we start from a moderate-dimensional (k, 3)-OV instance. To
     show that (k, 3)-OV does not even have a O(mk−δ )-time algorithm when the dimension is
     d = O(log n), we use the stronger Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis.11 See Appendix B for
     further discussion of this hypothesis.
         The second way in which we get a closer look at Theorem 9 is by inspecting the hardest
     regime, i.e., when Hand (ψ) = k:

     I Theorem 13 (Polynomial-Factor Approximation). Let ψ be a MaxSPk graph formula of
     full and-hardness Hand (ψ) = k.
         For every ε > 0, there exists some δ > 0 such that an mε -approximation for Max(ψ) can
         be computed in time O(mk−δ ).
         For every δ > 0, there exists an ε > 0 such that there exists no mε -approximation for
         Max(ψ) in time O(mk−δ ) unless SETH fails.

        The lower bound is obtained by applying the subsequent improvements on the distributed
     PCP framework by [74, 36, 60], which improve the parameters of the reduction via algebraic
     geometry codes and expander graphs (Lemma 69). For the upper bound, we give a simple
     algorithm which exploits the sparsity of the instances (Lemma 49).

     3.3.2     Minimization
     There is an easier criterion for the hardness of approximating minimization problems. Namely,
     observe that giving a multiplicative approximation to a minimization problem Min(ψ) is at


     10
        An instance of k-OV on dimension d = c log n is reduced to multiple instances of k-MaxIP on dimension
        exp(c) log n.
     11
        Morally, just as SETH implies the hardness of low-dimensional OV (see Appendix B), the Sparse
        Max-3-SAT Hypothesis implies the hardness of low-dimensional (k, 3)-OV.
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                15


least as hard as testing if the optimal value is zero (recall that we refer to this problem as
Zero(ψ)). More precisely, suppose that we are given an instance with OPT = 0. Then any
multiplicative approximation must return an optimal solution.
    It turns out that this is the only source of hardness for Min(ψ) problems. We show a
fine-grained equivalence of deciding Zero(ψ) and approximating Min(ψ) within a constant
factor:
I Theorem 14 (Constant Approximation is Equivalent to Testing Zero). Let ψ be a MinSPk
graph formula. Via a randomized reduction, there exists a constant-factor approximation
algorithm for Min(ψ) in time O(mk−δ ) for some δ > 0 if and only if Zero(ψ) can be solved
               0
in time O(mk−δ ) for some δ 0 > 0.
    To reduce approximating Min(ψ) to Zero(ψ), we make use of locality-sensitive hashing
(LSH); see Appendix G for details. This technique was for instance used to solve the
Approximate Nearest Neighbors problem in Hamming spaces [53], and was recently adapted
by Chen and Williams to show that Minimum Inner Product can be reduced to OV [38].
The latter result constitutes a singular known case for the general trend in MinSPk revealed
by Theorem 14. In comparison, our reduction is simpler and more general, but gives weaker
guarantees on the constant factor.
    We specifically use LSH for a reduction from approximating Min(ψ) to the intermediate
problem of listing solutions to Zero(ψ) (Lemma 56) – the better the listing algorithm
performs, the better the approximation guarantee. For instance, an algorithm listing L
solutions in time O(mk−δ · Lδ/k ) for some δ > 0 results in a constant-factor approximation
(Corollary 57), while a listing algorithm in time Õ(mk−δ + L) leads to an approximation
scheme (Corollary 58). To finish the proof of Theorem 14, we show that any Zero(ψ)
problem with an O(mk−δ )-time decider, for some δ > 0, also admits a listing algorithm in
time O(mk−δ · Lδ/k ) (Lemma 59).
    Since the hardness of Zero(ψ) is completely classified [31], we obtain the following
dichotomy as a consequence of Theorem 14:
I Corollary 15 (Constant Approximation – Minimization). Let ψ be a MinSPk graph formula.
   If Hand (ψ) ≤ 2 and Hand (ψ) < k, then there exists a randomized constant-factor approxi-
  mation algorithm for Min(ψ) in time O(mk−δ ) for some δ > 0.
   If 3 ≤ Hand (ψ) or Hand (ψ) = k, then computing any approximation for Min(ψ) in time
   O(mk−δ ) for any δ > 0 is not possible unless the Max-3-SAT hypothesis fails.
    Similar to the maximization case, let us next consider approximation schemes for
minimization problems. We can reuse the general framework outlined in the previous
paragraphs to obtain an approximation scheme by giving an output-linear listing algorithm
in time Õ(mk−δ + L), for all formulas with and-hardness at most Hand (ψ) ≤ 1 (Lemma 60).
I Theorem 16 (Approximation Scheme – Minimization). Let ψ be a MinSPk graph formula.
If Hand (ψ) ≤ 1, then there exists a randomized approximation scheme for Min(ψ).

3.4    Efficient (Multiplicative) Approximation Schemes
Theorems 11 and 16 show that if Hand (ψ) ≤ 1, then we can give approximation schemes
for Opt(ψ). We complement this result in subsection I.4 by ruling out the existence of
efficient approximation schemes for most regimes. In the same way as Definition 61, we say
that Opt(ψ) admits an efficient (multiplicative) approximation scheme if there is some fixed
constant δ > 0 such that for any ε > 0, a multiplicative (1 + ε)-approximation for Opt(ψ)
can be computed in time O(mk−δ ).
16   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


     I Theorem 17. Let ψ be an OptSPk graph formula. If 3 ≤ Hdeg (ψ) or Hdeg (ψ) = k, then
     there exists no efficient approximation scheme for Opt(ψ) assuming the Sparse Max-3-SAT
     Hypothesis.

     3.5    Proving the Main Theorem
     We can now put things together to prove Theorem 1.

     Proof of Theorem 1. Let ψ be a MaxSPk formula with k ≥ 3. We show how to classify ψ
     into one of the four stated regimes with a case distinction based on the hardness parameters
     Hand (ψ) and Hdeg (ψ). This case distinction can also be read off Figure 1.
         If Hdeg (ψ) ≤ 2: By Theorem 7, ψ is efficiently optimizable, so it lies in R1.
         Otherwise, it holds that 3 ≤ Hdeg (ψ) ≤ k. In this case, we make a further distinction:
            Hand (ψ) ≤ 1: By Theorem 11, ψ admits an approximation scheme but by Theorem 17
            not an efficient one, so it lies in R2.
            Hand (ψ) = 2: By Theorem 9, ψ admits an efficient constant-factor approximation
            but by Theorem 17, it does not admit an efficient approximation scheme. Thus,
            depending on whether ψ admits an approximation scheme or not, it lies in R2 or R3.
            (As mentioned below Theorem 1, this is the single case where we cannot place the
            formula in its precise regime, see also Open Problem 1.)
            3 ≤ Hand (ψ) < k: By Theorem 9, ψ admits an efficient constant factor approximation
            but by Theorem 11 it has no approximation scheme, so it lies in R3.
            Hand (ψ) = k: By Theorem 13, ψ admits an efficient polynomial-factor approximation,
            and this is best possible, so it lies in R4.
     The case distinctions for the case k = 2 and for the minimization variant are proven
     analogously.                                                                                J


      4     Discussion and Open Problems
     Our investigation reveals all possible approximability types (in better-than-exhaustive-search
     time) for general classes of polynomial-time optimization problems, namely graph formulas in
     MaxSPk and MinSPk . Our results, which give an almost complete characterization, open
     up the following questions:
        Can we extend our classification beyond graph formulas, i.e., when we allow more binary
        relations, or even higher-arity relations? Such settings include, e.g., generalizations of
        Max k-XOR from F2 to Fq , or variants of the densest subgraph problem on hypergraphs.
        In our setting, each variable xi ranges over a separate set Xi , also known as a multichro-
        matic setting. We leave it open to transfer our results to the monochromatic setting (see
        e.g. [61]).
        While we consider running times expressed in the input size (as usual in database contexts),
        it would also be natural to consider parameterization in the number n of objects in the
        relational structure, see [80].
     Besides these extensions, we ask whether one can close the remaining gap in our classification:
     Do formulas ψ with Hand (ψ) = 2 and Hdeg (ψ) ≥ 3 admit an approximation scheme? As a
     specific challenge, we give the following open problem:

     I Open Problem 1. Is there an approximation scheme for Maximum Exact-3-Cover (or its
     minimization variant)? Specifically, can we prove or rule out that for every ε > 0, there is
     some δ > 0 such that we can (1 + ε)-approximate Maximum Exact-3-Cover in time O(m3−δ )?
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                      17


    It appears likely that showing existence of an approximation scheme for Maximum
Exact-3-Cover would lead to a full characterization of MaxSPk .
    Finally, while we focused on the qualitative question whether or not exhaustive search
can be beaten, a follow-up question is to determine precise approximability-time tradeoffs. In
this vein, consider the well-studied Maximum k-Cover problem: A simple linear-time greedy
approach is known to establish a (1 − 1/e)−1 -approximation [55]. Subsequent lower bounds
show that this is conditionally best possible in polynomial-time [44] and even f (k)mo(k) -time
(under Gap-ETH) [40, 69]. On the other hand, for every fixed k, we show (1) existence of
an approximation scheme, but (2) rule out an efficient one assuming SETH, i.e., for every
δ > 0, there is some ε > 0 such that an (1 + ε)-approximation requires time Ω(mk−δ ).

I Open Problem 2. Let k ≥ 2. Can we determine, for every 1 ≤ γ ≤ (1 − 1/e)−1 , the
optimal exponent α of the fastest γ-approximation for Maximum k-Cover running in time
O(mα±o(1) ), assuming plausible fine-grained hardness assumptions?

Note that the extreme cases for γ = 1 and γ = (1 − 1/e)−1 are already settled and that
[69] shows that for all immediate cases, α must have a linear dependence on k, assuming
Gap-ETH.


      References
 1   Scott Aaronson and Avi Wigderson. Algebrization: A new barrier in complexity theory. TOCT,
     1(1):2:1–2:54, 2009.
 2   Amir Abboud and Arturs Backurs. Towards hardness of approximation for polynomial time
     problems. In Proceedings of the 8th Conference on Innovations in Theoretical Computer
     Science, volume 67 of ITCS ’17, pages 11:1–11:26. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
     Informatik, 2017.
 3   Amir Abboud, Arturs Backurs, and Virginia Vassilevska Williams. Tight hardness results
     for LCS and other sequence similarity measures. In Proceedings of the 56th IEEE Annual
     Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’15, pages 59–78. IEEE Computer
     Society, 2015.
 4   Amir Abboud, Arturs Backurs, and Virginia Vassilevska Williams. If the current clique
     algorithms are optimal, so is Valiant’s parser. SIAM J. Comput., 47(6):2527–2555, 2018.
 5   Amir Abboud, Karl Bringmann, Holger Dell, and Jesper Nederlof. More consequences of
     falsifying SETH and the orthogonal vectors conjecture. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual
     ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’18, pages 253–266. ACM, 2018.
 6   Amir Abboud and Aviad Rubinstein. Fast and deterministic constant factor approximation
     algorithms for LCS imply new circuit lower bounds. In Proceedings of the 9th Conference
     on Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science, volume 94 of ITCS ’18, pages 35:1–35:14.
     Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018.
 7   Amir Abboud, Aviad Rubinstein, and Ryan Williams. Distributed PCP theorems for hardness
     of approximation in P. In Proceedings of the 58th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations
     of Computer Science, FOCS ’17, pages 25–36. IEEE Computer Society, 2017.
 8   Amir Abboud, Ryan Williams, and Huacheng Yu. More applications of the polynomial method
     to algorithm design. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
     Algorithms, SODA ’15, pages 218–230. SIAM, 2015.
 9   Josh Alman, Timothy Chan, and Ryan Williams. Polynomial representations of threshold
     functions and algorithmic applications. In Proceedings of the 57th IEEE Annual Symposium on
     Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’16, pages 467–476. IEEE Computer Society, 2016.
10   Josh Alman, Timothy Chan, and Ryan Williams. Faster deterministic and Las Vegas algorithms
     for offline approximate nearest neighbors in high dimensions. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual
     ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’20, pages 637–649. SIAM, 2020.
18   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


     11   Josh Alman and Ryan Williams. Probabilistic polynomials and hamming nearest neighbors.
          In Proceedings of the 56th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
          FOCS ’15, pages 136–150. IEEE Computer Society, 2015.
     12   Josh Alman and Virginia Vassilevska Williams. OV graphs are (probably) hard instances. In
          Proceedings of the 11th Conference on Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science, volume
          151 of ITCS ’20, pages 83:1–83:18. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020.
     13   Josh Alman and Virginia Vassilevska Williams. A refined laser method and faster matrix
          multiplication. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
          Algorithms, SODA ’21, pages 522–539. SIAM, 2021.
     14   Alexandr Andoni and Piotr Indyk. Near-optimal hashing algorithms for approximate nearest
          neighbor in high dimensions. In Proceedings of the 47th IEEE Annual Symposium on
          Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’06, pages 459–468. IEEE Computer Society, 2006.
     15   Alexandr Andoni, Piotr Indyk, Huy L. Nguyen, and Ilya P. Razenshteyn. Beyond locality-
          sensitive hashing. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
          Algorithms, SODA ’14, pages 1018–1028. SIAM, 2014.
     16   Alexandr Andoni, Piotr Indyk, and Ilya P. Razenshteyn. Approximate nearest neighbor search
          in high dimensions. In Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, ICM ’18,
          pages 3287–3318, 2018.
     17   Alexandr Andoni, Robert Krauthgamer, and Krzysztof Onak. Polylogarithmic approximation
          for edit distance and the asymmetric query complexity. In Proceedings of the 51st IEEE
          Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’10, pages 377–386. IEEE
          Computer Society, 2010.
     18   Alexandr Andoni and Negev Shekel Nosatzki. Edit distance in near-linear time: it’s a constant
          factor. In Proceedings of the 61st IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
          Science, FOCS ’20, pages 990–1001. IEEE, 2020.
     19   Alexandr Andoni and Krzysztof Onak. Approximating edit distance in near-linear time. In
          Proceedings of the 41st Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’09, pages
          199–204. ACM, 2009.
     20   Alexandr Andoni and Ilya P. Razenshteyn. Optimal data-dependent hashing for approximate
          near neighbors. In Proceedings of the 47th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
          STOC ’15, pages 793–801. ACM, 2015.
     21   László Babai, Anna Gál, Peter G. Kimmel, and Satyanarayana V. Lokam. Communication
          complexity of simultaneous messages. SIAM J. Comput., 33(1):137–166, 2003.
     22   Arturs Backurs, Liam Roditty, Gilad Segal, Virginia Vassilevska Williams, and Nicole Wein.
          Towards tight approximation bounds for graph diameter and eccentricities. In Proceedings of
          the 50th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’18, pages 267–280. ACM,
          2018.
     23   Ziv Bar-Yossef, T. S. Jayram, Robert Krauthgamer, and Ravi Kumar. Approximating edit
          distance efficiently. In Proceedings of the 45th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of
          Computer Science, FOCS ’04, pages 550–559. IEEE Computer Society, 2004.
     24   Tugkan Batu, Funda Ergün, Joe Kilian, Avner Magen, Sofya Raskhodnikova, Ronitt Rubinfeld,
          and Rahul Sami. A sublinear algorithm for weakly approximating edit distance. In Proceedings
          of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’03, pages 316–324.
          ACM, 2003.
     25   Tugkan Batu, Funda Ergün, and Süleyman Cenk Sahinalp. Oblivious string embeddings and
          edit distance approximations. In Proceedings of the 17th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
          Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’06, pages 792–801. SIAM, 2006.
     26   Andreas Björklund, Rasmus Pagh, Virginia Vassilevska Williams, and Uri Zwick. Listing
          triangles. In Proceedings of the 41st International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and
          Programming, ICALP ’14, pages 223–234. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014.
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                      19


27    Allan Borodin, Rafail Ostrovsky, and Yuval Rabani. Subquadratic approximation algorithms
      for clustering problems in high dimensional spaces. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM
     Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’99, pages 435–444. ACM, 1999.
28    Joshua Brakensiek and Aviad Rubinstein. Constant-factor approximation of near-linear edit
      distance in near-linear time. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory
     of Computing, STOC ’20, pages 685–698. ACM, 2020.
29    Karl Bringmann. Why walking the dog takes time: Fréchet distance has no strongly
      subquadratic algorithms unless SETH fails. In Proceedings of the 55th IEEE Annual Symposium
     on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’15, pages 661–670. IEEE Computer Society,
     2014.
30    Karl Bringmann, Alejandro Cassis, Nick Fischer, and Marvin Künnemann. Fine-grained
      completeness for optimization in P. In APPROX-RANDOM, volume 207 of LIPIcs, pages
      9:1–9:22. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2021.
31    Karl Bringmann, Nick Fischer, and Marvin Künnemann. A fine-grained analogue of Schaefer’s
      theorem in P: Dichotomy of ∃k ∀-quantified first-order graph properties. In Proceedings of the
     34th Computational Complexity Conference, volume 137 of CCC ’19, pages 31:1–31:27. Schloss
      Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019.
32    Karl Bringmann, Marvin Künnemann, and Karol Wegrzycki. Approximating APSP without
      scaling: Equivalence of approximate min-plus and exact min-max. In Proceedings of the 51st
     Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’19, pages 943–954. ACM, 2019.
33    Diptarka Chakraborty, Debarati Das, Elazar Goldenberg, Michal Koucký, and Michael E.
      Saks. Approximating edit distance within constant factor in truly sub-quadratic time. In
     Proceedings of the 59th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS
     ’18, pages 979–990. IEEE Computer Society, 2018.
34    Parinya Chalermsook, Marek Cygan, Guy Kortsarz, Bundit Laekhanukit, Pasin Manurangsi,
      Danupon Nanongkai, and Luca Trevisan. From gap-ETH to FPT-inapproximability: Clique,
      dominating set, and more. In Proceedings of the 58th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations
     of Computer Science, FOCS ’17, pages 743–754. IEEE Computer Society, 2017.
35    Timothy M. Chan and Ryan Williams. Deterministic APSP, orthogonal vectors, and more:
      Quickly derandomizing Razborov-Smolensky. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual ACM-SIAM
     Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’16, pages 1246–1255. SIAM, 2016.
36    Lijie Chen. On the hardness of approximate and exact (bichromatic) maximum inner product.
      In Proceedings of the 33th Computational Complexity Conference, volume 102 of CCC ’18,
      pages 14:1–14:45. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018.
37    Lijie Chen, Shafi Goldwasser, Kaifeng Lyu, Guy N. Rothblum, and Aviad Rubinstein. Fine-
      grained complexity meets IP = PSPACE. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM-SIAM
     Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’19, pages 1–20. SIAM, 2019.
38    Lijie Chen and Ryan Williams. An equivalence class for orthogonal vectors. In Proceedings
     of the 30th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’19, pages 21–40.
      SIAM, 2019.
39    Ruiwen Chen and Rahul Santhanam. Improved algorithms for sparse MAX-SAT and MAX-
      k-CSP. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Theory and Applications of
     Satisfiability Testing, volume 9340 of SAT ’15, pages 33–45. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2015.
40    Vincent Cohen-Addad, Anupam Gupta, Amit Kumar, Euiwoong Lee, and Jason Li. Tight
      FPT approximations for k-median and k-means. In Proceedings of the 46th International
     Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, volume 132 of ICALP ’19, pages
     42:1–42:14. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019.
41    Nadia Creignou. A dichotomy theorem for maximum generalized satisfiability problems. J.
     Comput. Syst. Sci., 51(3):511–522, 1995.
42    Martin Dietzfelbinger, Philipp Schlag, and Stefan Walzer. A subquadratic algorithm for 3XOR.
      In Proceedings of the 43rd International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer
20   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


          Science, volume 117 of MFCS ’18, pages 59:1–59:15. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
          Informatik, 2018.
     43   Ran Duan and Seth Pettie. Linear-time approximation for maximum weight matching. J.
          ACM, 61(1):1:1–1:23, 2014.
     44   Uriel Feige. A threshold of ln n for approximating set cover. J. ACM, 45(4):634–652, 1998.
     45   Andreas Emil Feldmann, C. S. Karthik, Euiwoong Lee, and Pasin Manurangsi. A survey on
          approximation in parameterized complexity: Hardness and algorithms. Electronic Colloquium
          on Computational Complexity (ECCC), 27:86, 2020.
     46   Harold N. Gabow. Scaling algorithms for network problems. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 31(2):148–
          168, 1985.
     47   Jiawei Gao. On the fine-grained complexity of least weight subsequence in multitrees
          and bounded treewidth DAGs. In Proceedings of the 14th International Symposium on
          Parameterized and Exact Computation, volume 148 of IPEC ’19, pages 16:1–16:17. Schloss
          Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019.
     48   Jiawei Gao and Russell Impagliazzo. The fine-grained complexity of strengthenings of first-order
          logic. Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC), 26:9, 2019.
     49   Jiawei Gao, Russell Impagliazzo, Antonina Kolokolova, and Ryan Williams. Completeness
          for first-order properties on sparse structures with algorithmic applications. ACM Trans.
          Algorithms, 15(2):23:1–23:35, 2019.
     50   Aristides Gionis, Piotr Indyk, and Rajeev Motwani. Similarity search in high dimensions
          via hashing. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases,
          VLDB ’99, pages 518–529. Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.
     51   Ashish Goel, Piotr Indyk, and Kasturi R. Varadarajan. Reductions among high dimensional
          proximity problems. In Proceedings of the 12th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
          Algorithms, SODA ’01, pages 769–778. SIAM, 2001.
     52   Elazar Goldenberg, Aviad Rubinstein, and Barna Saha. Does preprocessing help in fast
          sequence comparisons? In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
          Computing, STOC ’20, pages 657–670. ACM, 2020.
     53   Sariel Har-Peled, Piotr Indyk, and Rajeev Motwani. Approximate nearest neighbor: Towards
          removing the curse of dimensionality. Theory of Computing, 8(1):321–350, 2012.
     54   Johan Håstad. Some optimal inapproximability results. J. ACM, 48(4):798–859, 2001.
     55   Dorit S. Hochbaum. Approximating Covering and Packing Problems: Set Cover, Vertex Cover,
          Independent Set, and Related Problems, pages 94–143. PWS Publishing Co., 1996.
     56   Piotr Indyk. Dimensionality reduction techniques for proximity problems. In Proceedings of
          the 11th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’00, pages 371–378.
          SIAM, 2000.
     57   Piotr Indyk. Better algorithms for high-dimensional proximity problems via asymmetric
          embeddings. In Proceedings of the 14th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms,
          SODA ’03, pages 539–545. SIAM, 2003.
     58   Piotr Indyk and Rajeev Motwani. Approximate nearest neighbors: Towards removing the
          curse of dimensionality. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
          Computing, STOC ’98, pages 604–613. ACM, 1998.
     59   Zahra Jafargholi and Emanuele Viola. 3SUM, 3XOR, triangles. Algorithmica, 74(1):326–343,
          2016.
     60   C. S. Karthik, Bundit Laekhanukit, and Pasin Manurangsi. On the parameterized complexity
          of approximating dominating set. J. ACM, 66(5):33:1–33:38, 2019.
     61   Karthik C. S. and Pasin Manurangsi. On closest pair in euclidean metric: Monochromatic is
          as hard as bichromatic. In Proceedings of the 10th Conference on Innovations in Theoretical
          Computer Science, volume 124 of ITCS ’19, pages 17:1–17:16. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-
          Zentrum für Informatik, 2019.
     62   Sanjeev Khanna, Madhu Sudan, Luca Trevisan, and David P. Williamson. The approximability
          of constraint satisfaction problems. SIAM J. Comput., 30(6):1863–1920, 2000.
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                      21


63   Donald E. Knuth. Dancing links. CoRR, abs/cs/0011047, 2000.
64   Michal Koucký and Michael E. Saks. Constant factor approximations to edit distance on far
     input pairs in nearly linear time. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual ACM Symposium on
     Theory of Computing, STOC ’20, pages 699–712. ACM, 2020.
65   Marvin Künnemann and Dániel Marx. Finding small satisfying assignments faster than brute
     force: A fine-grained perspective into boolean constraint satisfaction. In Proceedings of the
     35th Computational Complexity Conference, CCC ’20, 2020. To appear.
66   Gad M. Landau, Eugene W. Myers, and Jeanette P. Schmidt. Incremental string comparison.
     SIAM J. Comput., 27(2):557–582, 1998.
67   Bingkai Lin. Constant approximating k-clique is w[1]-hard. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual
     ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’21, pages 1749–1756. ACM, 2021.
68   Andrea Lincoln, Virginia Vassilevska Williams, and Ryan Williams. Tight hardness for shortest
     cycles and paths in sparse graphs. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium
     on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’18, pages 1236–1252. SIAM, 2018.
69   Pasin Manurangsi. Tight running time lower bounds for strong inapproximability of maximum
     k-coverage, unique set cover and related problems (via t-wise agreement testing theorem). In
     Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’20,
     pages 62–81. SIAM, 2020.
70   Jaroslav Nešetřil and Svatopluk Poljak. On the complexity of the subgraph problem.
     Commentationes Mathematicae Universitatis Carolinae, 26(2):415–419, 1985.
71   Christos H. Papadimitriou and Mihalis Yannakakis. Optimization, approximation, and
     complexity classes. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 43(3):425–440, 1991.
72   Mihai Pǎtraşcu. Towards polynomial lower bounds for dynamic problems. In Proceedings of
     the 42nd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’10, pages 603–610. ACM,
     2010.
73   Liam Roditty and Virginia Vassilevska Williams. Fast approximation algorithms for the
     diameter and radius of sparse graphs. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual ACM Symposium on
     Theory of Computing, STOC ’13, pages 515–524. ACM, 2013.
74   Aviad Rubinstein. Hardness of approximate nearest neighbor search. In Proceedings of the
     50th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’18, pages 1260–1268. ACM,
     2018.
75   Noah Stephens-Davidowitz and Vinod Vaikuntanathan. SETH-hardness of coding problems.
     In Proceedings of the 60th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
     FOCS ’19, pages 287–301. IEEE Computer Society, 2019.
76   Gregory Valiant. Finding correlations in subquadratic time, with applications to learning
     parities and the closest pair problem. J. ACM, 62(2), 2015.
77   Virginia Vassilevska Williams. On some fine-grained questions in algorithms and complexity.
     In Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, ICM ’18, pages 3447–3487,
     2018.
78   Ryan Williams. A new algorithm for optimal 2-constraint satisfaction and its implications.
     Theor. Comput. Sci., 348(2-3):357–365, 2005.
79   Ryan Williams. Algorithms and resource requirements for fundamental problems. ProQuest
     LLC, Ann Arbor, MI, 2007. Thesis (Ph.D.)–Carnegie Mellon University.
80   Ryan Williams. Faster decision of first-order graph properties. In Proceedings of the Joint
     Meeting of the 23rd EACSL Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic (CSL) and the
     29th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS), CSL-LICS ’14.
     ACM, 2014.
81   Ryan Williams. On the difference between closest, furthest, and orthogonal pairs: Nearly-linear
     vs barely-subquadratic complexity. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium
     on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’18, pages 1207–1215. SIAM, 2018.
22   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


     82   Andrew Chi-Chih Yao. Some complexity questions related to distributive computing. In
          Proceedings of the 9th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’79, pages
          209–213. ACM, 1979.
     83   Uri Zwick. All pairs shortest paths using bridging sets and rectangular matrix multiplication.
          J. ACM, 49(3):289–317, 2002.
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                  23


Appendix
In the following appendix sections we mention some interesting examples of our work, give
background on the hardness assumptions and provide detailed proofs of our theorems. We
start with a quick outline.
A Examples: Summarizes the problems listed in Table 1 and demonstrates how to apply
  our classification theorems to pinpoint their position in the four-regime landscape.
B Hardness Assumptions: Formally introduces our fine-grained hardness assumptions, and
  includes arguments for their plausibility.
C Comparison to Related Work: Extends the discussion on subsection 1.2 about related
  work.
D Vector Optimization Problems: Introduces a subfamily of problems which we call vector
  (optimization) problems. As we will prove, these problems capture the core hardness of
  the more general classes MaxSPk and MinSPk and are used as a critical ingredient in
  the following technical sections.
E Exact Optimization: Provides the algorithms for problems that can be optimized exactly
  and the conditional lower bounds for problems which cannot (for both maximization and
  minimization).
F Approximation Algorithms for Maximization: Provides the algorithms to approximate
  maximization problems (that is, approximation schemes, constant-factor and polynomial-
  factor approximations).
G Approximation Algorithms for Minimization: Provides the algorithms to approximate
  minimization problems (that is, approximation schemes and constant-factor approxima-
  tions).
H Additive Approximation Algorithms: Provides the additive approximation algorithms
  (for both maximization and minimization problems).
I Hardness of Approximation: Proves our results on hardness of approximation (for both
  maximization and minimization problems).
J Distributed PCP and Extensions: Shows how to transfer the Distributed PCP theorem
  established by [7, 74, 36, 60] to our setting.


 A     Examples
In the introduction, we gave as examples for our classification results the following three
families of natural MaxSPk and MinSPk graph problems. For each problem, an instance
consists of k sets of n vectors X1 , . . . , Xk ⊆ {0, 1}d .
    Maximum and Minimum k-XOR: maxx1 ,...,xk / minx1 ,...,xk #{y : x1 [y] ⊕ · · · ⊕ xk [y] = 0},
    Maximum and Minimum k-Agreement: maxx1 ,...,xk / minx1 ,...,xk #{y : x1 [y] = · · · =
    xk [y]},
    Maximum and Minimum k-Inner Product: maxx1 ,...,xk / minx1 ,...,xk hx1 , . . . , xk i,
    where we write hx1 , . . . , xk i = #{y : x1 [y] ∧ · · · ∧ xk [y]}.
Variants of some of our conclusions for each problem were already proved in the literature
(these provided the starting point for the paper); we will point these out below. The main
point of this section is to demonstrate how easily we can determine the hardness regime
of interesting graph formulas by a concise computation of our hardness parameters. In
particular, we demonstrate in detail how to compute the hardness parameters Hdeg and Hand
for all problems in the list, and how to apply our results. For each example, we condition on
the weakest possible hypothesis.
24   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


        We start with Maximum and Minimum k-XOR. For the case of k = 2, these problems
     correspond to Furthest and Closest Pair in Hamming distance, respectively. For these
     problems, Rubinstein [74] ruled out efficient approximation schemes in the moderate-
     dimensional case for Minimum 2-XOR under SETH, and Chen and Williams [38] gave an
     analogous result for Maximum 2-XOR.

     I Example 18 (Maximum and Minimum k-XOR). Both Maximum k-XOR and Minimum
     k-XOR admit randomized approximation schemes, but no efficient ones unless SETH fails.

     Proof. Let ψ = optx1 ,...,xk #y φ(x1 [y], . . . , xk [y]), where φ(z1 , . . . , zk ) = (z1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ zk = 0);
     then ψ is the OptSPk formula corresponding to Maximum k-XOR, respectively Minimum
     k-XOR. We first compute Hdeg (φ) and Hand (φ). The polynomial extension of φ is
                                  X
        φ(z1 , . . . , zk ) = 1 −   (−2)|S|−1 z S ,
                                   ∅6=S⊆[k]

     and thus deg(φ) = k. By Proposition 34 it follows immediately that Hdeg (φ) = k. Moreover,
     it is easy to see that Hand (φ) = 1 as any restriction of φ to h inputs is still a parity function
     and therefore has 2h−1 satisfying assignments.
          We can now apply our classification to derive the hardness of Maximum k-XOR and
     Minimum k-XOR: From Theorems 11 and 16 we obtain randomized approximation schemes
     for both problems, and Theorem 17 rules out efficient approximation schemes under SETH.
                                                                                                      J

        For Maximum and Minimum k-Agreement, the relation between the hardness parameters
     Hdeg and Hand is more interesting. Note that Maximum k-Agreement can be viewed as
     a very restricted setting of the MaxCover problem for which Karthik, Laekhanukit and
     Manurangsi [60] obtain strong inapproximability results. It turns out that our setting exhibits
     a more diverse landscape of approximability, which depends on k in a non-monotone way.
     We refer to Section C.2 for a detailed comparison between Maximum k-Agreement and the
     MaxCover problem studied in [60].

     I Example 19 (Maximum k-Agreement).
        If k = 2: Maximum 2-Agreement has a randomized approximation scheme, but not an
        efficient one, unless the Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis fails.
        If k = 3: Maximum 3-Agreement can be solved exactly.
        If k ≥ 4: Maximum k-Agreement admits a (k + 1)-approximation     in time O(mk−δ ) for
                                                                 k −1 −1
                                                                  
        some δ > 0, but cannot be approximated better than (1 − 3    ) in time O(mk−δ ), for
        any δ > 0, unless the Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis fails.

     Proof. Let ψ = maxx1 ,...,xk #y φ(x1 [y], . . . , xk [y]), where φ is the Boolean function indicating
     whether all its k inputs are equal; then ψ is the MaxSPk formula corresponding to Maximum
     k-Agreement. We first determine Hdeg (φ) and Hand (φ). The polynomial extension of φ is
                              Y      Y                         X
        φ(z1 , . . . , zk ) =   zi +   (1 − zi ) = z [k] +        (−1)|S| z S .
                           i∈[k]        i∈[k]                 S⊆[k]


     In particular, observe that the leading monomial z [k] cancels if k is odd. By Proposition 34,
     it is easy to check that Hdeg (φ) = k if k is even, and Hdeg (φ) = k − 1 if k is odd.
          Next, we claim that Hand (φ) = k − 1. On the one hand, it is easy to see that Hand (φ) < k
     as otherwise φ had only one satisfying assignment. On the other hand, we can the set
     any variable xi to, say 0; the remaining Boolean function on k − 1 inputs has exactly one
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                      25


satisfying assignment. We can now read off the hardness of Maximum k-Agreement from our
classification.
   If k = 2: We have Hdeg (φ) = 2 and Hand (φ) = 1. By Theorem 11 there exists a
   randomized approximation scheme for Maximum 2-Agreement, and by Theorem 17 there
   exists no efficient one unless SETH fails.
   If k = 3: We have Hdeg (φ) = 2 < k and therefore, Maximum 3-Agreement can be
   optimized exactly in time O(mk−δ ) by Theorem 7.
   If k ≥ 4: We have 3 ≤ Hdeg (φ) ≤ k and Hand (φ) = k − 1 < k. It follows that we can
   compute a constant-factor approximation in time O(mk−δ ) by Theorem 9. The precise
   approximation guarantee can be obtained from Lemma  46. In contrast, it is not possible
                                                 k −1 −1
                                                  
   to compute an approximation better than (1 − 3    ) unless the Sparse Max-3-SAT
   hypothesis fails, as proven in Theorem 11.                                           J

    With the same proof we can also classify the computational complexity of the Minimum
k-Agreement problem. The only difference is that for k ≥ 4, we cannot expect any approxi-
mation at all under the (k − 1)-Uniform HyperClique assumption, by Theorem 14 and
[31, Theorem 6].

I Example 20 (Minimum k-Agreement).
   If k = 2: Minimum 2-Agreement has a randomized approximation scheme, but not an
   efficient one, unless the Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis fails.
   If k = 3: Minimum 3-Agreement can be solved exactly.
   If k ≥ 4: Minimum k-Agreement cannot be approximated at all (i.e. we cannot
   distinguish if OPT is 0 or at least 1) in time O(mk−δ ) for any δ > 0, unless the
   (k − 1)-Uniform HyperClique hypothesis fails.

    Finally, we consider the hardest problems Maximum and Minimum k-Inner Product.
From our classification, we can immediately read off that Maximum k-Inner Product can be
approximated within an arbitrary polynomial factor and nothing better, while Minimum k-
Inner Product cannot be approximated at all. The underlying inapproximability of Maximum
k-Inner Product is based on the works of Abboud, Rubinsten and Williams [7] and Chen [36]
for k = 2 and Karthik, Laekhanukit and Manurangsi [60] for general k.

I Example 21 (Maximum k-Inner Product). For any ε > 0, Maximum k-Inner Product has
an mε -approximation in time O(mk−δ ) for some δ > 0. However, for every δ > 0, there
exists some ε > 0 such that computing an mε -approximation requires time O(mk−δ ) unless
SETH fails.

Proof. Maximum and Minimum k-Inner Product are the prototypical problems ψ of full
hardness Hand (ψ) = Hdeg (ψ) = k. We only need that Hand (ψ) = k which is clear since
φ(z1 , . . . , zk ) = z1 . . . zk has only one satisfying assignment. (By Proposition 36, it follows
that also Hdeg (ψ) = k). The claim is immediate by Theorem 13.                                    J


I Example 22 (Minimum k-Inner Product). Minimum k-Inner Product has no approximation
at all in time O(mk−δ ) for any δ > 0, unless the k-OV hypothesis fails.

Proof. As for Maximum k-Inner Product, it holds that Hand (ψ) = Hdeg (ψ) = k. The claim
follows immediately by Corollary 15.                                                  J
26   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


      B         Hardness Assumptions
     As usual in fine-grained complexity, our lower bounds are conditioned on certain hardness
     assumptions. In this section we introduce the relevant hypotheses and briefly argue for their
     plausibility. In our work we mostly depend on two popular hypotheses on polynomial-time
     problems, both of which are backed by hardness assumptions on fundamental, well-studied
     exponential-time problems. Whenever possible, we design our reductions to start from the
     (weaker) polynomial-time assumptions. To state all of our results, we rely on a relatively
     new assumption on sparse maximum satisfiability.

     B.1        Orthogonal Vectors and SETH
     One of the most prominent hypotheses in the area is the (k-)Orthogonal Vectors hypothesis12 .
     In the k-Orthogonal Vectors problem (k-OV), we are given k sets of bit-vectors X1 , . . . , Xk ⊆
     {0, 1}d , and the task is to check whether there exist x1 ∈ X1 , . . . , xk ∈ Xk with (generalized)
                                                       P
     inner product equal to zero: hx1 , . . . , xk i := y∈[d] x1 [y] · · · xk [y] = 0. The naive algorithm
     solves k-OV in time O(nk d) and the corresponding hypothesis states that this algorithm is
     essentially optimal:

     I Hypothesis 23 (k-OV). For every δ > 0, k-OV on n vectors with dimension d cannot be
     solved in time O(nk−δ poly(d)).

         The fastest known algorithm solves k-OV in time nk−Ω(1/ log(d/ log n)) [8, 35], which is a
     subpolynomial improvement over the baseline algorithm and thus not enough to refute the
     k-OV hypothesis. It is implied by many other fine-grained hypotheses, among others the
     weighted k-Clique hypothesis [5], the assumption that not all (k + 1)-quantifier first-order
     properties can be solved in time O(mk−δ ) [49], and – most notably – the Strong Exponential
     Time Hypothesis (SETH) [78]. We remark that the variant we stated here is usually referred
     to as the moderate-dimensional k-OV hypothesis, while SETH in fact implies an even
     stronger version postulating hardness just above logarithmic dimension:

     I Hypothesis 24 (Low-Dimensional k-OV). For every δ > 0, there exists some c > 0 such
     that k-OV on n vectors with dimension d = c log n cannot be solved in time O(nk−δ ).

     B.2        HyperClique and Maximum Satisfiability
     Another central hypothesis that gained a lot of popularity in recent years is the HyperClique
     hypothesis [5, 68]. Let h ≥ 2. Given an h-uniform k-partite hypergraph H = (V1 , . . . , Vk , E),
     the h-Uniform k-HyperClique problem is to detect a k-hyperclique (that is, a set of
     k vertices v1 ∈ V1 , . . . , vk ∈ Vk such that any h of them form a hyperedge). The brute-
     force algorithm solves the problem in time O(nk ), and for h = 2 there exists a polynomial
     improvement exploiting fast matrix multiplication [70]. However, for h ≥ 3, it is postulated
     that a similar improvement is not possible:

     I Hypothesis 25 (h-Uniform HyperClique). For every δ > 0 and k, the h-Uniform
     k-HyperClique problem cannot be solved in time O(nk−δ ).

       We refer to [68, Section 7] for a detailed discussion on the plausibility of the h-Uniform
     HyperClique hypothesis, which especially addresses the question of why there is no hope


     12
          In the case k = 2, the prefix is usually omitted and we simply speak of the Orthogonal Vectors hypothesis.
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                              27


to achieve improvements for h ≥ 3 in a similar spirit as the h = 2 algorithm. It is known
that a refutation of this hypothesis is required for further progress on model-checking of
first-order properties [31], and that it is equivalent to the existence of faster-than-brute-force
algorithms for a class of Boolean CSPs (including 3-SAT) parameterized by solution size [65].
A further argument for this hypothesis is its connection to a well-studied exponential-time
problem: The Max-3-SAT problem is the optimization variant of the 3-SAT problem, that
is, given a 3-CNF formula find an assignment maximizing the total number of satisfied
clauses. The associated hypothesis postulates that we cannot significantly improve upon
brute-force search:

I Hypothesis 26 (Max-3-SAT). For every δ > 0, the Max-3-SAT problem on n variables
cannot be solved in time O(2n(1−δ) ).
                                                                                                   2
    The fastest currently known algorithm solves Max-3-SAT in time 2n(1−1/Õ(log n)) [9].
The Max-3-SAT hypothesis implies both the h-Uniform HyperClique assumption [79]
(for all h ≥ 3) as well as the k-OV assumption (for all k ≥ 2) [5]. Actually, it is plausible to
extend and strengthen this hypothesis further to a sparse problem variant as defined in [12]:

I Hypothesis 27 (Sparse Max-3-SAT). For every δ > 0, there exists c > 0 such that the
Max-3-SAT problem on n variables and cn clauses cannot be solved in time O(2n(1−δ) ).

   Indeed, previous work addressed the problem of finding more efficient algorithms for
                                                                                   2
Sparse Max-3-SAT [39, 9], and the best-known algorithm runs in time 2n(1−1/Õ(log c)) [9],
which is compatible with the hardness assumption. Interestingly, the Sparse Max-3-SAT
hypothesis unifies all previous hypotheses, including the Max-3-SAT hypothesis (obviously),
but also SETH.13 As such, it provides the currently easiest barrier for all algorithmic
problems that we classify as hard.

 C         Comparison to Related Work
In this section, we give a more detailed comparison of similarities and differences between
some related works in inapproximability and fine-grained complexity theory.
    In particular, the close conceptual connection between MaxSPk and MaxSNP is
described in Section C.1. A comparison to the parameterized inapproximability result
of Karthik, Laekhanukit, and Manurangsi [60] is given in Section C.2.

C.1        Correspondence of MaxSPk and MaxSNP
Let us review the definition of MaxSNP and compare it to MaxSPk (see [30] for more
details). The class SNP is motivated by Fagin’s theorem, and is defined as problems of the
form ∃S ∀ȳ φ(ȳ, G, S), where G is a given relational structure, ∃S ranges over a relational
structure S and ∀ȳ φ(ȳ, G, S) is a ∀∗ -quantified first-order property. Its natural optimization
variant is MaxSNP, defined as the set of problems expressible as maxS #{ȳ : φ(ȳ, G, S)}.
    As an analogue for O(mk )-time solvable problems, MaxSPk is a variation of MaxSNP
where the maximization over a relational structure S is replaced by maxmization over k


13
     Indeed, [5, Theorem 1.5] proves that refuting SETH implies that there exists some δ > 0, such that for
     all constants c and d, the satisfiability of depth-d threshold circuits with cn wires can be determined
     in time O(2n(1−δ) ). As a consequence, we can also solve the Sparse Max-3-SAT problem in time
     O(2n(1−δ) poly(n)), by brute-forcing over all targets 0 ≤ t ≤ cn and by encoding the resulting decision
     problem as a depth-2 threshold circuit.
28   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


     variables x1 , . . . , xk , and the counting is performed over a variable y.14 Let us remark that
     [30] choose the name “SPk ” for “strict polynomial time O(nk )” in analogy to the name “strict
     NP” of SNP.


     C.2        Comparison to Karthik, Laekhanukit and Manurangsi
     Let us detail some interesting aspects of the work of Karthik, Laekhanukit and Manurangsi [60].
     To obtain inapproximability results for Dominating Set, Maximum k-Inner Product and
     other problems, the authors use a framework of reductions from so-called Product Space
     Problems (PSPs) via MaxCover as an intermediate problem. It is insightful to highlight how
     these notions relate to our problem settings:

     Connection to Product Space Problems (PSPs) A Product Space Problem (PSP) is a very
     abstract problem formulation: Given a function f : X1 × · · · × Xk → {0, 1}, the corresponding
     product space problem PSP(f ) is to determine, given an input A1 ⊆ X1 , . . . , Ak ⊆ Xk ,
     whether there exists (a1 , . . . , ak ) ∈ A1 × · · · × Ak such that f (a1 , . . . , ak ) = 1. Karthik et
     al. use this notion to give a general and elegant reduction framework: Let F be a family of
     functions such that (1) each f ∈ F has an “efficient” communication protocol (for the precise
     communication setting, we refer the reader to [60]) and (2) computing PSP(f ) for f ∈ F
     is hard to solve under some fine-grained assumption A. Then the framework immediately
     derives approximation hardness for MaxCover based on the assumption A. In particular, this
     framework is used in [60] to obtain – via reduction from MaxCover – approximation hardness
     for Dominating Set and Maximum k-Inner Product under a diverse set of assumptions (such
     as SETH, W[1] 6= FPT and the k-SUM hypothesis).
         Note that while PSPs defines a general family of problems, this notion would not
     be a suitable class to study in the context of our work: In a sense, it definition is too
     abstract/general for our purposes (one could not even enumerate all problems in this class,
     so characterizing all such problems appears hopeless). Our chosen classes, MaxSPk and
     MinSPk , provide problem classes defined by a simple syntactic definition – they are general
     enough to contain a diverse set of problems with very different approximability, while on the
     other hand, it is always clear which problems are members of this class (notably, for every k,
     we could enumerate the problems in MaxSPk and MinSPk ). This opens up the possibility
     of a systematic classification, as performed in our work.

     Is MaxCover in MaxSPk ? Karthik et al. prove their inapproximability results [60, Theorem
     5.2] already for a restricted setting of MaxCover that is closely related to our setting of
     MaxSPk . Specifically, one can view this variant (also called MaxCover with projection
     property) as the following problem over vectors: Given sets X1 , . . . , Xk ⊆ Σd , maximize
     the number of coordinates y such that x1 [y] = x2 [y] = · · · = xk [y] over all (x1 , . . . , xk ) ∈
     X1 × · · · × Xk . For Σ = {0, 1}, this is precisely a MaxSPk graph formula studied in this
     paper as Maximum k-Agreement. For any constant |Σ|, we can express the corresponding
     Maximum k-Agreement problem still as a MaxSPk formula, using additional binary relations
     to represent the larger alphabet (this is no longer a graph formula, see also the discussion in
     Section 4). Importantly, Karthik et al.’s main inapproximability result for MaxCover [60,


     14
          An alternative would be to allow counting over ` variables y1 , . . . , y` . This more general definition
          is pursued in [30], but proven to be reducible to the case of ` = 1, as Maximum k-Inner Product (a
          problem for ` = 1) is shown to be complete for this more general class.
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                   29


Theorem 5.2] assuming hardness of PSP(F) produces instances for which |Σ| depends both
on 2k and the efficiency of the communication protocol for F. Thus, this result cannot be
directly used for the MaxSPk graph formulas studied in the present paper, but provides
an important result for larger alphabet sizes. After a subsequent reduction to Maximum
k-Inner Product [60, Theorem B.3] (see Section J), their result provides an important part
of the basis for our hardness of approximation results given in Section I.


 D      Vector Optimization Problems

As mentioned before, the predicates E(xi , xj ) have only a minor impact on the complexity
of both the model-checking problem of ψ [31, Theorem 7] and the optimization problems
Opt(ψ). In particular, as we will show, it suffices to classify the subtype of problems featuring
no predicates E(xi , xj ). For convenience in the following parts of this paper, we will now
make this notion precise.

I Definition 28 (Vector Optimization Problems). Let φ be a Boolean function on k inputs,
and let ψ = optx1 ,...,xk #y φ(E(x1 , y), . . . , E(xk , y)). We refer to Max(ψ) and Min(ψ) as
vector (optimization) problems VMax(φ) and VMin(φ). Occasionally, we write VOpt(ψ)
to refer to both problems simultaneously.

    In the context of vector problems, we often view the objects xi as vectors and view Y as
the set of coordinates. In addition, we define the dimension d := |Y | and, following standard
notation, write xi [y] := E(xi , y). Note that a vector problem instance is sparsely represented
by one list of all nonzero entries in all vectors.
    Recall that ψ0 (as defined in the beginning of section 3) is a Boolean function obtained
from ψ by substituting each atom E(xi , xj ) by false. Similar to [31, Theorem 7], we obtain
the following equivalence of general optimization problems Opt(ψ) and vector optimization
problems VOpt(ψ0 ). Note that this equivalence holds in the strongest approximation-
preserving way, and a similar statement holds for additive approximations. The proof
of Theorem 29 is postponed to the end of this section.

I Theorem 29 (Equivalence of Vector Optimization Problems). Let ψ be an OptSPk graph
formula, and let c = c(m) ≥ 1.
    If a c-approximation for Opt(ψ) can be computed in time T (m), then a c-approximation
    for VOpt(ψ0 ) can be computed in time O(T (m)).
    If a c-approximation for VOpt(ψ0 ) can be computed in time O(mk−ε ) for some ε > 0,
                                                                             0
    then a c-approximation for Opt(ψ) can be computed in time O(mk−ε ) for some ε0 > 0.
    In the upcoming algorithms, to solve VOpt(φ) it is often necessary to “brute-force”
over a number of variables xi to reduce k to some smaller k 0 . However, in general this
cannot be considered a self-reduction, as the resulting k 0 -problem is not necessarily the
same vector optimization problem VOpt(φ). As an example, consider the 3-XOR problem,
VOpt(z1 ⊕ z2 ⊕ z3 ). After brute-forcing over all variables x1 , we are left with a combination
of VOpt(0 ⊕ z2 ⊕ z3 ) and VOpt(1 ⊕ z2 ⊕ z3 ), where in each coordinate one of these two
constraints applies. As we regularly have to deal with these combined problems, we now
define them formally.

I Definition 30 (Hybrid Optimization Problems). Let Φ be a set of Boolean functions on k
inputs. In a hybrid optimization problem VMax(Φ), we are given an (k + 1)-partite graph
X1 ∪ · · · ∪ Xk ∪ Y , where each coordinate y ∈ Y is associated to a function φy ∈ Φ, and the
30   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


     task is to compute

         OPT =           max         # φy (x1 [y], . . . , xk [y]).
                  x1 ∈X1 ,...,xk ∈Xk y∈Y


     We similarly define VMin(Φ).

          Our hardness parameters Hand and Hdeg interplay nicely with hybrid problems: Let φ be
     a k-variable Boolean function of hardness, say Hand (φ) ≤ h, and, for some h ≤ k 0 ≤ k, let Φ
     be the set of all k 0 -variable Boolean functions φ0 of hardness Hand (φ0 ) ≤ h. Then VOpt(φ)
                            0
     reduces to nk−k instances of VOpt(Φ). Indeed, by the definition of Hand , we can always
     find a set of k − k 0 indices which we can brute-force over, such that any remaining formula is
     of hardness at most h. The same statement holds for Hdeg as well.
          We finally give the missing proof of Theorem 29. The idea is a rather straightforward
     generalization of [31, Theorem 7]. We essentially exploit that there are not too many tuples
     (x1 , . . . , xk ) for which at least one of the edges (xi , xj ) is present. As an important ingredient,
     we recycle a lemma already proven in [31].

                                                                                           6 I ⊆ [k]
                                                                                                     
     I Lemma 31 ([31, Lemma 22]). Given a nonempty set of index pairs ∅ =                          2 , we say
     that (x1 , . . . , xk ) respects I if, for any i 6= j, we have E(xi , xj ) if and only if {i, j} ∈ I. We
     can compute hx1 , . . . , xk i for all vectors (x1 , . . . , xk ) respecting I in time O(mk−1/2 ).

     Proof of Theorem 29. The first part is clear: The vector optimization problem VOpt(ψ0 )
     is the special case of Opt(ψ), where we leave out all edges E(xi , xj ).
         So let us focus on the second part and start with Max(ψ). Let

         ψ = max # φ(x1 , . . . , xk , y).
              x1 ,...,xk y


     For any set I ⊆ [k]
                            
                          2   of index pairs, let φI denote the formula obtained from φ after
     substituting every atom E(xi , xj ) by true if {i, j} ∈ I, and by false otherwise. In particular,
     φ∅ = ψ0 . Furthermore, we define
                                                                                          
                               ^
        ψI = max #                E(xi , xj ) ⇐⇒ {i, j} ∈ I  ∧ φI (x1 [y], . . . , xk [y]) .
               x1 ,...,xk y
                               {i,j}⊆[k]


     It suffices to separately solve the given Opt(ψ) instance for all I, treated as an instance of
     Opt(ψI ), respectively. Then OPT = maxI OPTI , where OPTI is the optimal value of the
     Opt(ψI ) instance. We distinguish two cases:
     Case 1: I 6= ∅. We claim that an exact solution for Opt(ψI ) can be computed in time
        O(mk−1/2 ). Clearly, we only need to focus on tuples (x1 , . . . , xk ) that respect I, as any
        other tuple is of value 0. There are at most O(mk−1 ) such tuples. Indeed, since we
        assumed that I is non-empty, there exists a pair of indices {i, j} ∈ I such that there
        exists an edge E(xi , xj ) whenever (x1 , . . . , xk ) respects I. However, there are at most m
        pairs (xi , xj ) satisfying that condition, and therefore at most nk−2 m ≤ O(mk−1 ) relevant
        tuples (x1 , . . . , xk ).
        We can represent the value of (x1 , . . . , xk ) in terms of the polynomial representation of
        φI ; in the language of Appendix E:
                                     X
             Val(x1 , . . . , xk ) =      φbI ({i1 , . . . , i` }) · hxi1 , . . . , xi` i.
                                  i1 <...<i`
                                   0≤`≤k
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                          31


   Assuming that all inner products hxi1 , . . . , xi` i are precomputed, we can determine the
   optimum value in time O(mk−1 ) by iterating over all tuples respecting I and applying
   the previous equation in each step. For ` < k, we can easily compute all inner products
   hxi1 , . . . , xi` i in time O(m` ) ≤ O(mk−1 ). For ` = k, we apply Lemma 31 to compute all
   inner products hx1 , . . . , xk i in time O(mk−1/2 ).

Case 2: I = ∅. Note that Max(ψ∅ ) is not directly equivalent to VMax(ψ0 ), since an
   arbitrary solution (x1 , . . . , xk ) for the latter does not necessarily meet the condition that
   none of the edges (xi , xj ) be present. The following reduction enforces this constraint.
   Computing a c-approximation of Max(ψ) can be reduced to the following gap problem:
   Given a target t, distinguish whether OPT ≥ t, or whether OPT < t/c. Binary-searching
   over t then yields a c-approximation of the original problem, incurring only a logarithmic
   overhead. Despite its name, the definition of the gap problem also makes sense for the
   case c = 1.
   Let γ > 0 be a parameter to be fixed later. We call a vertex xi heavy if it is of degree
   ≥ mγ , and light otherwise. The first step is to eliminate all heavy vertices; there can
   exist at most O(m/mγ ) = O(m1−γ ) many such vertices xi . Fixing xi , we can solve the
   remaining problem in time O(mk−1 ) using the baseline algorithm. If a solution of value
   ≥ t/c is detected, we accept. It thus takes time O(mk−γ ) to safely remove all heavy
   vertices.
   Next, partition each set Xi into several groups Xi,1 , . . . , Xi,g such that the total degree
   of all vertices in a group is Θ(mγ ), except for possibly the last nonempty groups. This is
   implemented by greedily inserting vertices into Xi.j until its total degree exceeds mγ . As
   each vector inserted in that way is light, we can overshoot by at most mγ . It follows that
   g ≤ O(m/mγ ) = O(m1−γ ).
   We assume that VMax(φ∅ ) can be c-approximated in time O(mk−δ ) for some δ > 0.
   Then we continue as follows:
  1. For all combinations (j1 , . . . , jk ) ∈ [g]k , compute a c-approximation of the vector
       optimization problem VMax(ψ0 ) with input X1,j1 , . . . , Xk,jk . If the returned value is
       ≥ t/c, then we call (j1 , . . . , jk ) a successful combination.
  2. If there are more than mnk−2 successful combinations, we accept.
  3. Otherwise, for any successful combination (j1 , . . . , jk ), solve Max(ψ) on X1,j1 , . . . , Xk,jk
       exactly using the baseline algorithm, and accept if and only if one of these calls returns
       a value ≥ t/c.
   We begin with the correctness of the algorithm. First of all, whenever a solution
  (x1 , . . . , xk ) in Max(ψ∅ ) is of value at least t, then the respective value in VMax(φ∅ ) is
   also at least t. It is therefore safe to only treat those subinstances in step 3 which we
   considered successful in step 1. It remains to argue why step 2 is correct. How many
   tuples (x1 , . . . , xk ) can be false positives, that is, be of value ≥ t/c in VMax(φ∅ ), but of
   value < t/c in Max(ψ∅ )? At most mnk−2 , since at least one edge (xi , xj ) must exist for
   any false positive. Thus, if we witness > mnk−2 solutions of value ≥ t/c in VMax(φ∅ ),
   among these there exists at least one true positive.
   Finally, let us bound the running time of the above algorithm. Recall that removing
   heavy vertices accounts for O(mk−γ ) time. In step 1, the VMax(φ∅ ) algorithm is applied
   g k = O(mk−γk ) times on instances of size O(mγ ), which takes time O(mk−γk+γ(k−δ)) ) =
   O(mk−γδ ). Step 3 becomes relevant only if there are at most mnk−2 = O(mk−1 )
   successful combinations. For any such combination, the baseline algorithm takes time
   O((mγ )k ) = O(mγk ). The total running time is O(mk−γ + mk−γδ + mk−1+γk ). By
   picking γ in the range 0 < γ < k1 , the claim follows.
32   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


         This finishes the proof for the maximization variant. For minimizations, the proof is
     essentially analogous. We define
                                                                                         
                              _
         ψI = min #              E(xi , xj ) ⇐⇒
                                                6 {i, j} ∈ I  ∨ φI (x1 [y], . . . , xk [y])
              x1 ,...,xk y
                             {i,j}⊆[k]


     instead, because with our former choice, any tuple not respecting I is inconveniently of
     value 0. From then on, the necessary changes are straightforward and left to thorough
     readers.                                                                              J

        By carefully inspecting the proof of Theorem 29, one can also see that the same approach
     works to show that Opt(ψ) and VOpt(ψ0 ) are equivalent under additive approximations.


      E     Exact Optimization
     This section is devoted to proving Theorem 7. In fact, we prove a stronger result, formulated
     in terms of vector problems:

     I Theorem 32. Let φ be a Boolean function on k ≥ 2 inputs.
        If Hdeg (φ) ≤ 1 < k, then VOpt(φ) can be solved in time O(mk−1 ).
        If Hdeg (φ) ≤ 2 < k, then VOpt(φ) can be solved in time O(mk−δ ), for some δ > 0, using
        fast matrix multiplication.
        If 3 ≤ Hdeg (φ) ≤ k, then VOpt(φ) cannot be solved in time O(mk−δ ), for any δ > 0,
       unless the h-Uniform HyperClique hypothesis fails.
        If Hdeg (φ) = k, then VOpt(φ) cannot be solved in time O(mk−δ ), for any δ > 0, unless
       the k-OV hypothesis fails.

        By the equivalence of vector problems VOpt(φ) and graph problems Opt(ψ) (Theorem 29)
     and since the Max-3-SAT assumption implies the h-Uniform HyperClique assumption,
     Theorem 7 follows as a corollary of Theorem 32.
        For the sake of convenience, let us quickly recall the definition of Hdeg :

     I Definition 6 (Degree Hardness). Let φ be a Boolean function on k inputs. The degree
     hardness Hdeg (φ) of φ is the largest integer 0 ≤ h ≤ k such that, for any index set S ∈ [k]
                                                                                                 
                                                                                               h ,
     there exists some S-restriction of φ of degree h. For an OptSPk graph formula ψ, we define
     Hdeg (ψ) = Hdeg (ψ0 ).

         We begin with some propositions about the hardness parameters. Let φ(z1 , . . . , zk ) be a
     Boolean function (as before, we also write φ to denote its multilinear polynomial extension).
                                     the coefficient of the monomial z S = i∈S zi . These values
                                                                            Q
     For S ⊆ [k], we denote by φ(S)
                                b
     φ(S)
     b    are sometimes referred to as the Fourier coefficients of φ. There is a simple formula for
     calculating φ(S)
                 b    known as the inclusion-exclusion principle:

                                                    = T ⊆S (−1)|S|−|T | φ(T ).
                                                      P
     I Proposition 33 (Inclusion-Exclusion). φ(S)
                                              b

        The following proposition relates our notion of degree hardness with certain coefficients
     φ(S):
     b

     I Proposition 34. Let φ be a Boolean function k inputs. Then Hdeg (φ) is the maximum
     number 0 ≤ h ≤ k such that, for any set S ∈ [k]
                                                  h , there exists some superset T ⊇ S with
     b ) 6= 0.
     φ(T
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                             33


              0                                                                     0
Proof. Let Hdeg   (φ) denote the parameter defined in the statement,     that is, Hdeg (φ) is the
                                                           [k]
                                                              
largest number 0 ≤ h ≤ k such that, for any set S ∈ h , there exists some T ⊇ S with
b ) 6= 0. We prove that Hdeg (φ) = H 0 (φ).
φ(T                                     deg
    On the one hand,   suppose that Hdeg (φ) ≥ h. By definition it holds that for any set of
variables S ∈ [k]                                    0                                 b0
                 
                h , there exists some S-restriction φ of φ of degree h. In particular, φ (S) 6= 0
                                                                   0
and therefore, for some T ⊇ S, φ(T ) 6= 0. It follows that also Hdeg (φ) ≥ h.
                                  b
    On the other hand, suppose that Hdeg (φ) < h. Then there exists some index set S ∈ [k]
                                                                                                 
                                                                                               h
such that any S-restriction φ0 of φ is of degree less than h, or in other words, φb0 (S) = 0.
We claim that for any superset T ⊇ S, φ(T  b ) = 0. For the sake of contradiction, suppose
otherwise and pick an inclusion-wise minimal set T ⊇ S with φ(T  b ) 6= 0. Then we construct
                    0             0
an S-restriction φ of φ with φ (S) 6= 0 as follows: Fix every variable in T \ S to 1 and
                                 b
every variable in [k] \ T to 0. Then indeed φb0 (S) = φ(T b ) 6= 0 as the only monomial in
φ which is mapped to S under the restriction is T . This is a contradiction and therefore
  0
Hdeg (φ) < h.                                                                                   J

I Proposition 35. For any Boolean function φ it holds that Hdeg (φ) = Hdeg (¬φ), where ¬φ
denotes the negation of φ.

Proof. Negating a formula φ corresponds to changing its polynomial extension into 1 − φ.
Any nonzero monomial (of degree > 0) still has a nonzero coefficient after that transformation,
and therefore the claim follows by Proposition 34.                                           J

    As an immediate consequence of Proposition 35, it suffices to prove Theorem 32 only
for VMax(φ) (or interchangeably, VMin(φ)). Indeed, say that we have proven Theorem 32
for the maximization variant, and let φ be such that VMax(φ) admits an algorithm in
time O(mk−δ ). Since Hdeg (φ) = Hdeg (¬φ), there also exists an algorithm for VMax(¬φ) in
time O(mk−δ ), and solving VMax(¬φ) exactly is equivalent to solving VMin(φ) under the
translation VMin(φ) = d − VMax(¬φ). For that reason, we will implicitly deal with the
maximization variants in this section’s proofs.
    Finally, it is easy to relate Hand (φ) with Hdeg (φ):

I Proposition 36. For any Boolean function φ, it holds that Hand (φ) ≤ Hdeg (φ).

Proof. If a Boolean function φ0 : {0, 1}h → {0, 1} has a unique satisfying assignment
                                                                      Qh
α ∈ {0, 1}h , then its polynomial extension is φ0 (z1 , . . . , zh ) = i=1 τi (zi ), where τi (zi ) = zi
if αi = 1 and τi (zi ) = 1 − zi otherwise. In particular, φ0 is of degree h. The claim is now
immediate by the definitions of Hand (φ) and Hdeg (φ).                                                J


E.1     Hardness Results
As the main tool for the hardness proof, we demonstrate how to construct coordinate gadgets
for all problems classified as hard in Theorem 32. Our gadget definition is inspired by the
standard reduction from OV to MaxIP.
    Recall that a restriction of a Boolean function φ is another Boolean function φ0 obtained
by substituting constant values for some inputs of φ. In the following, we need a strictly
more general concept:

I Definition 37 (Unary Transformation). Let φ(z1 , . . . , zk ) be a Boolean function and let
τ1 , . . . , τk : {0, 1} → {0, 1} be unary functions. We call the composition φ(τ1 (z1 ), . . . , τk (zk ))
a unary transformation of φ.
34   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


         Whenever the unary functions τi are either constant or the identity, a unary transformation
     of φ is simply a restriction of φ. However, unary transformations also allow to flip some of
     the inputs.

     I Lemma 38 (Coordinate Gadget). Let φ(z1 , . . . , zk ) be a Boolean function of degree deg(φ) =
     k. Then there exist unary transformations φ1 , . . . , φ` of φ such that
        `
        X
               φj (z1 , . . . , zk ) = β1 − β2 · z [k] ,
         j=1


     for some positive integers β1 , β2 . The collection {φ1 , . . . , φ` } is called a coordinate gadget
     of φ.

     Proof. We describe an inductive procedure maintaining a polynomial g which is invariantly
     a sum of unary transformations of φ. Initially, we set g := φ and the goal is to eventually
     transform g into β1 − β2 · z [k] . We can assume that gb([k]) < 0; otherwise start with
     g := φ(1 − z1 , z2 , . . . , zk ). We proceed by eliminating unnecessary monomials one at a time:
         If g does not have any monomial of degree 1 ≤ d ≤ k − 1, then we stop and output g.
     Otherwise, pick one such monomial gb(S) · z S of maximum degree. Moreover, let T ⊆ [k] be an
     inclusion-wise minimal set such that S ⊆ T and φ(T    b ) 6= 0 (note that T exists since deg(φ) = k).
     Then, we construct the unary transformation φ0 (z1 , . . . , zk ) := φ(τ1 (z1 ), . . . , τk (zk )) with
                  
                  z if i ∈ S,
                  
                  
         τi (z) := 1 if i ∈ T \ S,
                  
                  
                  0 otherwise.


     We have that φb0 (S) = φ(T
                              b ) 6= 0. By additionally flipping an arbitrary input zi , i ∈ S, we
                00       00        b ). Moreover, observe that z S is the only nonzero monomial
     construct φ with φ (S) = −φ(T
                        b
                         00
     of degree ≥ |S| in φ .
         Next, we cancel the monomial z S as follows: Assume without loss of generality that
     φ(T ) > 0 (and thus φb00 (S) < 0) and also assume gb(S) > 0; the other cases are symmetric.
     b
     We set

        g 0 := φ(T
               b ) · g + gb(S) · φ00 .

     Then gb0 (S) = φ(T
                      b ) · gb(S) + gb(S) · (−φ(T b )) = 0, and any other monomial of degree ≥ |S|
                               0
     remains untouched in g . Since the number of nonzero monomials of maximum degree (less
     than k) has decreased, the construction continues with g 0 by induction. Here, we implicitly
     used that the coefficients φ(T
                                  b ) and gb(S) are integral, which can for example be seen from
     the inclusion-exclusion formula (Proposition 33).
          It remains to argue that β1 and β2 are positive integers. Recall that we started with
     gb([k]) < 0 and any function φ00 that was added in the process satisfies φb00 ([k]) = 0. Hence,
     gb([k]) < 0 and thus β2 > 0. Finally, since g is a sum of (polynomial extensions of) Boolean
     functions, it is clear that 0 ≤ g(1, . . . , 1) = β1 − β2 . It follows that β1 ≥ β2 > 0.     J

        With the coordinate gadget in mind, the k-OV hardness result is now almost immediate:

     I Lemma 39 (No Exact Optimization for Hdeg (φ) = k). Let φ be a Boolean function on k
     inputs of degree hardness Hdeg (φ) = k. Then VOpt(φ) cannot be solved in time O(mk−δ )
     any δ > 0, unless the k-OV hypothesis fails.
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                                     35


Proof. We assume an O(mk−δ )-time algorithm for VMax(φ) and our goal is to find an
improved algorithm for a given k-OV instance X1 , . . . , Xk ⊆ {0, 1}d . Observe that Hdeg (φ) =
k is equivalent to deg(φ) = k, and therefore there exists a coordinate gadget {φ1 , . . . , φ` } for
φ by the previous lemma. Let τj,1 , . . . , τj,k denote the unary functions used to transform φ
into φj . Then we rewrite every vector xi ∈ Xi as a vector x0i of dimension `d by mapping
each entry z to (τ1,i (z), . . . , τ`,i (z)).
    Consider the VMax(φ) instance X10 , . . . , Xk0 . By Lemma 38, the optimal solution is
                    X
    OPT = 0max 0        φ(x01 [y], . . . , x0k [y]) = max β1 d − β2 hx1 , . . . , xk i.
                x1 ,...,xk                                  x1 ,...,xk
                             y

In particular, we have that OPT = β1 d if we started with a YES instance of k-OV, and a
value strictly smaller otherwise.
   Finally, we analyze the the running time. Constructing the sets X10 , . . . , Xk0 takes time
O(nd), and the sparsity of the constructed VMax(φ) instance is also m = O(nd). The total
running time is O(nd+mk−δ ) = O(nk−δ poly(d)), which contradicts the k-OV hypothesis. J

I Lemma 40 (No Exact Optimization for 3 ≤ Hdeg (φ)). Let φ be a Boolean function on k
inputs of degree hardness Hdeg (φ) = h, 3 ≤ h ≤ k. Then VOpt(φ) cannot be solved in time
O(mk−δ ) for any δ > 0, unless the h-Uniform HyperClique hypothesis fails.
Proof. For contradiction, let us assume that VMax(φ) can be solved in time O(mk−δ ) for
some δ > 0. Let k 0 = k 0 (k, h, δ) be a multiple of k to be specified later. Our reduction starts
from an instance H of h-Uniform k 0 -HyperClique. That is, H = (V, E) is a k 0 -partite
h-uniform hypergraph and we write V = V1,1 ∪ · · · ∪ V1,k0 /k ∪ · · · ∪ Vk,1 ∪ · · · ∪ Vk,k0 /k for
the vertex partition into k 0 parts of size n each. We regroup the vertices into k groups
Vi := Vi,1 ∪ · · · ∪ Vi,k0 /k and set Xi := Vi,1 × · · · × Vi,k0 /k .
    We begin to describe the construction of the VMax(φ) instance: Let I = {i1 ≤ . . . ≤ ih }
be a set of indices and let Ē(I) denote the set of non-edges ē = (vi1 , . . . , vih ) ∈ Vi1 × · · · × Vih
in H. In the following, we fix such a non-edge ē ∈ Ē(I). We say that some tuple xi ∈ Xi
avoids ē if not all vertices in ē ∩ Vi are part of xi .
    Since Hdeg (φ) = h, we know that for all index sets I, there exists some restriction
to a subformula φI (zi1 , . . . , zih ) of degree deg(φI ) = h. For that subformula, we can
apply Lemma 38 to obtain a coordinate gadget {φI,1 , . . . , φI,`(I) } so that
    `(I)
    X
           φI,j (zi1 , . . . , zih ) = β1 (I) − β2 (I) · z I .
    j=1

Recall that each φI,j is a unary transformation of φ0 , which in turn is a restriction of φ. It
follows that φI,j is also a unary transformation of φ. Let τI,j,1 , . . . , τI,j,k denote the unary
                                                               S
functions used to transform φ into φI,j . Finally, let Y = I Ē(I) × [`(I)]. We describe how
to assign the entries xi [y], for xi ∈ Xi and y = (ē, j) ∈ Ē(I) × [`(I)]:
            
            τI,j,i (0) = τI,j,i (1) if i 6∈ I (in which case τI,j,i is constant),
            
            
    xi [y] = τI,j,i (0)              if i ∈ I and xi avoids ē,
            
                                     if i ∈ I and x does not avoid ē.
            
            τ      (1)
                    I,j,i                                        i

We claim that there exists a k 0 -hyperclique in H if and only if the VMax(φ) instance over
the vectors X1 ∪ · · · ∪ Xk and dimensions Y has optimal value β ∗ := I β1 (I) · |Ē(I)|.
                                                                                     P

   First, suppose that there exists a k 0 -hyperclique (v1,1 , . . . , v1,k0 /k , . . . , vk,1 , . . . , vk,k0 /k )
and let (x1 , . . . , xk ) be their corresponding vectors, i.e. xi = (vi,1 , . . . , vi,k0 /k ). Then, for any
36   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


     index set I and any non-edge ē ∈ Ē(I), there has to be at least one vector xi , i ∈ I, which
     avoids ē. Hence, for any j ∈ [`(I)], xi [(ē, j)] = τI,j,i (0). As a consequence, the contribution
         P
     of j φI (x1 [(ē, j)], . . . , xk [(ē, j)]) is exactly β1 (I). Since this argument holds for any index
     set I and any non-edge ē ∈ Ē(I), the total value of this instance is β ∗ .
          For the other direction, suppose that (v1,1 , . . . , v1,k0 /k , . . . , vk,1 , . . . , vk,k0 /k ) does not form
     a k 0 -hyperclique in H, and let (x1 , . . . , xk ) be their corresponding vectors. Among these
     k 0 vertices, there exists at least one tuple ē = (vi1 , . . . , vih ) which forms a non-edge; let
     I = {i1 , . . . , ih }. Hence, for every i ∈ I and every j ∈ [`(I)], xi [(ē, j)] = τI,j,i (1). It follows
     that the contribution of all coordinates (ē, j) is:

         `(I)                                          `(I)
         X                                           X                                          
                φ x1 [(ē, j)], . . . , xk [(ē, j)] =  φI,j xi1 [(ē, j)], . . . , xih [(ē, j)]
         j=1                                           j=1

                                                  = β1 (I) − β2 (I) · 1 < β1 (I),

     and therefore, the total value of (x1 , . . . , xk ) is less than β ∗ . This completes the correctness
     proof.
                                                                             0
            To analyze the running time, note that |Xi | ≤ O(nk /k ), |Y | ≤ O(nh ) and m ≤
                            k0 /k+h                            0
                                    ). It also takes time O(nk /k+h ) to construct the VMax(φ) instance.
     P
          i |Xi ||Y | ≤ O(n
     Assuming that we can solve VMax(φ) in time O(mk−δ ), we can test whether H contains a
                                         0                                                            0
     k 0 -hyperclique in time O(n(k /k+h)(k−δ) ). By choosing k 0 ≥ k 2 hδ −1 , this becomes O(nk −hδ ),
     which contradicts the h-Uniform HyperClique hypothesis.                                             J

     E.2        Algorithmic Results
     For the remaining part of Theorem 32, we present two algorithms to solve low-hardness
     optimization problems: First, if Hdeg (φ) ≤ 1 < k, then VOpt(φ) admits a linear-time
     improvement. Second, if Hdeg (φ) ≤ 2 < k, then we still get a polynomial improvement using
     fast matrix multiplication. All in all, this approach is similar to [31].
         In both algorithms, we brute-force over some variables xi and solve the remaining k = 2
     or k = 3 problem in a more clever way. However, recall that after instantiating some variables
     the remaining optimization problem is a hybrid problem.

     I Lemma 41 (Exact Optimization for Hdeg (φ) ≤ 1). Let φ be a Boolean function on k inputs
     of degree hardness Hdeg (φ) ≤ 1 < k. Then VOpt(φ) can be solved in time O(mk−1 ).

     Proof. By Proposition 34, Hdeg (φ) ≤ 1 implies that there exist distinct variables a, b ∈ [k]
     such that φ(S)
                b     = 0 for all S ⊇ {a, b}. We explicitly enumerate all choices of the other
     k − 2 variables in [k] \ {a, b}. It remains to solve a two-variable hybrid vector problem
     maxx1 ,x2 #y φy (x1 [y], x2 [y]) in linear time. However, by our choice of a, b we know that
     deg(φy ) ≤ 1 for all y and thus the objective becomes
                   X                                   X                             X
          max           φby ({1}) · x1 [y] + max              φby ({2}) · x2 [y] +         φby (∅).
         x1 ∈X1                               x2 ∈X2
                  y∈Y                                  y∈Y                           y∈Y

     These summands can be computed independently by a single pass through the edge set and
     so the total running time is O(nk−2 m) = O(mk−1 ). Note that the same approach works for
     minimization problems.                                                                J

         We present the second algorithm as a reduction from VOpt(φ) to the h-Uniform
     (h + 1)-HyperClique problem. For h = 2, the improvement then follows as a corollary.
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                                  37


    We need the following subroutine for computing maximum-weight hypercliques. That is,
given an h-uniform k-partite hypergraph with integral edge weights w, the goal is to return
                                                                   P
a k-hyperclique (v1 , . . . , vk ) maximizing the total edge weight i1 <...<ih w(vi1 , . . . , vih ).
I Lemma 42 (Maximum-Weight HyperClique). Assume that the h-Uniform k-Hyper-
Clique problem can be solved in time O(nk−δ ) for some δ > 0. Then, given an h-uniform
k-partite hypergraph with integral edge weights w satisfying e∈E(H) |w(e)| ≤ O(nh ) (i.e.,
                                                            P

the average edge weight is constant), we can compute a maximum-weight k-hyperclique in
            0
time O(nk−δ ) for some δ 0 > 0.
Proof. Let V1 ∪ . . . ∪ Vk be the vertex partition of the given hypergraph H. We call an edge
e ∈ E(H) heavy if |w(e)| > nγ (for some parameter γ to be set later), and light otherwise.
Since e∈E(H) |w(e)| ≤ O(nh ), there are at most O(nh /nγ ) = O(nh−γ ) heavy edges. For
       P

each heavy edge e = {vi1 , . . . , vih } (with vij ∈ Vij ), we iterate over all (k − h)-tuples of
remaining vertices vi ∈ Vi for i 6∈ {i1 , . . . , ih } and keep track of the maximum weight of any
hyperclique. In this way, we compute the maximum weight of all hypercliques involving a
heavy edge in time O(nh−γ nk−h ) = O(nk−γ ).
    After this step, we remove all heavy edges and therefore the maximum edge weight in
H is bounded by nγ . Now, it is feasible to enumerate all combinations of edge weights
wI ∈ {−nγ , . . . , nγ } for all I = {i1 < . . . < ih }. For any such combination (wI )I , we remove
all edges {vi1 , . . . , vih } from H unless w(vi1 , . . . , vih ) = w{i1 ,...,ih } . Therefore, any hyperclique
in the remaining graph is of weight I wI . We use the O(nk−δ ) algorithm to test whether
                                            P

there exists such a clique, and by repeating the process for all weight combinations (wI )I we
                                                                                                        k
can keep track of the maximum weight of any hyperclique. All in all, there are nγ (h) many
                                                                    k
weight combinations, so this step takes time O(nk+γ (h)−δ ).
                                                         k
    The total running time is O(nk−γ + nk+γ (h)−δ ), which for sufficiently small γ = γ(k, h, δ)
           0
is O(nk−δ ) for some δ 0 > 0.                                                                                 J

I Lemma 43 (Exact Optimization via HyperClique). Let φ be a Boolean function on k
inputs of degree hardness h = Hdeg (φ) < k. If the h-Uniform (h + 1)-HyperClique
                                      0
problem can be solved in time O(nh+1−δ ) for some δ 0 > 0, then VOpt(φ) can be solved in
time O(mk−δ ) for some δ > 0.
Proof. The high-level idea is similar to Lemma 41. Using Proposition 34, there exist distinct
indices i1 , . . . , ih+1 ∈ [k] so that φ(S)  b        = 0 for all S ⊇ {i1 , . . . , ih+1 }. After brute-forcing
over all k − (h + 1) variables in [k] \ {i1 , . . . , ih+1 }, it remains to solve a hybrid (h + 1)-
variable problem maxx1 ,...,xh+1 #y φy (x1 [y], . . . , xh+1 [y]) in time O(mh+1−δ ). By the choice
of i1 , . . . , ih+1 , we are guaranteed that deg(φy ) ≤ h for all coordinates y. Hence, we can
express the objective as
                      X X
        max                    φby ({i1 , . . . , i` }) · xi1 [y] . . . xi` [y].
    x1 ,...,xh+1
                   i1 <...<i` y∈Y
                      `≤h

    The key observation is that each term depends on at most h of the vectors x1 , . . . , xh+1 .
Thus, we can construct a complete (h + 1)-partite h-uniform hypergraph H on the vertices
X1 ∪ · · · ∪ Xh+1 and encode the objective on the edge weights. As a first step, the encoding
uses hyperedges of arities 1, . . . , h; we will later fix the construction to include hyperedges
of arity h only. Start with zero weights on all edges. For all i1 < . . . < i` with 0 < ` ≤ h,
increment all edge weights w(xi1 , . . . , xi` ) by
    X
         φby ({i1 , . . . , i` }) · xi1 [y] . . . xi` [y].
    y∈Y
38   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


     We can compute these values in time O(mh ) by enumerating all tuples of nonzero entries in
     Xi1 , . . . , Xi` , respectively. The empty sequence (` = 0) contributes only a constant offset
     in the objective and can thus be ignored. Observe that the weight of any hyperclique
                                      P                  P
     (x1 , . . . , xh+1 ) is exactly                      y∈Y φy ({i1 , . . . , i` }) · xi1 [y] . . . xi` [y]. Hence, we
                                                              b
                                         i1 <...<i` ,`≤h
     have reduced the problem to finding a hyperclique of maximum weight in H. Note that
     each nonzero entry in a vector xi contributes to at most n`−1 hyperedges of arity ` in H.
     Therefore, the total weight of all hyperedges of arity ` is bounded by O(n`−1 m) = O(m` ).
          We continue to fix the issue that H contains hyperedges of arity less than h: For any
     edge (xi1 , . . . , xi` ), we fix some distinct indices i`+1 , . . . , ih 6∈ {i1 , . . . , i` } and iterate over
     all (h − `)-tuples of vertices (x`+1 , . . . , xh ) ∈ X`+1 × · · · × Xh . We add w(x1 , . . . , x` ) to all
     weights w(x1 , . . . , xh ) and delete the hyperedge (x1 , . . . , x` ) afterwards. In that way, the
     weight of every (h + 1)-hyperclique remains fixed, as the weight of any small-arity hyperedge
     is transferred to some arity-h hyperedge. Moreover, after this step H is h-uniform. The total
     edge weight in H is bounded by `≤h nh−` O(m` ) = O(mh ) and the number of vertices is
                                                P

     bounded by O(m).
          We apply Lemma 42 to find a maximum-weight hyperclique in H in time O(mh+1−δ ) for
     some δ > 0. Recall that this process is repeated nk−(h+1) times, so the overall running time
     is dominated by O(nk−(h+1) mh+1−δ ) = O(mk−δ ) for some δ > 0, as desired.                                        J

         Recall that the 2-Uniform 3-HyperClique problem – also known as triangle detection
     in standard graphs – can be solved in time O(nω ). This yields the following corollary:

     I Corollary 44 (Exact Optimization for Hdeg (φ) ≤ 2). Let φ be a Boolean function on k
     inputs of degree hardness Hdeg (φ) ≤ 2 < k. Then VOpt(φ) can be solved in time O(mk−δ ),
     for some δ > 0.

     E.3      The Equivalence to HyperClique
     In the course of the previous subsections, we proved both upper and lower bounds by
     connecting the optimization problems VOpt(φ) of degree hardness Hdeg (φ) = h to clique
     detection in h-uniform hypergraphs. Theorem 8 summarizes both directions:

     I Theorem 8 (Equivalence of Opt(ψ) and HyperClique). Let ψ be an OptSPk graph
     formula of degree hardness h = Hdeg (ψ) ≥ 2.
        If Opt(ψ) can be solved in time O(mk−δ ) for some δ > 0, then, for some (large)
                                                                                  0  0
        k 0 = k 0 (k, h, δ), h-Uniform k 0 -HyperClique can be solved in time O(nk −δ ) for some
        δ 0 > 0.
        If h-Uniform (h + 1)-HyperClique can be solved in time O(nh+1−δ ) for some δ > 0,
                                                     0
        then Opt(ψ) can be solved in time O(mk−δ ) for some δ 0 > 0.

     Proof. By the equivalence of general problems Opt(ψ) and vector optimization problems
     VOpt(φ) (Theorem 29), we only need to show the statement for vector problems VOpt(φ).
     The second item is proven in Lemma 43. The first item is proven in Lemma 40, but only
     for h ≥ 3. Nevertheless, exactly the same proof works also for h = 2.               J

         Theorem 8 strengthens the evidence for the h-Uniform HyperClique hypothesis
     (at least for the stronger version postulating no O(nh+1−δ ) algorithm for the h-Uniform
     h + 1-HyperClique problem), but we consider it an interesting result also for two additional
     reasons.
         First, in the specific case Hdeg (ψ) = 2, Theorem 8 yields an explanation on why we can,
     but also need to use fast matrix multiplication to efficiently solve Opt(ψ). Indeed, any
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                                39


           Hdeg (ψ) ≤ 2                                        3 ≤ Hdeg (ψ) ≤ k
            (Hdeg (ψ) ≤ 1)                                       (Hdeg (ψ) = 2)



                              Hand (ψ) ≤ 1        Hand (ψ) = 2        3 ≤ Hand (ψ) < k       Hand (ψ) = k
                               (Hand (ψ) ≤ 1)        (empty)                 (empty)          (Hand (ψ) = 2)
 Max(ψ)


          R1:                R2:                 R2 or R3:          R3:                  R4:
            exact solvable     AS                  constant approx.   constant approx.     poly. approx.
                               no efficient AS     no efficient AS    no AS                no subpoly. approx.




   Figure 3 A reminder of our classification of Max(ψ) for k ≥ 3. The pale labels indicate how to
change the conditions to obtain the picture for k = 2.


algorithm solving Opt(ψ) in time O(mk−δ ), translates directly to an algorithm for finding
                                             0
cliques in (ordinary) graphs in time O(nk−δ ) – an improvement, which is labeled highly
unlikely without the use of fast matrix multiplication [4].
    Second, it is interesting to compare Theorem 8 to a similar, yet different equivalence
result [31]: The h-Uniform HyperClique hypothesis holds if and only if for all k ≥ h, and
all MinSPk graph formulas ψ of and-hardness Hand (ψ) = h, Zero(ψ) requires time O(mk−δ )
for all δ > 0. That equivalence is about classes (in that it relates the class of h-Uniform
HyperClique problems with the class of all problems Zero(ψ) of and-hardness h), whereas
Theorem 8 is more problem-centered (in the sense that every specific graph formula ψ is
related with certain h-Uniform HyperClique problems).

 F          Approximation Algorithms for Maximization
In this section, we give our algorithmic results for approximating the maximization variant of
our problems. As illustrated in Figure 3, there are three regimes of interest. We first present
elementary constant-factor approximation algorithms (subsection F.1) and polynomial-factor
approximation algorithms (subsection F.2). In subsection F.3 we then obtain approximation
schemes by a reduction to the polynomial method.

F.1         Constant-Factor Approximation
In this section, we provide a proof for the algorithmic part of Theorem 9. Phrased in terms
of vectors problems (which is equivalent by Theorem 29), we prove that:

I Lemma 45 (Constant-Factor Approximation for Hand (φ) < k). Let φ be a Boolean function
on k inputs. If Hand (φ) < k (or equivalently, φ does not have exactly one satisfying
assignment), then there exists a constant-factor approximation for VMax(φ) in time O(mk−1 ).

    We start with a definition. Let φ : {0, 1}k → {0, 1} be a Boolean function with the
following property: Whenever α is a satisfying assignment of φ, then the component-wise
negation of α is also satisfying. We call φ an opposite function. We proceed in three steps:
1. Exploiting the formula’s structure, we design a constant approximation algorithm for all
    problems VMax(φ) where φ is an opposite function (Lemma 46).
2. As a consequence, we turn this algorithm into a constant approximation for all problems
    VMax(φ) where φ has exactly two (arbitrary) satisfying assignments (Lemma 48).
3. Finally, let φ have at least two satisfying assignments. We can “cover” all satisfying
    assignments by pairs and apply the previous algorithm (Lemma 45).
40   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


     I Lemma 46. Let φ be a k-variable opposite function. Then there exists a (k + 1)-
     approximation for VMax(φ) in time O(mk−1 ).

         The proof of Lemma 46 relies on the following simple proposition:

     I Proposition 47. Let φ be a k-variable opposite function and let a1 , . . . , ak , b1 , . . . , bk ∈
     {0, 1}. Then:
                                                     X
         φ(a1 , . . . , ak ) ≤ φ(b1 , . . . , bk ) +   φ(a1 , . . . , ai−1 , bi , ai+1 , . . . , ak ).
                                                      1≤i≤k

     Proof. If the ai ’s do not satisfy φ, then the claimed inequality trivially holds. Thus, assume
     that φ(a1 , . . . , ak ) = 1. We distinguish two cases: If there exists some index i with bi = ai ,
     we have that φ(a1 , . . . , ai−1 , bi , ai+1 , . . . , ak ) = 1 as well. Hence, one of the terms in the sum
     on the right-hand side equals one. Otherwise, we have bi 6= ai for all i. Recall that φ is
     opposite and φ(a1 , . . . , ak ) = 1, thus φ(b1 , . . . , bk ) = 1 and we also have a contribution of at
     least one on the right-hand side.                                                                         J

     Proof of Lemma 46. The previous proposition immediately suggests the following algorithm
     for VMax(φ). Let X1 , . . . , Xk be the given sets of vectors.
     1. Pick k arbitrary vectors x̂1 ∈ X1 , . . . , x̂k ∈ Xk .
     2. Compute

             v0 := # φ(x̂1 [y], . . . , x̂k [y]).
                     y∈Y

     3. Compute

             vi :=            max              # φ(x1 [y], . . . , xi−1 [y], x̂i [y], xi+1 [y], . . . , xk [y])
                     x1 ,...,xi−1 ,xi+1 ,...,xk y∈Y


         for all i ∈ [k], using the MaxSPk−1 baseline algorithm.
      4. Return v := maxi vi .
     We first analyze the approximation ratio. Obviously, the algorithm never returns an
     overestimation: v ≤ OPT. Let (x1 , . . . , xk ) be vectors corresponding to an optimal solution
     and fix an arbitrary coordinate y for which φ(x1 [y], . . . , xk [y]) holds. From Proposition 47
     it follows that y contributes 1 to at least one of the values v0 , v1 , . . . , vk . Hence, by the
     pigeonhole principle, there exists an index i such that vi ≥ OPT/(k + 1). In particular, we
     have v ≥ OPT/(k + 1) and thus the algorithm indeed computes a (k + 1)-approximation.
         Next, focus on the running time. Steps 1, 2 and 4 are executed in linear time. The third
     step invokes the MaxSPk − 1 baseline algorithm a constant number of times which takes
     time O(mk−1 ) in total.                                                                         J

     I Lemma 48. Let φ be a Boolean function on k inputs with exactly two satisfying assignments.
     Then there exists a (k + 1)-approximation for VMax(φ) in time O(mk−1 ).

     Proof. Let α, β ∈ {0, 1}k be the two satisfying assignments of φ. Without loss of generality,
     we may assume that αi 6= βi for all 1 ≤ i ≤ r and αi = βi for all r < i ≤ k, by reordering
     the indices i if necessary. We distinguish the following cases for r:
        r < 1: This case is contradictory, since α and β are distinct.
        r = 1: Here α1 6= β1 is the only position in which α and β differ, so φ does not depend
        on the first input. Therefore, we can use the MaxSPk−1 baseline algorithm to solve the
        problem in time O(mk−1 ).
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                       41


   r > 1: We brute-force over all vectors xi , r < i ≤ k. What remains is a vector
   maximization problem VMax(φ0 ) on r vectors, where φ0 is an opposite function. Therefore
   we can apply Lemma 46 to solve any instance in time O(mr−1 ). We repeat this step
   for all nk−r choices of xr+1 , . . . , xk and obtain a total running time of O(nk−r mr−1 ) =
   O(mk−1 ).                                                                                  J

Proof of Lemma 45. If φ is the constant false function, then the problem is trivial. So let
α1 , . . . , α` denote the satisfying assignments of φ, where ` ≥ 2.
 1. For all indices 1 ≤ i ≤ k, let φi : {0, 1}k → {0, 1} be the indicator function of α1 and αi .
     That is, φi (z) = 1 if and only if z = α1 or z = αi .
 2. Compute a (k + 1)-approximation v i for VMax(φi ) using Lemma 48.
 3. Return maxi v i .
The number of iterations in step 2 is bounded by ` = O(1), so the running time is bounded
by O(mk−1 ).
     To analyze the approximation performance, let (x1 , . . . , xk ) be an optimal solution
of value OPT, and let αi be the satisfying assignment which occurs most frequently in
(x1 , . . . , xk ). Then, by the pigeonhole principle, it follows that the optimal value of VMax(φi )
is at least OPT/`. Since v i is a (k + 1)-approximation to that maximization problem, it
follows that v i ≥ 1/(k + 1) · OPT/` = Ω(OPT), so our algorithm outputs a constant-factor
approximation.                                                                                    J


F.2     Polynomial-Factor Approximation
Next, we show that even the hardest maximization problems admit polynomial-factor
approximations thereby proving the upper bound in Theorem 13. Recall that hereby, we
mean polynomial factors in m. Our algorithm heavily exploits the sparse input representation.

I Lemma 49 (Polynomial-Factor Approximation). Let φ be an arbitrary Boolean function
on k inputs. Then, for any ε > 0, there exists some δ > 0 such that an mε -approximation of
VMax(φ) can be computed in time O(mk−δ ).

    As a first step towards proving Lemma 49, we prove the following simple lemma:

I Lemma 50. Let φ be a Boolean function on k inputs with exactly one satisfying assignment.
Then, given a VMax(φ) instance, we can decide distinguish whether OPT = 0 or OPT > 0
in time O(m).

    Notice that Lemma 50 does not hold for minimization, which is the reason why we cannot
give polynomial-factor approximations for VMin(φ).

Proof. Let α ∈ {0, 1}k be the satisfying assignment of φ. Observe that OPT = 0 if and only
if, for all i ∈ [k], all vectors xi ∈ Xi and all coordinates y ∈ Y , xi [y] 6= αi . Therefore, it
suffices to check individually for each set Xi , whether it contains some vector with an entry
equal to αi . Clearly this takes time at most O(m).                                            J

Proof of Lemma 49. We have already shown how to compute constant approximations for
all functions φ in time O(mk−1 ), except for those with exactly one falsifying assignment
(Lemma 45). Thus, assume that φ has exactly one satisfying assignment α ∈ {0, 1}k . We
distinguish two cases:
42   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


     Case 1: αi = 1 for some i. Without loss of generality, we assume that i = 1. We split X1
        into a sparse part X1sparse = {x1 ∈ X1 : x1 has Hamming weight ≤ mε } and a dense part
        X1dense = X1 \ X1sparse and separately solve the instances (X1sparse , X2 , . . . , Xk , Y ) and
       (X1dense , X2 , . . . , Xk , Y ). In the sparse instance it holds that OPT ≤ mε . Thus, it suffices
        to check whether OPT > 0 to compute an mε -approximation. By Lemma 50, this can be
        checked in time linear time.
        We are left with the dense instance, which can be solved exactly efficiently: Since every
        vector in Xidense is of Hamming weight at least mε , there can be at most m/mε = m1−ε
        vectors in Xidense . Therefore, we can brute-force over all x1 ∈ Xidense and solve the
        remaining MaxSPk−1 problem in time O(mk−1 ) using the baseline algorithm. The total
        running time is O(m1−ε mk−1 ) = O(mk−ε ).
     Case 2: αi = 0 for all i. As before, let d = |Y |. If d ≤ mε , then it again suffices to
        decide whether OPT > 0 (which takes linear time by Lemma 50) to compute an mε -
        approximation. So we may assume that d > mε . We in fact show how to compute a
        constant-factor approximation. We call a vector xi light if its Hamming weight is at most
        d/(k + 1), and heavy otherwise. If there exist light vectors x1 ∈ X1 , . . . , xk ∈ Xk , then
        we have detected a solution of value ≥ d − k · d/(k + 1) = d/(k + 1) ≥ OPT/(k + 1).
        Otherwise, some set Xi contains only heavy vectors and therefore contains at most
        |Xi | ≤ (k + 1)m/d ≤ O(m1−ε ) vectors. After enumerating all vectors xi ∈ Xi , it suffices
        to solve the remaining MaxSPk−1 problem using the baseline algorithm in time O(mk−1 ).
        Again, the total running time is O(m1−ε mk−1 ) = O(mk−ε ).                                      J

     F.3    Approximation Schemes via Polynomial Method
     In this section, we give the approximation scheme claimed in Theorem 11. Although a similar
     approach also works for the minimization variants, we will omit their treatment here and
     instead prove the relevant claims about minimization in Appendix G. By the equivalence of
     vector optimization problems, it suffices to prove the following lemma:

     I Lemma 51 (Approximation Scheme for Hand (φ) ≤ 1). Let φ be a Boolean function on k
     inputs. If Hand (φ) ≤ 1, then there exists a randomized approximation scheme for VMax(φ).

         The proof of Lemma 51 ultimately traces back to an application of the polynomial method
     [11, 9]. However, as it turns out, it is not necessary to explicitly design algorithms in the
     style of the polynomial method for every problem considered here; instead, we show a black-
     box reduction to a problem which is already known to admit subquadratic approximation
     algorithms based on the polynomial method: Furthest Neighbor. In the Furthest
     Neighbor problem, we are given two sets of n bit-vectors X1 , X2 ⊆ {0, 1}d and the task
     is to compute the maximum Hamming distance between any two vectors x1 ∈ X1 , x2 ∈ X2 .
     Let ↔ denote the Boolean function computing “if and only if”. Then Furthest Neighbor
     is equivalent to VMax(z1 6↔ z2 ).
         The following result about Furthest Neighbor occurs several times in the literature;
     in particular, it was proven by Alman, Chan and Williams [9]:

     I Theorem 52 ([9, Theorem 1.5]). For any ε > 0, there exists some δ > 0 such that
     we can compute an (1 + ε)-approximation for Furthest Neighbor in randomized time
     Õ(nd + n2−δ ).

        Their proof first uses a dimension reduction by locality-sensitive hashing in Hamming
     spaces. The improvement for the low-dimensional problem is then achieved by the polynomial
     method.
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                            43


   To state our reductions, recall the notion of a hybrid optimization problem as defined
in Appendix D. As a first step, we show how to obtain an approximation scheme for the
hybrid problem of Furthest Neighbor and its complement:

I Lemma 53. Let Φ = {z1 6↔ z2 , z1 ↔ z2 }. There exists a randomized approximation
scheme for VMax(Φ).

Proof. We introduce some notation: Let Y0 ⊆ Y denote the set of coordinates y associated
to φy (z1 , z2 ) = (z1 ↔ z2 ) and let Y1 = Y \ Y0 . Moreover, let d0 = |Y0 | and d1 = |Y1 |. For
a vector x and a subset of dimensions Y 0 , let kxkY 0 = |{y ∈ Y 0 : x[y] = 1}| denote the
Hamming weight of x restricted to Y 0 .
    Our goal is to get rid of all coordinates in Y0 , as then the given hybrid instance effectively
becomes an instance of Furthest Neighbor. Following a naive approach, we would simply
complement all entries x1 [y], y ∈ Y0 . However, as d0 might be as large as n, we cannot
afford to complement directly. Instead, we will first modify the instance to guarantee that
nd0 ≤ O(m1.9 ). We have to further guarantee that nd1 ≤ O(m1.9 ) to effectively apply the
assumed Furthest Neighbor algorithm.
    To prove that we can assume nd1 ≤ O(m1.9 ), suppose that otherwise nd1 ≥ m1.9 . It
    follows that m ≤ (nd1 )1/1.9 ≤ n2/1.9 ≤ n1.1 . Let us call a vector xi heavy if kxi kY1 ≥ n0.2 ,
    and light otherwise. Clearly, there can be at most m/n0.2 ≤ n1.1 /n0.2 = n0.9 heavy vectors
    and thus it is feasible to explicitly enumerate all heavy vectors xi and solve the remaining
    MaxSPk−1 problem exactly using the baseline algorithm in time O(n0.9 m) = O(m1.9 ).
    In the remaining instance, there are only light vectors.
    We now apply the following simple hashing scheme: Let Y10 be a set of size |Y10 | = d01 := n0.9
    and pick a random function h : Y1 → Y10 . For every vector xi , we construct a vector
                         0
    x0i ∈ {0, 1}Y0 ∪Y1 with x0i [y 0 ] = y∈h−1 (y0 ) xi [y] for all y 0 ∈ Y10 and x0i [y] = xi [y] for all
                                         W

    y ∈ Y0 . Notice that the value of any pair (x1 , x2 ) can only decrease in the hashing step.
    Moreover, for any fixed pair (x1 , x2 ), with probability 1 − 2n2·0.2 /n0.9 = 1 − O(n−0.5 ),
    there occurs no collision in the hashing (i.e., no two 1-entries are mapped to the same
    new coordinate) and thus the value of (x01 , x02 ) is the same as the value for (x1 , x2 ). In
    particular, with probability 1 − O(n−0.5 ), the optimal value does not change. In that way,
    we have effectively reduced d1 = |Y1 | to n0.9 , and thus nd1 ≤ n1.9 ≤ O(m1.9 ).
    Next, we prove that we can assume nd0 ≤ O(m1.9 ). So suppose that nd0 ≥ m1.9 . Then
    d0 ≥ m1.9 /n ≥ Ω(n0.9 ). Moreover, there exist vectors x1 , x2 with kx1 kY0 ≤ d0.9            0   and
    kx2 kY0 ≤ d0.9 0    (as otherwise  m >  nd0.9
                                              0   and    thus  m  1.9
                                                                      >  nd 0 ). But  then  the  optimal
    value of this instance is very large: For most coordinates y ∈ Y0 , x1 [y] = x2 [y] = 0,
    which is satisfying for (z1 ↔ z2 ). Thus, the optimal value is at least OPT ≥ d0 − d0.9         0 ≥
                −0.09
    (1 − Ω(n          ))d0 ≥ (1 − ε)d0 for any constant ε > 0 and sufficiently large n. Moreover,
    the contribution of all coordinates y ∈ Y1 is at most 2n0.2 after eliminating all heavy
    vectors in the previous step. Therefore also OPT ≤ d0 + 2n0.2 ≤ (1 + ε)d0 and we can
    safely return x1 , x2 as an approximate optimal solution.
In combination, we can assume that nd = n(d0 + d1 ) ≤ O(m1.9 ). It is now feasible to
complement all entries x1 [y], y ∈ Y0 , in time O(nd0 ) = O(m1.9 ). What remains is a pure
Furthest Neighbor instance. Observe that we increased the sparsity by a lot, however,
the assumed Furthest Neighbor is insensitive to the sparsity m. Running that algorithm
                                                                0
takes time O(nd + n2−δ ) = O(m1.9 + m2−δ ) = O(m2−δ ) for δ 0 := min{δ, 0.1} > 0.                       J

Proof of Lemma 51. As Hand (φ) ≤ 1, there exist two variables, say z1 and z2 without
loss of generality, such that for any assignment to z3 , . . . , zk , the remaining two-variable
formula does not have exactly one satisfying assignment. We start by brute-forcing over all
44   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


                 Hdeg (ψ) ≤ 2                                        3 ≤ Hdeg (ψ) ≤ k
                  (Hdeg (ψ) ≤ 1)                                       (Hdeg (ψ) = 2)



                                    Hand (ψ) ≤ 1        Hand (ψ) = 2                    3 ≤ Hand (ψ) ≤ k
                                     (Hand (ψ) ≤ 1)        (empty)                        (Hand (ψ) = 2)
       Min(ψ)
                R1:                R2:                 R2 or R3:          R4:
                  exact solvable     AS                  constant approx.   no approximation
                                     no efficient AS     no efficient AS




        Figure 4 A reminder of our classification of Min(ψ) for k ≥ 3. The pale labels indicate how to
     change the conditions to obtain the picture for k = 2.


     nk−2 tuples (x3 , . . . , xk ). For each tuple, we are left to solve a hybrid optimization problem
     VMax(Φ0 ), where Φ0 potentially contains all 2-variable functions φ0 of hardness Hand (φ0 ) ≤ 1.
     We demonstrate how to eliminate any function φ0 6∈ Φ. In the process, we pay attention to
     not increase the sparsity m beyond a constant multiple. There are several cases for φ0 :

     Case 0: φ0 has 0 or 4 satisfying assignments. Then φ0 trivially accepts or rejects every
          input and we can delete all coordinates y associated with this type.
     Case 1: φ0 has 1 satisfying assignment. This case is contradictory since Hand (φ0 ) ≤ 1.
     Case 2: φ0 has 2 satisfying assignments.
     Case 2a: φ0 (z1 , z2 ) = (z1 ↔ z2 ) or φ0 (z1 , z2 ) = (z1 6↔ z2 ). Again, this case is trivial
          as φ0 is already of the desired shape: φ0 ∈ Φ.
     Case 2b: φ0 depends only on one input zi . Without loss of generality, assume that i = 1.
          If φ0 (z1 , z2 ) = z1 , we set every vector x2 to zero (at all relevant coordinates y) and
          reinterpret φ0 as z1 6↔ z2 . Otherwise, if φ0 (z1 , z2 ) = ¬z1 , we instead interpret φ0 as
          z1 ↔ z2 . This transformation is clearly correct and does not increase the sparsity,
          reducing Case 2b to Case 2a.
     Case 3: φ0 has 3 satisfying assignments. We can “cover” the three satisfying assignments
          by three pairs of assignments. For demonstration, consider the function φ0 (z1 , z2 ) = z1 ∨z2 .
          We run the previous reductions for the three functions z1 6↔ z2 , z1 and z2 and concatenate
          the resulting vectors. For each of the three satisfying assignments (1, 0), (0, 1) and (1, 1)
          of φ0 , exactly two functions among z1 6↔ z2 , z1 and z2 are satisfied. As a result, we
          weighted the contribution of Case 3 by a factor of 2. To compensate, we simply execute
          each of the previous cases twice and concatenate the output vectors. The optimal value
          of the resulting hybrid problem equals two times the former optimal value.
     Running the approximation scheme for VMax(Φ) takes time O(m2−δ ), and we can recover
     the original optimal value by halving the output. Repeating these steps for all nk−2 tuples
     (x3 , . . . , xk ) in the original instance takes time O(nk−2 m2−δ ) = O(mk−δ ).                 J

      G           Approximation Algorithms for Minimization
     In this section we give the algorithms for approximating VMin(φ). Our goal is to prove
     the following Lemma 54. The upper bounds for both Theorem 16 and Theorem 14 follow
     immediately, by the equivalence of Min(ψ) and VMin(φ).

     I Lemma 54. Let φ be a Boolean function on k inputs.
        If Hand (φ) ≤ 1, then there exists a randomized approximation scheme for VMin(φ).
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                       45


   If Hand (φ) ≤ 2 < k, then there exists a randomized constant-factor approximation
   algorithm for VMin(φ) in time O(mk−δ ), for some δ > 0.

   More generally: There exists a constant-factor approximation for VMin(φ) in time
                                                                               0
   O(mk−δ ) for some δ > 0 if and only if VZero(φ) can be solved in time O(mk−δ ) for
   some δ 0 > 0.

    In contrast to the maximization case where we applied different techniques for each
approximation regime, here all our results are a consequence of a general reduction from
approximating VMin(φ) to exactly solving VZero(φ), where we use locality-sensitive hashing.
Recall that VZero(φ) is the problem of testing whether there exists a solution of value
zero, or equivalently, testing whether OPT = 0 for the minimization problem VMin(φ).
Our strategy is to first show that a sufficiently fast listing algorithm for VZero(φ) implies
the claimed approximation algorithms. Afterwards, we demonstrate how derive efficient
listing algorithms for VZero(φ), given the assumptions Hand (φ) ≤ 1 < k respectively
Hand (φ) ≤ 2 < k.
    Formally, we call an algorithm a listing algorithm for VZero(φ) if, given an integer L,
it returns a list of L distinct solutions (x1 , . . . , xk ) to VZero(φ) (if there are less than L
distinct solutions, then it exhaustively lists all solutions). We usually parameterize the
running time of listing algorithms with T (m, L), where m is the size of the input (as before).
    We start with the following technical lemma, which generalizes the baseline algorithm to
the case where only a subset of all tuples (x1 , . . . , xk ) are considered candidate solutions.

I Lemma 55. Let φ be a Boolean function on k inputs, and let δ > 0. Given a VMin(φ)
instance, and a set of O(nk−δ ) candidates C ⊆ X1 × · · · × Xk , we can compute Val(x1 , . . . , xk )
for all candidates (x1 , . . . , xk ) ∈ C in time O(mk−δ/3 ).

Proof. The algorithm executes the following three steps:
   We call a vector xi heavy if its Hamming weight exceeds mδ/3 , and light otherwise. As
   the total Hamming weight of all vectors is at most O(m), there can be at most O(m1−δ/3 )
   heavy vectors. Therefore, we can brute-force over all heavy vectors xk and solve the
   remaining MinSPk−1 problem in time O(mk−1 ) using the baseline algorithm (which in
   fact computes all values Val(x1 , . . . , xk ) in the same running time; see [30, Theorem 22
   of the full version]). This step takes time O(mk−δ/3 ) and afterwards, we can assume that
   all vectors xk are light.
   Next, call a tuple (x1 , . . . , xk−1 ) a heavy prefix if the number of vectors xk such that
   (x1 , . . . , xk ) is a candidate is at least n1−2δ/3 . There can be at most nk−1−δ/3 heavy
   prefixes, as otherwise |C| > nk−δ . Enumerating all such prefixes and solving the remaining
   MinSP1 problem by the baseline algorithm takes time O(nk−1−δ/3 m) = O(mk−δ/3 ).
   For any prefix (x1 , . . . , xk−1 ) which is left, we can assume that there are at most n1−2δ/3
   completions xk such that (x1 , . . . , xk ) is a candidate. Moreover, recall that every such
   vector xk is light, and therefore of Hamming weight at most O(mδ/3 ). Hence, we brute-
   force over all remaining prefixes and solve a MinSP1 problem of size O(n1−2δ/3 mδ/3 ).
   Again, we use the baseline algorithm, so this step takes time O(nk−1 n1−2δ/3 mδ/3 ) =
   O(mk−δ/3 ) as well.                                                                          J

I Lemma 56 (Approximation via Listing Zeros). Let φ be a variable Boolean function on
k ≥ 2 inputs so that L solutions to VZero(φ) can be listed in time T (m, L). Then, for any
c > 1 and 0 < γ < k, there is a randomized algorithm that with high probability computes a
46   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


     c-approximation of VMin(φ) in time
                                                                        
                           O(log n)                         k−γ(1−1/c)
                                                                        
                γ(1−1/c)    X                              n
        Õmk− 3         +          min{2i , nγ/c } · T m,        i
                                                                         .
                             i=0
                                                                2

     Proof. We will consider the following gap version of the VMin(φ) problem: Along with the
     input, we are given an additional target t. The task is to compute an output satisfying the
     following requirements:
           If OPT ≤ t, then return “small” and attach a solution of value at most c · t.
           If OPT > c · t, then return “large”.
           Otherwise, we do not care about the output.
     An algorithm for this gap problem translates into an approximation algorithm for VMin(φ)
     by using binary search on t to determine OPT up to a factor of c. For that reason, we focus
     on the gap problem for the remainder of this proof.
           Let X1 , . . . , Xk ⊆ {0, 1}|Y | be the given gap instance with target t, and let R and S be
     parameters to be specified later. Throughout the algorithm, we maintain a global counter L
     initialized to L = 8nk−γ(1−1/c) + 1. The following steps are repeated R times:
      1. Sample S coordinates y1 , . . . , yS ∈ Y uniformly at random. For a vector xi ∈ Xi , we write
           x0i for the projected vector (xi [y1 ], . . . , xi [yS ]) ∈ {0, 1}S and we set Xi0 = {x0i : xi ∈ Xi }.
      2. List up to L solutions to the VZero(φ) instance (X10 , . . . , Xk0 ). Afterwards, decrease L
           by the number of detected solutions.
      3. For every tuple (x01 , . . . , x0k ) listed in the previous step, check whether Val(x1 , . . . , xk ) ≤ c·t.
           In that case, report “small” and attach (x1 , . . . , xk ).
     If after all iterations no solution was detected, output “large”.
           We start with the correctness argument. For a fixed round and a tuple (x1 , . . . , xk ), we
     distinguish two cases:                                                               S
           If Val(x1 , . . . , xk ) ≤ t, then: Pr Val(x01 , . . . , x0k ) = 0 ≥ 1 − |Yt | =: pS1 .
                                                                            
                                                                                           S
           If Val(x1 , . . . , xk ) > ct, then: Pr Val(x01 , . . . , x0k ) = 0 ≤ 1 − |Yct| =: pS2 .
                                                                              

     The strategy is to set R large enough such that any (fixed) solution (x1 , . . . , xk ) of value at
     most t is mapped to a tuple (x01 , . . . , x0k ) of value zero in at least one round. It suffices to choose
     R = p−S    1     as then the probability of failing in all R rounds is bounded by (1 − pS1 )R ≤ 1/e.
           Next, we specify S in such a way that the number of false positives – that is, tuples
     (x01 , . . . , x0k ) of value zero whereas (x1 , . . . , xk ) has large value – is bounded by O(mk−1 ) with
     good probability. Specifically, set

                  γ log n        γ log n      γ|Y | log n
         S :=              =          ct −1 ≤             .
                log(1/p2 )   log(1 − |Y | )       ct

     It follows that
                                    −S                    − γ|Y | log n
                               t                       t             ct
         R = p−S
              1  =         1−              ≤       1−                         ≤ nγ/c .
                              |Y |                    |Y |

     The expected number of false positives among all rounds is therefore bounded by R · nk · pS2 ≤
     nγ/c · nk · n−γ = nk−γ(1−1/c) . Using Markov’s inequality, the number of false positives is at
     most 8nk−γ(1−1/c) with probability at least 7/8. Hence, it suffices to list L = 8nk−γ(1−1/c) + 1
     many solutions to all VZero(φ) instances together, in order find at least one true positive
     with probability 1 − 1/e − 1/8 > 1/2. By repeating the whole procedure O(log n) times, we
     amplify the success probability to 1 − n−Ω(1) .
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                      47


   Finally, focus on the running time analysis. The first step runs in time O(m) per round.
The second and third steps are more involved. To achieve the claimed time bound, we
have to implement the second step slightly more efficiently: Instead of running the listing
algorithm with the global capacity L directly, we use binary search to test for 2i solutions,
i = 0, 1, . . . , log L. If in the i-th iteration there are strictly less than 2i solutions, we stop
and continue as above. Among all R rounds, we execute that i-th step at most L/2i times.
Hence, the running time of step 2 is bounded by

         XL
        log                                        XL
                                                  log
                                        !                                  !
                        L               i                    i              L
   O            min       , R · T (m, 2 ) = O          min{2 , R} · T m, i       ,
         i=0
                       2i                          i=0
                                                                           2

which is as stated, after plugging in the parameters from before. In the third step,
across all rounds, we test at most O(nk−γ(1−1/c) ) tuples (x1 , . . . , xk ) for their exact value
Val(x1 , . . . , xk ). That task can be solved in time O(mk−γ(1−1/c)/3 ) using Lemma 55.        J

   In the following two corollaries, we show how to apply Lemma 56 to obtain approximation
schemes and constant-factor approximations.

I Corollary 57 (Constant-Factor Approximation via Listing Zeros). Let φ be a Boolean function
on k inputs. If VZero(φ) admits a listing algorithm in time O(mk−δ · Lδ/k ) for some δ > 0,
then there is a randomized algorithm computing a constant-factor approximation of VMin(φ)
                 0
in time O(mk−δ ) for some δ 0 > 0.

Proof. We use Lemma 56 with γ = 1 and some constant c > k/δ + 1. The running time is
bounded by
                1−1/c                                  δ
       Õ(mk−     3      + n1/c · mk−δ · (nk−(1−1/c) ) k )
                1−1/c               δ   1+δ/k
    = Õ(mk−      3      + mk− k +        c     )
            k−δ 0
    = O(m           ),

for δ 0 := min{ 1−1/c δ
                  3 , k −
                          1+δ/k
                            c   } > 0.                                                           J

I Corollary 58 (Approximation Scheme via Listing Zeros). Let φ be a Boolean function on k
inputs. If VZero(φ) admits a listing algorithm in time Õ(mk−δ + L) for some δ > 0, then
there is a randomized approximation scheme for VMin(φ).

Proof. We use Lemma 56 with γ = δ and c = 1 + ε, for an arbitrarily small constant ε > 0.
The running time is bounded by
                                                                                    
                             O(log n)                               k−δ(1−1/(1+ε))
                                                                                    
              δ(1−1/(1+ε))    X                                    n
      Õmk−       3       +          min{2i , nδ/(1+ε) } · mk−δ +         i
                                                                                     
                               i=0
                                                                          2
                δ(1−1/(1+ε))
    = Õ(mk−         3         + nδ/(1+ε) mk−δ + nk−δ(1−1/(1+ε)) )
                δ(1−1/(1+ε))
    = Õ(mk−         3         ).

Notice that indeed δ(1−1/(1+ε))
                        3       > 0.                                                             J

    It remains to show how to list solutions to VZero(φ) fast enough to apply Corollaries 57
and 58. First we give a general algorithm, which can be then directly applied with Lemma 56
to yield Corollary 57:
48   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


     I Lemma 59. Let φ be a Boolean function on k inputs. If VZero(φ) can be solved in time
     O(mk−δ ) for some δ > 0, then there is an algorithm listing L solutions of VZero(φ) in time
     T (m, L) = Õ(mk−δ · Lδ/k ).

     Proof. Let X1 , . . . , Xk ⊆ {0, 1}Y be the given input. We write m(Xi ) for the total number
     of ones in all vectors in Xi . Each set Xi can be partitioned into sets Xi = Xi1 ∪ {x̂i } ∪ Xi2
     where m(Xi1 ) < m(Xi )/2 and m(Xi2 ) < m(Xi )/2 in the following way: We greedily add
     elements to Xi1 until m(Xi1 ) < m(Xi )/2 but m(Xi1 ∪ {x̂i }) ≥ m(Xi )/2 for the next element
     x̂i . We take {x̂i } to be a set on its own and set Xi2 = Xi \ (Xi1 ∪ {x̂i }).
           We can list all solutions (x1 , . . . , xk ) involving one of the middle elements x̂i in time
     O(mk−1 ) using the baseline algorithm. There are 2k many subproblems remaining, where each
     is of the form (X1j1 , . . . , Xkjk ) for j1 , . . . , jk ∈ {1, 2}. Using the assumed efficient algorithm
     for VZero(φ), we test for each of these instances whether it contains a solution. For each
     subproblem which is a YES instance, continue recursively. If at some point we reported more
     than L solutions, stop.
           Since we cannot miss solutions in the branching, the correctness is clear. For the running
     time, note that in each recursive call the sparsity was halved, and therefore the recursion
     depth is bounded by O(log m). Each individual call on the i-th recursion level takes time
     O((m/2i )k−δ ) and there are at most min{L, 2ik } calls on that level. Hence, we can bound
     the total running time by

                      O(log m)
                        X
         T (m, L) ≤              min{L, 2ik } · O((m/2i )k−δ ) ≤ Õ(mk−δ Lδ/k ).
                        i=0

     The last inequality holds because there are O(log m) summands and the largest one has
     L = 2ik .                                                                          J

         When φ has and-hardness Hand (φ) ≤ 1 < k we can improve upon Lemma 59:

     I Lemma 60. Let φ be a Boolean function on k inputs. If Hand (φ) ≤ 1 < k, then there is
     an algorithm listing L solutions of VZero(φ) in time T (m, L) = Õ(mk−1 + L).

     Proof. This proof is similar to [31, Lemma 11]. Let us start with the case k = 2; we later
     point out how to generalize. We distinguish several formulas φ:

     Case 0: φ has 0 or 4 satisfying assignments. Then φ trivially accepts or rejects every
        input and we can list L solutions in time O(L).
     Case 1: φ has 1 satisfying assignment. This case is contradictory since Hand (φ) ≤ 1.
     Case 2: φ has 2 satisfying assignments.
     Case 2a: φ(z1 , z2 ) = (z1 ↔ z2 ) or φ(z1 , z2 ) = (z1 6↔ z2 ). In this case, any solution
       (x1 , x2 ) requires that either x1 and x2 are equal in every coordinate, or exactly negations
        of each other. In any case, for each vector x1 there exists at most one choice x2 such that
       (x1 , x2 ) is a solution. Thus, it is easy to list all solutions in time Õ(m).
     Case 2b: φ depends only on one input zi . Without loss of generality, assume that i = 1.
        Then there can be at most one vector x1 which participates in a solution. It takes time
        O(m) to identify this vector and to list all solutions (x1 , x2 ), for all x2 .
     Case 3: φ has 3 satisfying assignments. Then φ has only one falsifying assignment, say
       (1, 1). That means that the only possible solution (x1 , x2 ) is that both x1 and x2 are the
        all-ones vector. It easy to check whether such a pair exists in time O(m).
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                       49


Let Φ = {φ(z1 , z2 ) : Hand (φ) ≤ 1}. By combining the previous cases, we can also list
L solutions of the hybrid problem VZero(Φ) in time Õ(m + L). Indeed, we can list all
solutions for each individual nontrivial problem VZero(φ) in time Õ(m), and report only
those solutions which are part of every individual solution set. There are two corner cases:
If there are some coordinates associated to the constant false-function, then we return no
solution at all, and if all coordinates are associated to the constant true-function, then we
proceed as in Case 0.
     Finally, assume that k > 2. We show how to list L solutions to VZero(φ). Since
Hand (φ) ≤ 1, there exists a set of k − 2 indices, say {3, . . . , k}, which we can brute-force
over, such that the remaining problem is exactly VZero(Φ). For any tuple (x3 , . . . , xk ), we
first compute the number of solutions (x1 , x2 , x3 , . . . , xk ) in time Õ(m), using the same case
distinction as before. Afterwards, we split our global budget L in such a way that we never
list too many solutions of VZero(Φ), and run the previous listing algorithm for every tuple
(x3 , . . . , xk ). The total running time is Õ(nk−2 m + L) = Õ(mk−1 + L).                       J

     Finally, we put things together and prove the main result of this section:

Proof of Lemma 54. The first bullet follows by combining Corollary 58 and Lemma 60. The
second bullet, and in particular the equivalence of VZero(φ) and approximating VMin(φ)
within a constant factor, follows by combining Corollary 57 and Lemma 59.            J

    One might hope to give an approximation scheme for Hand (φ) = 2 in a similar way.
Unfortunately, it is unlikely that a listing algorithm for VZero(φ) in time Õ(nk−δ + L)
exists: There exists a fine-grained reduction from triangle detection to VZero(φ) [31, Lemma
20], and thus we are implicitly also hoping for an output-linear triangle listing algorithm.
However, previous work [72, 26] suggests that we cannot avoid a dependence on L · poly(n).

 H       Additive Approximation Algorithms
We say that an algorithm computes an additive c-approximation if it returns a solution
whose value is contained in the interval [OPT − c, OPT + c]. Similarly as for multiplicative
approximations, we can define approximation schemes in the additive setting.

I Definition 61 (Additive Approximation Scheme). Let ψ be an OptSPk formula. We say that
Opt(ψ) admits an additive approximation scheme if, for any ε > 0, there exists some δ > 0
and an algorithm computing an additive ε|Y |-approximation of Opt(ψ) in time O(mk−δ ).
   We say that Opt(ψ) admits an efficient additive approximation scheme if there exists
some fixed constant δ > 0, such that for any ε > 0 there exists an algorithm computing an
additive ε|Y |-approximation of Opt(ψ) in time O(mk−δ ).

    The complexity landscape of multiplicative approximations turned out to be rich, featuring
natural problems in all major regimes of approximation guarantees. In contrast, we draw a
significantly simpler picture for additive approximations.

I Theorem 62 (Additive Approximation). Let ψ be an OptSPk graph formula.
   There exists a randomized additive approximation scheme for Opt(ψ).
   If 3 ≤ Hdeg (ψ) or Hdeg (ψ) = k, then there exists no efficient additive approximation
  scheme for Opt(ψ) unless the Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis fails.

    In summary, all problems Opt(ψ) admit approximation schemes, but no efficient ones
(except for the problems that can be optimized exactly).
50   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


        In this section we will show the first item of Theorem 62, i.e. that all problems Opt(ψ)
     admit additive approximation schemes. We defer the proof of the second item to subsection I.4.
     In particular, we will show the following:

     I Lemma 63 (Additive Approximation Scheme). Let φ be an arbitrary Boolean function.
     There exists a randomized additive approximation scheme for VOpt(φ).

         Combining Lemma 63 with the equivalence of Opt(ψ) and vector problems VOpt(ψ)
     (which also holds for additive approximations, see Appendix D for details), we obtain a proof
     for the algorithmic part of Theorem 62.
         The techniques used to obtain multiplicative approximations often differed substantially
     for maximization and minimization. As it turns out, to obtain additive approximation
     schemes we can treat both in a unified way. Indeed, to prove Lemma 63, we demonstrate how
     to reduce every problem VOpt(φ) to an instance of low-dimensional Maximum Inner Product
     (MaxIP), or equivalently, low-dimensional Minimum Inner Product (MinIP). It is known
     that both MaxIP and MinIP admit polynomial-time improvements in the low-dimensional
     regime using the polynomial method [11, 9]:

     I Theorem 64 ([11]). For every c > 0, there exists some δ > 0 such that MaxIP on
     d = c log n dimensions can be solved in time O(n2−δ ).

         As a first algorithmic step, we establish a simple dimension reduction:

     I Lemma 65. Let φ be an arbitrary Boolean function. For every ε > 0, there is a randomized
     linear-time reduction, turning a given an instance of VOpt(φ) on n vectors of dimension
     d into another VOpt(φ) instance on n vectors of dimension d0 = O(log n), such that with
     high probability we have |OPT/d − OPT0 /d0 | ≤ ε, where OPT0 is the optimal value of the
     constructed instance.

     Proof. Set d0 := cε−2 log n for some sufficiently large constant c. Sample d0 coordinates
     from Y uniformly and independently at random, and let X10 , . . . , Xk0 be the projections of
     the input vectors to these d0 coordinates. For any x01 ∈ X10 , . . . , x0k ∈ Xk0 , we have that
                                                                                                  0
     Val(x01 , . . . , x0k ) is a random variable with expectation E[Val(x01 , . . . , x0k )] = dd Val(x1 , . . . , xk ).
     Moreover, since each coordinate was sampled independently and uniformly at random, by an
     additive Chernoff bound we have
                   Val(x1 , . . . , xk ) Val(x01 , . . . , x0k )
                                                                   
        Pr                              −                        > ε ≤ 2 exp(−2ε2 d0 ) ≤ O(n−2c ).
                              d                  d0

     Thus, by a union bound over all tuples (x1 , . . . , xk ), it holds that |OPT/d − OPT0 /d0 | ≤ ε
     with probability 1 − n−Ω(1) , where OPT0 is the optimal value of the new instance. As claimed,
     we can construct the instance in time O(m) by once iterating over all one-entries, after
     subsampling the d0 relevant coordinates.                                                      J

        Having applied the dimension reduction, we can complete the reduction from additively
     approximating VMax(φ) to low-dimensional MaxIP.

     I Lemma 66. Let φ be an arbitrary Boolean function. There exists a randomized additive
     approximation scheme for VMax(φ).

     Proof. Let (X1 , . . . , Xk , Y ) be the given VMax(φ) instance, and fix ε > 0. In order to
     compute an additive εd-approximation of VMax(φ), we can assume that d = |Y | = O(log n)
     by applying Lemma 65. Our goal is to solve the resulting instance exactly by “covering” every
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                           51


satisfying assignment of φ by the all-ones assignment (which is satisfying for k-MaxIP). More
precisely, let α1 , . . . , α` ∈ {0, 1}k denote the satisfying assignments of φ. Let Y 0 = Y × [`] be
a new set of dimensions and for each vector xi ∈ Xi , we create a new vector x0i ∈ Xi0 with
                  (
      0              xi [y]        if αj [i] = 1,
    xi [(y, j)] =
                     1 − xi [y] otherwise.

It is easy to check that Val(x1 , . . . , xk ) = hx01 , . . . , x0k i, and therefore it suffices to solve
the k-MaxIP instance (X10 , . . . , Xk0 , Y 0 ). We brute-force over k − 2 variables, and solve
the remaining MaxIP instance using the assumed efficient algorithm (notice that indeed
d0 = |Y 0 | = d` = O(log n)). The total running time is O(nk−2 n2−δ ) = O(nk−δ ) = O(mk−δ )
for some δ > 0.                                                                                        J

    Instead of proving an analogous reduction to from VMin(φ) to MinIP, we instead show
the following more general statement, which we will reuse in subsection I.4 to rule out efficient
additive approximation schemes.

I Lemma 67. Let φ be an arbitrary Boolean function. Via a randomized reduction, there
exists an additive approximation scheme for VMax(φ) if and only if there exists an additive
approximation scheme for VMin(φ). The same holds for efficient additive approximating
schemes.

Proof. We focus only on one direction, the other one is analogous. Suppose there exists
an additive approximation scheme for VMax(φ), and fix some ε > 0. We can compute an
additive εd-approximation for a given VMin(φ) instance (X1 , . . . , Xk , Y ) on dimension-d
vectors using the following algorithm:
1. Apply the dimension reduction from Lemma 65 with parameter ε/2 to obtain an equivalent
    VMin(φ) instance (X10 , . . . , Xk0 , Y 0 ) on d0 = |Y 0 | = O(log n) dimensions.
2. Complement all vectors in X10 , . . . , Xk0 to obtain a VMax(φ) instance (X100 , . . . , Xk00 , Y 0 ).
                                                                                            0
3. Use the assumed additive approximation scheme to compute an additive εd2 -approx-
    imation V of the VMax(φ) instance (X100 , . . . , Xk00 , Y 0 ), and return d − dd0 V .
Let OPT denote the optimal value of the original VMin(φ) instance, and let OPT0 and
OPT00 be the optimal values of the VMin(φ) and VMax(φ) instances computed in the
                                                                                                        0
second and third steps, respectively. The algorithm guarantees that |OPT00 − V | ≤ εd2
and by construction it holds that OPT0 = d0 − OPT00 . Moreover, with high probability the
dimension reduction succeeds in which case |OPT − dd0 OPT0 | ≤ εd            2 . Plugging these three
bounds together yields that |OPT − (d − dd0 V )| ≤ εd.
    Running the first step of the algorithm takes time O(m) by Lemma 65. The complemen-
tation takes time Õ(m), as the dimension was reduced to d0 = O(log n). Finally, applying
the additive approximation scheme for VMax(φ) takes time Õ(mk−δ ) for some δ > 0, which
dominates the total running time. If the VMax(φ) additive approximation scheme is efficient,
then so is the constructed one for VMin(φ).                                                          J

     Finally, note that Lemma 63 follows by combining Lemma 66 and Lemma 67.

 I     Hardness of Approximation
In this section, we give the proofs of our results for hardness of approximation. Recall that
in the minimization case, Corollary 15 immediately rules out the existence of multiplicative
approximations for any ψ with Hand (ψ) = k or 3 ≤ Hand (ψ) ≤ k. This was done by arguing
52   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


     that any approximation for VMin(ψ) is at least as hard as Zero(ψ), for which [31] gave a
     complete classification.
         The maximization case is more complicated. To show hardness of approximation for
     maximization problems, we make use of the distributed PCP framework which was introduced
     in [7] and further developed in [74, 36, 60]. We use this as the main tool (Lemma 68) to give
     our results for hardness of approximation. In subsection I.2 we address the hardest regime,
     giving the lower bound of Theorem 13. In subsection I.3 we develop our main technical
     contribution and use it to rule out approximation schemes, completing the lower bound
     of Theorem 11. Finally, in subsection I.4 we rule out efficient approximation schemes for both
     maximization and minimization problems, which gives the lower bounds for Theorems 62
     and 17.

     I.1    Distributed PCP
     All the hardness results in this section rely on the distributed PCP reduction. In a nutshell,
     this gives a reduction from k-OV in the low dimensional regime, i.e. d = c log n where c is a
     constant, to a subpolynomial number of instances of k-MaxIP with dimension exp(c) · log n
     and introduces a gap in the optimal value of the instances depending on whether we started
     from a YES or a NO instance. In this way, an algorithm giving an approximation for
     k-MaxIP can distinguish between both cases and decide the original instance.
         For our exposition, we extract the main properties of this reduction in the following
     lemma, which is the main technical tool that we will use. In Appendix J we elaborate on
     how this can be derived as a simple combination of the results in [36] and [60], both of which
     make use of the key improvement of Rubinstein [74] over the basic reduction introduced
     in [7].

     I Lemma 68 ([36, 60, 74]). Let φ : {0, 1}k → {0, 1} have exactly one satisfying assignment.
     There is a universal constant c1 such that for every c and parameters 0 < γ ≤ 1, τ ≥ 2,
     there is a reduction from k-OV on sets of size n and dimension d = c log n, to nγ instances
     I1 , . . . , Inγ of VMax(φ), each on d0 dimensions and with sparsity m0 . Let T := c log n · τ c1 .
     Then, the reduction has the following properties:
           d0 = τ poly(k,c/γ) · log n and m0 ≤ nd0 .
           Completeness: If we start from a YES instance of k-OV, then there is some j ∈ [nγ ]
          such that in Ij , it holds that OPT = T .
           Soundness: If we start from a NO instance of k-OV, then OPT ≤ T /τ for all instances
           I1 , . . . , Inγ .
     The running time of the reduction is linear in the output size: O(n1+γ d0 ).

     I.2    Hardness for Hand (φ) = k
     In this section we give a proof of the lower bound part of Theorem 13.

     I Lemma 69 (No Subpolynomial-Factor Approximation for Hand (φ) = k). Let φ : {0, 1}k →
     {0, 1} have and-hardness Hand (φ) = k. Then for all δ > 0 there is an ε > 0 such that there
     is no mε -approximation for VMax(φ) in time O(mk−δ ) unless the low-dimensional k-OV
     hypothesis fails.

     Proof. Assume for contradiction that there is a δ > 0 such that for all ε > 0 there is an
     algorithm A which gives an mε -approximation to VMax(φ) in time O(mk−δ ). We will
     show that by appropriately setting the parameters of the reduction in Lemma 68, we can
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                           53


reduce any k-OV instance on d = Θ(log n) to nγ instances of VMax(φ) introducing a gap
in the optimal value of τ = (m0 )ε , where m0 is the sparsity of the constructed instances of
VMax(φ). By making γ small enough and ensuring that m0 ≤ n1+β for some small constant
β > 0, we can thus decide the k-OV instance by running A on the constructed instances, in
                                     0
time O(nγ · (n1+β )k−δ ) = O(nk−δ ) for some δ 0 > 0, which contradicts the low-dimensional
k-OV hypothesis.
    Now we give the full details. By Definition 4, note that Hand (φ) = k if and only if φ
has exactly one satisfying assignment, so we can use Lemma 68. Set β := δ/(3k). Then,
for every constant c > 0, we apply Lemma 68 with parameters γ := δ/3 and τ := (n1+β )ε
to reduce any instance of k-OV on d = c log n dimensions, to nγ instances of VMax(φ) on
d0 = τ poly(k,c/γ) · log n dimensions each.
                                          β
    Note that by setting ε < (1+β)·poly(k,c/γ)  , we can bound d0 ≤ nβ and further, the
sparsity of the constructed instances by m0 ≤ n1+β . Since by assumption A computes an
(m0 )ε ≤ (n1+β )ε = τ -approximation, we can decide the original k-OV instance by running A
on the constructed instances. This takes time

      O(nγ · (m0 )k−δ ) = O(nγ · (n1+β )k−δ ) = O(nk+βk−δ+γ ) = O(nk+δ/3−δ+γ ) = O(nk−γ ).

Since the time needed to run the reduction is Õ(n1+γ ), we obtain an algorithm to decide the
k-OV instance in time O(nk−γ ). This contradicts the low-dimensional k-OV hypothesis. J

I.3      Hardness for 3 ≤ Hand (φ) < k
If Hand (φ) = Hdeg (φ) = k, then Lemma 69 rules out even the existence of subpolynomial
multiplicative approximations for VMax(φ). But consider the case when 3 ≤ Hand (φ) < k:
By Theorem 9 we know that VMax(φ) admits some constant approximation, but how small
can the approximation factor be? In particular, can we hope to get an approximation scheme?
                              negatively by showing that any such function φ cannot be
In this section we answer this
approximated within (1 − k3 −1 + ε)−1 in time O(mk−δ ) for any ε > 0 and δ > 0, assuming
the Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis. In other words, we can rule out approximation schemes
for all such φ’s.
    Our reduction is outlined in Figure 2. At a high level there are two main steps: we first
introduce an intermediate problem that we call (k, 3)-OV and show that it is hard in the
low-dimensional regime assuming the Sparse Max-3-SAT Hypothesis (Lemma 72). We then
give a gap introducing reduction from (k, 3)-OV to VMax(φ) by using the distributed PCP
reduction as a blackbox (Lemma 74 and Theorem 75).15
    We start by formally defining our intermediate problems:

I Definition 70 ((k, 3)-OV). Given sets of n vectors X1 , . . . , Xk ⊆ {0, 1}d , where to each
coordinate y ∈ [d] we associate three active indices a, b, c ∈ [k], detect if there are vectors
x1 ∈ X1 , . . . , xk ∈ Xk such that for all y ∈ [d], it holds that xa [y] · xb [y] · xc [y] = 0 where
a, b, c are the active indices at y.

   In the same spirit, we also define the “(k, 3)-” problems for k-MaxIP and k-ExactIP:
Here, let the value Val(x1 , . . . , xk ) denote the number of coordinates y ∈ [d] with xa [y] · xb [y] ·


15
     We note that an alternative to our reduction is to reduce Max-3-SAT to (k, 3)-ExactIP, and then
     reduce (k, 3)-ExactIP to approximate VMax(φ) using the distributed PCP. Although this is slightly
     more direct, it requires to show that the Disjointness protocol used in the distributed PCP can be
     extended for the more general k-ExactIP. Moreover, we think the reduction via (k, 3)-OV provides a
     conceptually clean and natural abstraction that might inspire future applications.
54   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


     xc [y] = 1, where again a, b, c are the active indices at y. Then the (k, 3)-MaxIP problem is
     to maximize the value among all vectors x1 , . . . , xk , and the (k, 3)-ExactIP problem is to
     check whether there exist vectors x1 , . . . , xk of value equal to a given target.

     I.3.1    Hardness of Low-Dimensional (k, 3)-OV
     As mentioned earlier, the first step in the reduction it to show that we can reduce a
     sparse instance of Max-3-SAT to an instance of (k, 3)-OV with dimension d = Θ(log n).
     We proceed by first reducing Max-3-SAT to (k, 3)-ExactIP, and then make use of the
     following known reduction from 3-ExactIP to 3-OV:

     I Lemma 71 (Reduction from 3-ExactIP to 3-OV [38, Lemma 4.2]). For all constants c > 0
     and γ > 0, there is a reduction from 3-ExactIP with target β on n vectors and dimension
     d = c log n to nγ log(c/γ) instances I1 , . . . , Inγ log(c/γ) of 3-OV on n vectors and dimension
     d0 = O(2c/γ · log n) with the following properties:
         Each vector in the 3-ExactIP is in one-to-one correspondence with a vector in each of
        the constructed instances.
         Completeness: If we start from a YES instance of 3-ExactIP, then there exists a
         j ∈ [nγ log(c/γ) ] such that Ij is a YES instance of 3-OV.
         Soundness: If we start from a NO instance of 3-ExactIP, then for all j ∈ [nγ log(c/γ) ],
         Ij is a NO instance.
     The running time of the reduction is linear in the output size: Õ(n1+γ log(c/γ) ).

     I Lemma 72 (Low-Dimensional (k, 3)-OV is Hard under Sparse Max-3-SAT). For every
     δ > 0, there exists some c > 0 such that (k, 3)-OV in dimension d = c log n cannot be solved
     in time O(nk−δ ), unless the Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis fails.

     Proof. Take an instance Φ of Max-3-SAT on N variables and M = cN clauses. As a first
     step, we reduce to O(N ) instances of (k, 3)-ExactIP using the split-and-list technique due
     to Williams [78]: We split the variables into k groups, and let V1 , . . . , Vk be the sets of
     partial assignments to each group, i.e. |Vi | = 2N/k . Given a partial assignment vi ∈ Vi , we
     construct a vector xi ∈ {0, 1}M and assign its entries as xi [j] = 0 if and only if vi contains a
     literal which satisfies the clause Cj . In this way, we obtain k sets of vectors X1 , . . . , Xk with
     n := |Xi | = 2N/k and dimension d = M = cN = c · k log n. For each coordinate j ∈ [d] we
     say that the set Xi is active in dimension j iff its corresponding group contains a variable
     inside the clause Cj . Since we start from a Max-3-SAT instance, each dimension has at
     most 3 active sets. The key property is that for an assignment x1 , . . . , xk , we have that
     d − hx1 , . . . , xk i counts the number of satisfied clauses. Moreover, in each dimension, the
     inner product only depends on the active vectors (a set Xi that is not active for a given
     clause Cj has xi [j] = 1 for all xi ∈ Xi ). Thus, we can decide the Max-3-SAT instance, by
     deciding d instances of (k, 3)-ExactIP: we try all d possible target values and output d
     minus the minimum. Note that the way we defined (k, 3)-ExactIP requires exactly 3 active
     sets per dimension, while in this reduction we have at most 3. To fix this, if some dimension
     has a < 3 active sets, we select 3 − a other arbitrary sets as active. The instance remains
     equivalent since for that dimension all vectors in the newly active sets will have a one.
         Next, we use Lemma 71 to reduce each of the d instances of (k, 3)-ExactIP to (k, 3)-OV:
     Fix an instance X1 , . . . , Xk of (k, 3)-ExactIP with target β. For each {a, b, c} ∈ [k]
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                       3 ,
     we project Xa , Xb , Xc to the dimensions where {a, b, c} are active. Let Xa0 , Xb0 , Xc0 be the
     resulting sets. Then, for each α ∈ [β], we can see (Xa0 , Xb0 , Xc0 ) with target α as a 3-ExactIP
     instance. For each of these, we apply the reduction in Lemma 71, and obtain a collection of
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                         55


3-OV instances. We extend them to instances of (k, 3)-OV by making the sets corresponding
to Xa , Xb , Xc active in all dimensions, and adding the sets Xj for j ∈ [k] \ {a, b, c} with n
zero-vectors each (i.e. we add dummy vectors for each non-active set, which are irrelevant
for the instance). We denote the resulting collection of (k, 3)-OV instances by I{a,b,c} . By
the properties of Lemma 71, we have that |I{a,b,c} | ≤ β · nγ log(c/γ) = O(nγ log(c/γ) log n) for
all {a, b, c} ∈ [k]
                                                                       c/γ
                  3 , and the dimension of each instance is O(2             log n). As a final step, we
                               k
combine the I’s into O(n     ( 3 ) γ log(c/γ)
                                              log n) instances of (k, 3)-OV in the natural way: for
each combination of (I1 , . . . , I(k) ) ∈ I1 × · · · × I(k) (where we consider all {a, b, c} ∈ [k]
                                                                                                  3 in
                                      3                   3
                                                                                             k
                                                                                               
some fixed order), we construct an instance of (k, 3)-OV by concatenating the 3 vectors
corresponding to the original (k, 3)-ExactIP instance (note that in each Ij , there is a
one-to-one correspondence between vectors in the original and the reduced instances) and
summing up the targets (we discard any constructed instance not summing up to β).
    In summary, we reduced the given Max-3-SAT instance Φ of N variables and cN clauses
          k
to Õ(n(3)γ log(c/γ) ) instances of (k, 3)-OV with dimension d0 = O( k3 2c/γ log n). By the
                                                                                  

completeness and soundness of Lemma 71, we can decide Φ by checking whether any of
the constructed (k, 3)-OV instances is a YES-instance. Thus, assume for contradiction
that there is an algorithm A and some δ > 0 such that for all c0 , A decides (k, 3)-OV
on d = c0 log n   dimensions in time O(n
                                                   k−δ
                                                       ). Then, by picking γ sufficiently small we
               k
can make     γ 3   log(c/γ) <   δ/2.      Since  the  dimension  of the (k, 3)-OV instances is d0 =
    k c/γ
     
O( 3 2 log n) = O(log n), we can solve the Max-3-SAT by running A. This takes time
         k
   Õ(n(3)γ log(c/γ) · nk−δ ) = Õ(nk−δ/2 ).

Since n = 2N/k , this gives a Max-3-SAT algorithm in time O(2N (1−δ/(2k)) ), contradicting
the Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis.                                                         J

I.3.2    Gap Reduction from Low-Dimensional (k, 3)-OV to VMax(φ)
Having established the hardness of (k, 3)-OV in the low-dimensional regime, we will use the
distributed PCP reduction from Lemma 68 to show hardness of approximation for VMax(φ)
when Hand (φ) ≥ 3. As an intermediate step we will need the following reduction:

I Lemma 73 (Reduction from (k, 3)-MaxIP to VMax(φ)). Let φ : {0, 1}k → {0, 1} have
and-hardness 3 ≤ Hand (φ) ≤ k. Then, given an instance of (k, 3)-MaxIP on n vectors
of dimension d, there is a reduction to VMax(φ) on n vectors of dimension d such that
the value of any solution x1 , . . . , xk in the original instance is the same as the value of the
corresponding solution x01 , . . . , x0k in the constructed instance. The reduction runs in time
O(nd).

Proof. For each coordinate y ∈ [d], the (k, 3)-MaxIP instance has three active indices
ay , by , cy . By definition of Hand (φ), there is an S = {ay , by , cy }-restriction φ0 of φ which has
a unique satisfying assignment. Let αy : [k] \ S → {0, 1} be the partial assignment which
restricts φ to φ0 , and denote the satisfying assignment by βy : S → {0, 1}.
     For every j ∈ [k] and all xj ∈ Xj , we create a vector x0j ∈ Xj0 in the VMax(φ) instance,
and set the entries for each coordinate y ∈ [d] as follows:
                
                αy (j)
                
                             if j ∈
                                   / {ay , by , cy },
      0
     x [y] := βi (j)          if j ∈ {ay , by , cy } and xy [j] = 1,
                
                1 − β (j) otherwise.
                
                     i
56   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


     It is immediate that the VMax(φ) instance has the same number of vectors and the same
     dimension as the original instance. Moreover, the value of each possible solution is the same
     in both instances. The running time is O(nd).                                               J

        Next, we give a gap introducing reduction from low-dimensional (k, 3)-OV to VMax(φ).
     The steps are similar to those in the proof of Lemma 72:

     I Lemma 74 (Reduction from Low-Dimensional (k, 3)-OV to VMax(φ)). Let φ : {0, 1}k →
     {0, 1} have hardness 3 ≤ Hand (φ) ≤ k. Then, there is a universal constant c1 such that
     for every c > 0, and parameters 0 < γ ≤ 1 and τ ≥ 2, there is a reduction from (k, 3)-OV
     in dimension c log n to nγ instances I1 , . . . , Inγ of VMax(φ). For T := c log n · τ c1 , the
     following properties hold:
         The constructed VMax(φ) instances have dimension d0 = k3 · τ poly(k,c/γ) log n, and
                                                                         

         sparsity m0 = O(n · τ poly(k,c/γ) log n).
         Completeness: If we start from a YESinstance of (k, 3)-OV, then there is some j ∈ [nγ ]
         such that in Ij it holds that OPT = k3 · T .
                                                                                              γ
         Soundness: If we start
                              k
                                 from a NO instance of (k, 3)-OV, then for every Ij , j ∈ [n ] we
         have that OPT ≤ ( 3 − 1) · T + T /τ .
     The running time of the reduction is linear in the output size: Õ(n1+γ ).

     Proof. Let X1 , . . . , Xk be the input instance of (k,
                                                            3)-OV in d = c log n dimensions. As a
                                                       [k]
     first step, we make sure that for all {a, b, c} ∈ 3 , there is at least one dimension in which
     {a, b, c} are active, by adding a fresh dimension with all zeros for all vectors if necessary.
         Now we describe the reduction. For each {a, b, c} ∈ [k]
                                                                     
                                                                   3 , we project Xa , Xb , Xc to the
     dimensions where {a, b, c} ‘are active. Let Xa0 , Xb0 , Xc0 be the resulting sets and note that
     we can see it as a 3-OV instance. We pad the vectors with zeros, so that the dimension
     of this 3-OV instance is also d = c log n. Next,      we invoke the reduction from Lemma 68
                                                                                           0
     on Xa0 , Xb0 , Xc0 with parameters γ 0 := γ/ k3 and τ 0 := τ . This produces nγ instances of
                                                    

     3-MaxIP, which we extend to instances of (k, 3)-MaxIP by adding zeros to the sets Xj ’s
     for j ∈ [k] \ {a, b, c} (i.e. we put zero-vectors corresponding to each vector from the non-
                                                                          0
     participating sets). We denote by I{a,b,c} the collection of nγ constructed instances of
     3-MaxIP.
         Having constructed I{a,b,c} corresponding to each {a, b, c} ∈ [k]
                                                                                 
                                                                               3 , we merge them into
        0 k
     nγ ·(3) = nγ instances of (k, 3)-MaxIP as follows. For each (I1 , . . . , I(k) ) ∈ I1 × · · · × I(k) we
                                                                                 3                     3
     construct one instance of (k, 3)-MaxIP in the natural way: Each Ij has a vector associated
     to every xi ∈ Xi from the original (k, 3)-OV instance, so we concatenate the k3 copies
                                                                                                    

     across the I’s. This gives an instance of (k, 3)-MaxIP with the same number of vectors as
     the original instance, dimension d0 = k3 · τ poly(k,c/γ) log n. and sparsity m0 = O(n · d0 ).
         As a final step, we apply Lemma 73 to each of the nγ instances of (k, 3)-MaxIP and
     obtain nγ instances of VMax(φ), each with sparsity m0 = O(n · d0 ) = O(n · τ poly(k,c/γ) log n).
     Now we analyze the completeness and soundness of the reduction:

     Completeness: If X1 , . . . , Xk is a YES instance of (k, 3)-OV, then there are vectors x1 ∈
       X1 , . . . , xk ∈ Xk such that hx0a , x0b , x0c i = 0 in the corresponding projected 3-OV instances
       Xa0 , Xb0 , Xc0 for all {a, b, c} ∈ [k]
                                             3 . By the completeness         of the reduction in Lemma 68,
                                  k                                   γ0
       for each {a, b, c} ∈ 3 , in at least one of the n instances of 3-MaxIP the vectors
       corresponding to x0a , x0b , x0c attain a value of T . In particular, in at least one of the nγ
       final instances     of VMax(φ), the value of the vectors corresponding to x1 , . . . , xk is at
       least k3 · T .
                   
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                       57


Soundness: If X1 , . . . , Xk is a NO instance, then for all x1 ∈ X1 , . . . , xk ∈ Xk , there is at
   least one {a, b, c} ∈ [k]                0  0    0
                            3 such that hxa , xb , xc i > 0 in the corresponding projected 3-OV
               0    0    0
   instance Xa , Xb , Xc . Hence, by the soundness of the reduction in Lemma 68, in all the
   final instancesof VMax(φ), the value attained by the vectors corresponding to x1 , . . . , xk
   is at most ( k3 − 1) · T + T /τ .
The running time is dominated by constructing the nγ instances of (k, 3)-MaxIP, which
takes time Õ(n1+γ ).                                                                              J

      Finally, we are ready to give the main result, which proves the lower bound of Theorem 11:

I Theorem 75 (No Approximation Scheme for 3 ≤ Hand (φ)). Let φ : {0, 1}k → {0, 1}
have and-hardness 3 ≤ Hand (φ) ≤ k. Then, for all 0 < ε < k3 −1 and for all δ > 0, we
cannot compute a (1 − k3 −1 + ε)−1 -approximation for VMax(φ) in time O(mk−δ ) unless
the Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis fails.

Proof. Suppose for contradiction there is some 0 < ε < k3 −1 and δ > 0 such that there is
                                                           

an algorithm A computing a multiplicative (1 − k3 −1 + ε)−1 -approximation for VMax(φ)
in time O(mk−δ ). We will show that by applying Lemma 74, we can use A to decide any
                                                    0
low-dimensional (k, 3)-OV instance in time O(nk−δ ) for some δ 0 > 0, which would contradict
the Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis.
    For every constant c > 0, we invoke the reduction from Lemma 74 with parameters
γ := δ/2 and τ > (ε k3 )−1 to reduce a (k, 3)-OV instance on n vectors of dimension c log n
to nγ instances of VMax(φ) each with sparsity m0 = O(nτ poly(k,c/γ) log n) = O(n log n).
    By the soundness and completeness of the reduction, a (1 − k3 −1 + ε)−1 -approximation
                                                                  

is sufficient to distinguish between the two cases:
            −1      !                  
             k             k           k
      1−          +ε ·        ·T >         − 1 · T + T /τ.
             3             3           3

   Thus, we can decide the original (k, 3)-OV instance by running the reduction and
using A on the constructed instances. The time to run the reduction is Õ(n1+γ ), and
running A on nγ instances of (k, 3)-MaxIP with sparsity m0 = O(n log n) takes time
O(nγ · (m0 )k−δ ) = Õ(nk+γ−δ ). Thus, by choosing γ = δ/2, the total running time is bounded
by Õ(nk−γ ). By Lemma 72, this contradicts the Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis.               J

I.4     Ruling out Efficient Approximation Schemes
Recall that we say that VOpt(φ) admits an efficient approximation scheme, if there is a
fixed δ > 0 such that for any ε > 0, an ε-approximation can be computed in time O(mk−δ ).
In this section we rule out the existence of efficient approximation schemes for all problems
which cannot be solved exactly, namely, for all problems VOpt(φ) with 3 ≤ Hdeg (φ) or
Hdeg (φ) = k, thereby proving the lower bounds in Theorem 62 and Theorem 17. Since a
multiplicative approximation scheme implies an additive one, it suffices to show the result for
the additive case. Moreover, by Lemma 67, we know that an additive approximation scheme
for VMax(φ) is equivalent to an additive approximation scheme for VMin(φ), so we focus
on the minimization case.
    For h ≥ 3, consider the natural generalization (k, h)-MaxIP of the (k, 3)-MaxIP problem
defined in Definition 70. The main ingredient for our results is the following lemma, which
shows that an additive approximation for (k, h)-MaxIP can be obtained from an additive
approximation for VMin(φ), when Hdeg (φ) = h.
58   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


     I Lemma 76. Let φ : {0, 1}k → {0, 1} have degree hardness Hdeg (φ) = h. If VMin(φ) has
     an additive approximation scheme, then for any ε > 0, there exists some δ > 0 such that
     (k, h)-MaxIP has an additive εd-approximation in time O((nd)k−δ ).

     Proof. Let X1 , . . . , Xk ⊆ {0, 1}d be the (k, h)-MaxIP instance. We describe how to construct
     an instance X10 , . . . , Xk0 ⊆ {0, 1}O(d) of VMin(φ). For each coordinate y ∈ [d], let Sy ∈ [k]           h
     denote the set of active indices at y. Since φ has degree hardness Hdeg (ψ) = h, there is
     an Sy -restriction φy of φ such that deg(φy ) = h. Let αy : [k] \ Sy → {0, 1} denote the
     partial assignment which restricts φ to φy . By Lemma 38 there is a coordinate gadget for φy ,
     consisting of functions φy,1 , . . . , φy,` with constants β1y , β2y > 0. For j ∈ [`], let τj,1 , . . . , τj,k
     denote the unary functions needed to transform φy into φy,j . For every i ∈ [k] and xi ∈ Xi
     we introduce ` new coordinates x0i [(y, 1)], . . . , x0i [(y, `)] and to be set as follows:
                       (
          0               αy (i)        if i ∈
                                             / Sy ,
        xi [(y, j)] :=
                          τj,i (xi [y]) otherwise.

        Note that we can make the constants β2y the same for all y ∈ [d]: Let β2∗ be the lowest
     common multiple of all the β2y ’s. Then, by concatenating the y-th coordinate gadget β2∗ /β2y
     many times, we obtain β2∗ for all y ∈ [d]. Thus, letting β1∗ := y∈[d] β1y and β2∗ as indicated,
                                                                     P

     we have that
                                                     !
                                X  y     y
                                           Y
             0            0
        Val(x1 , . . . , xk ) =   β1 − β2      xi [y] = β1∗ − β2∗ · Val(x1 , . . . , xk ).
                              y∈[d]             i∈Sy


          Let d0 = O(d) be the dimension of the constructed instance X10 , . . . , Xk0 of VMin(φ) and
     let OPT0 be its optimal value. Let OPT be the optimal for the original instance X1 , . . . , Xk of
     (k, h)-MaxIP. Since β1∗ , β2∗ > 0, we have that OPT0 = β1∗ − β2∗ · OPT. Thus, given an additive
     εd0 -approximation V 0 for VMin(φ), we compute V := −(V 0 −β1∗ )/β2∗ ∈ [OPT−ε/β2∗ ·d0 , OPT],
     which is an additive O(εd)-approximation for (k, h)-MaxIP.
          Since the reduction takes time O(nd) and the produced instance is of size m = O(nd),
     the result follows.                                                                             J

        Note that if h = k in Lemma 76, then the (k, k)-MaxIP is the same as the standard
     k-MaxIP and the result still applies.
        Now we are ready to give the lower bounds. We start with the hardest regime, i.e., when
     Hdeg (φ) = k.

     I Lemma 77 (No Efficient Approximation Scheme for Hdeg (φ) = k). Let φ : {0, 1}k → {0, 1}
     have degree hardness Hdeg (φ) = k. Then, for all δ > 0 there is some ε > 0 such that there
     is no additive εd-approximation for VMin(φ) in time O(mk−δ ) unless the low-dimensional
     k-OV hypothesis fails.

     Proof. Suppose there is a δ > 0 and an algorithm A computing an additive εd-approximation
     for VMin(φ) in time O(mk−δ ) for any ε > 0. We will show how to use Lemma 68 in
     combination with Lemma 76 to reduce any k-OV instance in dimension c log n to a small
     number of VMin(φ) instances for which we can use A to decide the original instance in time
             0
     O(nk−δ ) for some δ 0 > 0.
         For every constant c > 0, we apply Lemma 68 with parameters γ (to be set) and τ := 2
     to reduce an instance of k-OV in dimension d = c log n to nγ instances of k-MaxIP on
     d0 = 2poly(k,c/γ) log n = O(log n) dimensions each. By the properties of Lemma 68, if we
     started from a YES instance, then at least one of the constructed k-MaxIP instances achieves
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                    59


a value of T = c · 2c1 log n. Otherwise, all instances have value at most T /2. Thus, if we set
ε such that ε · d0 ≤ T /6, an additive εd0 -approximation can distinguish the two cases. Since
                                          c·2c1
d0 = 2poly(k,c/δ) log n, choosing ε < 6·2poly(k,c/γ) suffices.
    By Lemma 76, there exists some δ 0 > 0 such that we can compute such an additive εd0 -
                                                0
approximation using A in time O((nd0 )k−δ ). In this way, we can decide the k-OV instance
by constructing the nγ instances of k-MaxIP instances in time Õ(n1+γ ) and computing the
additive εd0 -approximation using A. The overall running time is
                                      0               0
     Õ(n1+γ + nγ · ((nd0 ) + (nd0 )k−δ )) = Õ(nk+γ−δ ).

By picking γ < δ 0 , this contradicts the low-dimensional k-OV hypothesis.                     J

   Finally we show the analogous result for VMin(φ) with 3 ≤ Hdeg (φ) ≤ k. Note that the
proof is virtually the same as for Lemma 77, but we use the stronger Sparse Max-3-SAT
hypothesis, and the machinery developed in subsection I.3.

I Lemma 78 (No Efficient Approximation Scheme for 3 ≤ Hdeg (φ)). Let φ : {0, 1}k → {0, 1}
have degree hardness 3 ≤ Hdeg (φ) ≤ k. Then, for all δ > 0, there is some ε > 0 such
that there is no additive εd-approximation for VMin(φ) in time O(mk−δ ) unless the Sparse
Max-3-SAT hypothesis fails.

Proof. Suppose there exists some δ > 0 and an algorithm A such that for any ε > 0, it
produces an additive εd-approximation for VMin(φ) in time O(mk−δ ). We will show how
to use the gap introducing reduction from Lemma 74 to reduce any (k, 3)-OV instance in
dimension c log n to a few instances of (k, h)-MaxIP, and then use A is to distinguish the
gap via Lemma 76.
    For every constant c, we use Lemma 74 with parameters γ (to be set) and τ := 2 to reduce
an instance of (k, 3)-OV in dimension d = c log n to nγ instances of (k, 3)-MaxIP each in
dimension d0 = τ poly(k,c/γ) log n and with sparsity m0 = O(nτ poly(k,c/γ) log n) = O(n log n).
Note that we can further reduce each of these instances to (k, h)-MaxIP, for any 3 < h ≤ k:
For each coordinate we add h−3 arbitrary active indices and set all entries for these indices to
one. The produced (k, h)-MaxIP instances are clearly equivalent since in each coordinate the
contribution to the objective only depends on the 3 active sets in the original (k, 3)-MaxIP
instance.
    To decide the (k, 3)-OV instance, we need to distinguish    whether the optimal value of
each constructed (k, h)-MaxIP instance is k3 T or ( k3 − 1)T + T /2. Thus, an additive
                                                           
                                                                              c2c1
εd0 < T /6-approximation suffices. Since T = c · 2c1 · log n, setting ε < τ poly(k,c/γ) is enough.
                                                                                                0
By Lemma 76, we can compute such an additive approximation using A in time O((nd0 )k−δ )
for some δ 0 > 0.
    Hence, by constructing Õ(n1+γ ) instances of (k, h)-MaxIP and computing the additive
  0
εd -approximation using A, we can decide the original (k, 3)-OV instance in time
                                  0               0
     Õ(n1+γ + nγ (nd0 + (nd0 )k−δ )) = Õ(nk+γ−δ )

By choosing γ < δ 0 , this contradicts the Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis.                        J


 J      Distributed PCP and Extensions
In this section we sketch how Lemma 68 can be obtained by combining previously known
results in [36], [60] and [74].
60   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


     I Lemma 68 ([36, 60, 74]). Let φ : {0, 1}k → {0, 1} have exactly one satisfying assignment.
     There is a universal constant c1 such that for every c and parameters 0 < γ ≤ 1, τ ≥ 2,
     there is a reduction from k-OV on sets of size n and dimension d = c log n, to nγ instances
     I1 , . . . , Inγ of VMax(φ), each on d0 dimensions and with sparsity m0 . Let T := c log n · τ c1 .
     Then, the reduction has the following properties:
           d0 = τ poly(k,c/γ) · log n and m0 ≤ nd0 .
           Completeness: If we start from a YES instance of k-OV, then there is some j ∈ [nγ ]
          such that in Ij , it holds that OPT = T .
           Soundness: If we start from a NO instance of k-OV, then OPT ≤ T /τ for all instances
           I1 , . . . , Inγ .
     The running time of the reduction is linear in the output size: O(n1+γ d0 ).

         Lemma 68 was shown in [36, Appendix D], but for the case of k = 2 and using 2-MaxIP
     as the target problem. Our version is a simple generalization for the case of arbitrary k, and
     to reduce to any VMax(φ) with Hand (φ) = k. The main ingredient to obtain the parameters
     of the reduction as in Lemma 68, is an efficient MA protocol 16 for Set-Disjointness:

     I Problem 79 (Disjd,k ). In the Disjd,k problem there are k players, each of which receives
     a vector xi ∈ {0, 1}d as input. Their goal is to jointly decide whether hx1 , . . . , xk i = 0.

     I Definition 80 ((m, r, `, s)-efficient MA protocols [60]). We say that a communication
     protocol is (m, r, `, s)-efficient for a communication problem if the following holds:
        There are k players in the protocol P1 , . . . , Pk and Merlin. Each player Pi holds an input
        xi .
        The protocol is one-round with public randomness. The following happens sequentially:
       1. Merlin sends an advice string of length m to P1 , which is a function of x1 , . . . , xk .
       2. The players jointly draw r random bits.
       3. Each player Pi for 2 ≤ i ≤ k sends an `-bit message to P1 , which is a deterministic
            function of the input and randomness.
       4. Upon receiving the messages, P1 decides to accept or reject.
        The protocol has full completeness and soundness s ∈ (0, 1].
        The computation of players is polynomial in their input lengths.

        In particular, to obtain Lemma 68 one needs the generalization of the protocol for Disjm,2
     by Rubinstein [74] to the case of k players. This generalization was written explicitly in [60],
     where the authors explicitly acknowledge that Rubinstein suggested them the generalization.

     I Lemma 81 (k-Disjointness Protocol [60, Theorem 6.1]). For every d, k and α > 0, there
     exists a (d/α, log2 d, poly(k, α), 1/2)-efficient protocol for Disjd,k .

         Lemma 81 improves upon the Aaronson and Wigderson protocol [1] used in the original
     distributed PCP reduction [7], which if extended to k players, has parameters (dk/ log d,
     Ok (log d), Ok (log3 d), 1/2). As mentioned earlier, this key technical improvement was
     introduced by Rubinstein [74] via algebraic geometry codes.
         Note that the protocol of Lemma 81 uses O(log d) random bits to obtain soundness 1/2.
     To boost the soundness to ε, the standard way is to repeat the protocol (with the same
     advice) O(log ε−1 )-many times. The overall number of random bits used would thus be


     16
          More precisely, the communication model is the Simultaneous Messaging Passing model [82, 21], as
          referred to in [60]. But we stick to Chen’s notation [36].
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, M. Künnemann                                                        61


O(log d · log ε−1 ). Chen reduced this to O(log d + log ε−1 ) in the case of k = 2 via expander
walk sampling and using the aforementioned protocol for Disjd,2 as a blackbox. His proof
extends in a straightforward way to general k using the protocol from Lemma 81:

I Lemma 82 (k-Disjointness Protocol with Expander Graphs [36, Lemma D.2]). For every
d, α > 0 and 0 < ε < 1/2, there exists a (d/α, log2 d + O(log ε−1 ), poly(k, α) · log(ε−1 ), ε)-
efficient protocol for Disjd,k .

    In [7] it was shown that given any communication protocol for Disjd,2 , one can obtain a
gap introducing reduction from 2-OV on dimension d, to many instances of 2-MaxIP with
a gap proportional to the soundness of the protocol. The number of instances produced
and the dimension of the constructed instances depend on the parameters of the protocol.
This can be easily extended to our case, where we instead start from k-OV and reduce to
instances of VMax(φ) where Hand (φ) = k:

I Lemma 83 (Gap Introducing Reduction). Let φ : {0, 1}k 7→ {0, 1} have Hand (φ) = k. Given
a (m, r, `, s)-efficient protocol for Disjd,k , there is a reduction from k-OV on sets of size n
and dimension d which constructs 2m instances of VMax(φ) with dimension d0 = 2r+(k−1)`
and sparsity m0 = O(nd0 ), such that the following holds:
   Completeness: If we start from a YES instance of k-OV, then one of the constructed
   instances of VMax(φ) has OPT = 2r .
   Soundness: If we start from a NO instance of k-OV, then for every constructed instance
   of VMax(φ) it holds that OPT ≤ s · 2r .
The running time of the reduction is O(2r+(k−1)`+m · n · poly(d)).

Proof. By Definition 4, note that Hand (φ) = k if and only if φ has exactly one satisfying
assignment, which we denote by (α1 , . . . , αk ) ∈ {0, 1}k .
    Consider an instance X1 , . . . , Xk ⊆ {0, 1}d of k-OV. For each advice string M ⊆ [2m ] we
construct an instance X1M , . . . , XkM of VMax(φ) as follows:
    For each random string R ∈ [2r ] and for each x1 ∈ X1 we create a vector xM,R           1    ∈
        (k−1)`
{0, 1}2        . We treat a tuple of messages (B2 , . . . , Bk ) where Bi ∈ {0, 1}` as an index in
[2(k−1)` ], and each entry of xM,R
                               1       is defined as:

                                           if P1 accepts on input x1 , advice M from Merlin,
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 α1
                                          randomness R and messages B2 , . . . , Bk from players
  xM,R
   1   [(B2 , . . . , Bk )] :=             P2 , . . . , P k ,
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 1 − α
                                       1   otherwise.

Similarly, for each random string R ∈ [2r ] and for each xi ∈ Xi for 2 ≤ i ≤ k we create a
                       (k−1)`
vector xM,R
        i    ∈ {0, 1}2        :
                                 
                                           if Pi sends message Bi to P1 on input xi , advice M from
                                 αi
                                 
  xM,R [(B2 , . . . , Bk )] :=             Merlin and randomness R,
   i
                                 
                                 1 − α
                                       i   otherwise.

    The key observation is that there is exactly one position j = (B2 , . . . , Bk ) where xM,R
                                                                                             i   [j] =
αi for 2 ≤ i ≤ k, corresponding to the actual messages B2 , . . . , Bk sent by players P2 , . . . , Pk
in the protocol under randomness R and advice M . In particular, it follows that if P1
accepts with these messages, this randomness and this advice then xM,R  1       [j] = α1 . Thus, since
62   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


     (α1 , . . . , αk ) is the unique satisfying assignment of φ, we have that
                                       
                                             if P1 accepts on inputs x1 , . . . , xk , advice M from Merlin
                                       1
                                       
                    M,R        M,R
          Val(x1 , . . . , xk ) =            and randomness R,
                                       
                                       0 otherwise.

                                                                          M,R
        Finally, each xM           M
                           i ∈ Xi is constructed by concatenating xi            over all random strings
                                                  r+(k−1)b
           r                           M        2
     R ∈ [2 ], which means that Xi ⊆ {0, 1}                . And by the previous argument we have
     that
                                       "                                                        #
              M           M      r       P1 accepts on inputs x1 , . . . , xk , advice M from
        Val(x1 , . . . , xk ) = 2 · Pr
                                     R               Merlin and randomness R

     We analyze the completeness, soundness and running time of the reduction:

         Completeness: If X1 , . . . , Xk is a YES instance of k-OV, then there is an advice M 0
         which makes P1 accept with probability one, and thus OPT = 2r for the instance
             0            0
         X1M , . . . , XkM .
         Soundness: If X1 , . . . , Xk is a NO instance of k-OV, by the soundness of the protocol
         we have that OPT ≤ s · 2r for all instances X1M , . . . , XkM , M ∈ [2m ].
         Running Time: We iterate over the 2m possible advice strings, the 2r possible random
         strings and the 2(k−1)` possible messages that the players send. Then, we simulate the
         decision of P1 based on each possible combination of advice, randomness and messages
         which takes O(poly(d))-time per vector (due to the efficiency of the protocol). Since we
         do this for O(n) vectors, the overall running time is O(2r+(k−1)`+m · n · poly(d)).    J

        Finally, we obtain Lemma 68 by using the protocol from Lemma 82 in the gap reduction
     from Lemma 83:

     Proof of Lemma 68. Given an instance of k-OV on sets of size n and dimension c log n,
     we take the (d/α, log2 d + O(log ε−1 ), poly(k, α) · log(ε−1 ), ε)-efficient protocol for Disjd,k
     from Lemma 82 with parameters d := c log n, α := c/γ, and ε := 1/τ . Plugging it into the
     reduction from Lemma 83 yields the result.                                                     J
