A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of
Polynomial-Time Problems
Karl Bringmann
Universität des Saarlandes, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
Alejandro Cassis
Universität des Saarlandes, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
Nick Fischer
Universität des Saarlandes, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
Marvin Künnemann
TU Kaiserslautern, Germany

      Abstract
An extensive research effort targets optimal (in)approximability results for various NP-hard op-
timization problems. Notably, the works of (Creignou’95) as well as (Khanna, Sudan, Trevisan,
Williamson’00) establish a tight characterization of a large subclass of MaxSNP, namely Boolean
MaxCSPs and further variants, in terms of their polynomial-time approximability. Can we obtain
similarly encompassing characterizations for classes of polynomial-time optimization problems?
    To this end, we initiate the systematic study of a recently introduced polynomial-time analogue
of MaxSNP, which includes a large number of well-studied problems (including Nearest and
Furthest Neighbor in the Hamming metric, Maximum Inner Product, optimization variants of
k-XOR and Maximum k-Cover). Specifically, for each k, MaxSPk denotes the class of O(mk )-time
problems of the form maxx1 ,...,xk #{y : ϕ(x1 , . . . , xk , y)} where ϕ is a quantifier-free first-order
property and m denotes the size of the relational structure. Assuming central hypotheses about
clique detection in hypergraphs and exact Max-3-SAT, we show that for any MaxSPk problem
definable by a quantifier-free m-edge graph formula ϕ, the best possible approximation guarantee in
faster-than-exhaustive-search time O(mk−δ ) falls into one of four categories:
    optimizable to exactness in time O(mk−δ ),
    an (inefficient) approximation scheme, i.e., a (1 + ε)-approximation in time O(mk−f (ε) ),
    a (fixed) constant-factor approximation in time O(mk−δ ), or
    an mε -approximation in time O(mk−f (ε) ).
We obtain an almost complete characterization of these regimes, for MaxSPk as well as for an
analogously defined minimization class MinSPk . As our main technical contribution, we show
how to rule out the existence of approximation schemes for a large class of problems admitting
constant-factor approximations, under a hypothesis for exact Sparse Max-3-SAT algorithms posed
by (Alman, Vassilevska Williams’20). As general trends for the problems we consider, we observe:
(1) Exact optimizability has a simple algebraic characterization, (2) only few maximization problems
do not admit a constant-factor approximation; these do not even have a subpolynomial-factor
approximation, and (3) constant-factor approximation of minimization problems is equivalent to
deciding whether the optimum is equal to 0.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Problems, reductions and completeness;
Theory of computation → Approximation algorithms analysis

Keywords and phrases Classification Theorems, Hardness of Approximation in P, Fine-grained
Complexity Theory

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2022.30

Category Track A: Algorithms, Complexity and Games
             © Karl Bringmann, Alejandro Cassis, Nick Fischer, and Marvin Künnemann;
                                                                                                       EA




             licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
                                                                                                       TC S




49th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2022).
Editors: Mikołaj Bojańczyk, Emanuela Merelli, and David P. Woodruff;
Article No. 30; pp. 30:1–30:20
                     Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                     Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
30:2   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


       Related Version Full Version: https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.11681

       Funding Karl Bringmann, Alejandro Cassis, Nick Fischer: This work is part of the project TIPEA
       that has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Unions
       Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No. 850979). Marvin Künnemann:
       Part of this research was performed at ETH Zürich, Institute for Theoretical Studies, supported by
       Dr. Max Rössler, by the Walter Haefner Foundation, and by the ETH Zürich Foundation.



        1        Introduction

       For many optimization problems, the best known exact algorithms essentially explore the
       complete search space, up to low-order improvements. While this holds true in particular for
       NP-hard optimization problems such as maximum satisfiability, also common polynomial-time
       optimization problems like Nearest Neighbor search are no exception. When facing such
       a problem, the perhaps most common approach is to relax the optimization goal and ask
       for approximations rather than optimal solutions. Can we obtain an approximate value
       significantly faster than exhaustive search, and if so, what is the best approximation guarantee
       we can achieve?
           Even considering polynomial-time problems only, the study of such questions has led to
       significant algorithmic breakthroughs, such as locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) [49, 41, 11],
       subquadratic-time approximation algorithms for Edit Distance [56, 18, 17, 19, 14, 12, 26,
       55, 21, 43, 13], scaling algorithms for graph problems [37, 70, 34], and fast approximation
       algorithms via the polynomial method [5, 6] (which lead to the currently fastest known
       exponential-time approximation schemes for MaxSAT).
           These algorithmic breakthroughs have recently been complemented by exciting tools for
       proving hardness of approximation in P: Most notably, the distributed PCP framework [4]
       has lead to strong conditional lower bounds, including fundamental limits for Nearest
       Neighbor search [62], as well as tight approximability results for the Maximum Inner Product
       problem [28]. Other technical advances include evidence against deterministic approximation
       schemes for Longest Common Subsequence [1, 3, 29], strong (at times even tight) problem-
       specific hardness results such as [61, 22, 16, 25, 52], the first fine-grained equivalences of
       approximation in P results [30, 29], and related works on parameterized inapproximability [27,
       51, 59], see [36] for a survey.
           These strong advances from both sides shift the algorithmic frontier and the frontier of
       conditional hardness towards each other. Consequently, it becomes increasingly important
       to generalize isolated results – both algorithms and reductions – towards making these
       frontiers explicit: A more comprehensive description of current techniques might enable us
       to understand general trends underlying these works and to highlight the most pressing
       limitations of current methods. In fact, we view this as one of the fundamental tasks and
       uses of fine-grained algorithm design & complexity.


       Optimization Classes in P. To study (hardness of) approximation in P in a general way,
       we study a class MaxSPk recently introduced in [23] (see the full version of this paper for a
       comparison to the classic class MaxSNP, which motivated the definition of MaxSPk ). This
       class consists of polynomial-time optimization problems of the form:

             max #{y : ϕ(x1 , . . . , xk , y)},
            x1 ,...,xk
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, and M. Künnemann                                                          30:3


where ϕ is a quantifier-free first-order property.1 One obtains an analogous minimization
class MinSPk by replacing maximization by minimization. A large number of natural and
well-studied problems can be expressed this way: In particular, we may think of each xi
ranging over a set Xi of n vectors in {0, 1}d , and the task is to maximize (or minimize) the
number of coordinates y satisfying an arbitrary Boolean function over the coordinate values
x1 [y], . . . , xk [y] (here, ϕ is defined using a binary relation R ⊆ (X1 ∪ · · · ∪ Xk ) × Y that
expresses whether the y-th coordinate of xi is 0 or 1; see Section 2 for details). In particular,
this class of problems includes:
    (Offline) Furthest/Nearest Neighbor search in the Hamming metric
    (maxx1 ,x2 / minx1 ,x2 dH (x1 , x2 )),
    Maximum/Minimum Inner Product; the latter is the optimization formulation of the
    Most-Orthogonal Vectors problem [2]
    (maxx1 ,x2 / minx1 ,x2 ⟨x1 , x2 ⟩),
    A natural similarity search problem that we call Maximum k-Agreement
    (maxx1 ,...,xk #{y : x1 [y] = · · · = xk [y]}),
    Maximum k-Cover [35, 31, 59] and its variation Maximum Exact-k-Cover [54]
    (maxx1 ,...,xk #{y : xi [y] = 1 for some i}, maxx1 ,...,xk #{y : xi [y] = 1 for exactly one i})2 ,
    The canonical optimization variants of the k-XOR problem [50, 33]
    (maxx1 ,...,xk / minx1 ,...,xk #{y : x1 [y] ⊕ · · · ⊕ xk [y] = 0}).
    By the standard split-and-list technique [66], it is easy to see that any c-approximation for
    Maximum k-XOR or Minimum k-XOR in time O(nk−δ poly(d)) gives a c-approximation
    for Max-LIN (maximize the number of satisfied constraints of a linear system over F2 ,
    see [45, 66, 6]) or the Minimum Distance Problem3 (finding the minimum weight of a
                                                                                             ′
    non-zero code word of a linear code over F2 , see [63]), respectively, in time O(2n(1−δ ) ).
   By a simple baseline algorithm, all of these problems can be solved in time O(mk ), where
m denotes the input size (for the above setting of k sets of n vectors in {0, 1}d we have
m = O(nd)). A large body of work addresses problems with k = 2, typically inventing or
adapting strong techniques to each specific problem as needed:
   Abboud, Rubinstein, and Williams introduced the distributed PCP in P framework and
   ruled out almost-polynomial approximations for the Maximum Inner Product problem
   assuming the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH). Subsequently, Chen [28]
   strengthened the lower bound and gave an approximation algorithm resulting in tight
   bounds on the approximability in strongly subquadratic time, assuming SETH. Corre-
   sponding inapproximability results for its natural generalization to k-Maximum Inner
   Product have been obtained in [51].
   In contrast, strong approximation algorithms have a rich history for the Nearest Neigh-
   bor search problem: Using LSH, we can obtain an (1 + ε)-approximation in time
   O(n2−Θ(ε) ) [44, 9, 10,√ 15]. Using further techniques,
                                                   √
                                                                  the dependence on ε has been
                      2−Ω( ε)                 2−Ω̃( 3 ε)
   improved to O(n            ) [64] and O(n             ) [5, 6]. On the hardness side, Rubin-
   stein [62] shows that the dependence on ε cannot be improved indefinitely, by proving
   that for every δ, there exists an ε such that (1 + ε)-approximate Nearest Neighbor search
   requires time Ω(n2−δ ) assuming SETH. In particular, this rules out poly(1/ε)n2−δ -time
   algorithms with δ > 0.


1
  Note that [23] more generally defines classes MaxSPk,ℓ for ℓ ≥ 1. We focus on MaxSPk = MaxSPk,1 ,
  as it was determined as computationally harder than MaxSPk,ℓ with ℓ ≥ 2, and contains many natural
  problems (see below).
2
  These problems are typically studied in the setting where k is part of the input, while we consider them
  for a fixed constant k.
3
  In fact, even for the Nearest Codeword Problem over F2 .


                                                                                                             ICALP 2022
30:4   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


            For the dual problem of Furthest Neighbor search (i.e., diameter in the Hamming metric),
                                  2
            [20] gives a O(n2−Θ(ε ) )-time algorithm, which was improved to O(n2−Θ(ε) ) via reduction
            to Nearest Neighbor search
                                    √
                                           in [47]. Following further improvements [42, 48], also here
                                    3
            [5, 6] give an O(n2−Ω̃( ε) )-time algorithm. Analogous inapproximability to Rubinstein’s
            result are given in [30].
            For Minimum Inner Product, the well-known Orthogonal Vectors hypothesis [65] (which
            is implied by SETH [66]) is precisely the assumption that already distinguishing whether
            the optimal value is 0 or at least 1 cannot be done in strongly subquadratic time.
            Interestingly, Chen and Williams [30] show a converse: a refutation of the Orthogonal
            Vectors hypothesis would give a subquadratic-time constant-factor approximation for
            Minimum Inner Product.
           In the above list, we focus on the difficult case of moderate dimension d = no(1) (when
       measuring the time complexity with respect to the input size). Lower-dimensional settings
       such as d = Θ(log n), d = Θ(log log n) or even lower are addressed in other works [69, 30].
           While the above collection of results gives a detailed understanding of isolated problems,
       we know little about general phenomena of (in)approximability in MaxSPk and MinSPk
       using faster-than-exhaustive-search algorithms: Are there problems for which constant-factor
       approximations are best possible? Is maximizing (or minimizing) Inner Product the only
       problem without a constant-factor approximation? Which problems can we optimize exactly?
           There are precursors to our work that show fine-grained equivalence classes of approxima-
       tion problems in P [29, 30]. However, establishing membership of a problem in these classes
       requires a problem-specific proof, while we are interested in syntactically defined classes,
       where class membership can be immediately read off from the definition of a problem. Our
       aim is to understand the approximability landscape of such classes fully. Finally, the previous
       works either focus on lower-dimensional settings [30]4 , or target more powerful problems
       than we consider, such as Closest-LCS-Pair [29].

       MaxSPk as Polynomial-Time Analogue of MaxSNP. Investigating NP-hard optimization
       problems, Papadimitriou and Yannakakis [60] introduced the class MaxSNP, which motivates
       the definition of MaxSPk as a natural polynomial-time analogue (see [23] and the full
       version of this paper for details). As a general class containing prominent, constant-factor
       approximable optimization problems, MaxSNP was introduced to give the first evidence
       that Max-3-SAT does not admit a PTAS, by proving that Max-3-SAT belongs to the
       hardest-to-approximate problems in MaxSNP.
           Ideally, one would like to understand the approximability landscape in MaxSNP fully
       and give tight approximability results for each such problem. Major advances towards this
       goal have been achieved by Creignou [32] and Khanna, Sudan, Trevisan, and Williamson [53]
       who gave a complete classification of a large subclass of MaxSNP, namely, maximum
       Boolean Constraint Satisfaction Problems (MaxCSP): Each Boolean MaxCSP either is
       polynomial-time optimizable or it does not admit a PTAS unless P = NP, rendering a
       polynomial-time constant-factor approximation best possible. For minimization analogues,
       including Boolean MinCSPs, the situation is more diverse with several equivalence classes
       needed to describe the result [53].
           We initiate the study of the same type of questions in the polynomial-time regime. Our
       aim is to achieve a detailed understanding of MaxSPk and MinSPk akin to the classification
       theorems achieved for MaxCSPs and MinCSPs [32, 53].


       4
           Chen and Williams also give some results for the moderate-dimensional case; we discuss these in
           Section 3.
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, and M. Künnemann                                                30:5


1.1      Our Results
We approach the classification of MaxSPk and MinSPk by considering the simplest, yet
expressive case of a single, binary relation involved in the first-order formula; this route was
also taken in earlier classification work for first-order properties [24]. We may thus view the
relational structure as a graph, and call such a formula a graph formula. Note that despite its
naming, this includes problems not usually viewed as graph problems, such as all examples
given in the introduction, which are natural problems on sets of vectors in {0, 1}d .
    We obtain a classification of each graph formula into one of four regimes, assuming central
fine-grained hardness hypotheses whose plausibility we detail in the full version of this paper.
All of our hardness results are implied by the Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis [7], which
states that for all δ > 0 there is some c > 0 such that Max-3-SAT on n variables and cn
clauses has no O(2n(1−δ) )-time algorithm.5 (Actually, most of our hardness results already
follow from weaker assumptions.)
▶ Theorem 1. Let ψ be a MaxSPk or MinSPk graph formula. Assuming the Sparse
Max-3-SAT hypothesis, ψ belongs to precisely one of the following regimes:
R1 Efficiently optimizable:
   There is some δ > 0 such that ψ can be solved exactly in time O(mk−δ ).
R2 Admits an approximation scheme, but not an efficient one:
   For all ε > 0, there is some δ > 0 such that ψ can be (1 + ε)-approximated in time
   O(mk−δ ). However, for all δ > 0, there is some ε > 0 such that ψ cannot be (1 + ε)-
   approximated in time O(mk−δ ).
R3 Admits a constant-factor approximation, but no approximation scheme:
   There are ε, δ > 0 such that ψ can be (1 + ε)-approximated in time O(mk−δ ). However,
   there also exists an ε > 0 such that for all δ > 0, ψ cannot be (1 + ε)-approximated in
   time O(mk−δ ).
R4 Arbitrary polynomial-factor approximation is best possible (maximization):
   For every ε > 0, there is some δ > 0 such that ψ can be O(mε )-approximated in time
   O(mk−δ ). However, for every δ > 0, there exists some ε > 0 such that ψ cannot be
   O(mε )-approximated in time O(mk−δ ).
      No approximation at all (minimization):
      For all δ > 0, we cannot decide whether the optimum value of ψ is 0 or at least 1 in time
      O(mk−δ ).
    Note that the characteristics of the fourth (i.e., hardest) regime differ between the
maximization and the minimization case.
    This theorem has immediate consequences for the approximability landscape in MaxSPk
and MinSPk , based on fine-grained assumptions: In particular, while any MaxSPk graph
formula can be approximated within a subpolynomial factor O(mε ), we can rule out optimal
approximation ratios that grow with m but are strictly subpolynomial (i.e., there are no
graph formulas √  whose optimal approximability within O(mk−Ω(1) ) time is Θ(log log m),
Θ(log2 m) or 2Θ( log m) ). Furthermore, there are no graph formulas with an f (1/ε)mk−Ω(1)
approximation scheme that cannot already be optimized to exactness in time mk−Ω(1) .
    In fact, beyond Theorem 1 we even give an almost complete characterization of each regime:
Specifically, we introduce integer-valued hardness parameters 0 ≤ Hand (ψ) ≤ Hdeg (ψ) ≤ k
(defined in Section 3). As illustrated in Figure 1, we show how to place any graph formula ψ


5
    This hypothesis is a stronger version of the Max-3-SAT hypothesis [58].




                                                                                                   ICALP 2022
30:6   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems




                   Hdeg (ψ) ≤ 2                                           3 ≤ Hdeg (ψ) ≤ k
                    (Hdeg (ψ) ≤ 1)                                          (Hdeg (ψ) = 2)



                                      Hand (ψ) ≤ 1        Hand (ψ) = 2             3 ≤ Hand (ψ) < k          Hand (ψ) = k
                                       (Hand (ψ) ≤ 1)         (empty)                    (empty)              (Hand (ψ) = 2)
         Max(ψ)




                  R1:                R2:                 R2 or R3:          R3:                          R4:
                    exact solvable     AS                  constant approx.   constant approx.             poly. approx.
                                       no efficient AS     no efficient AS    no AS                        no subpoly. approx.
         Min(ψ)




                  R1:                R2:                 R2 or R3:          R4:
                    exact solvable     AS                  constant approx.   no approximation
                                       no efficient AS     no efficient AS




           Figure 1 Visualizes our classification of first-order optimization problems Max(ψ) and Min(ψ)
       for all k ≥ 3, in terms of the hardness parameters Hand and Hdeg (as defined in Definitions 4 and 6).
       See Definition 10 for the precise definition of an (efficient) approximation scheme (AS). The pale
       labels indicate how to change the conditions to obtain the picture for k = 2.




           Table 1 Some interesting examples classified according to Figure 1. For each problem ψ, an
       instance consists of k sets of n vectors X1 , . . . , Xk ⊆ {0, 1}d . We write ψ = maxx1 ,...,xk / minx1 ,...,xk ϕ
       and only list the inner formulas ϕ in the table.

        Problem ψ                        ϕ                                     Hdeg (ψ)       Hand (ψ)     Hardness regime

        Maximum/Minimum
                                         #{y : x1 [y] = x2 [y]}                2              1                           R2
        2-Agreement
        Maximum/Minimum
                                         #{y : x1 [y] = x2 [y] = x3 [y]}       2              2                           R1
        3-Agreement
        Maximum
                                         #{y : x1 [y] = · · · = xk [y]}        2⌊ k2 ⌋        k−1                         R3
        k-Agreement, k ≥ 4
        Minimum
                                         #{y : x1 [y] = · · · = xk [y]}        2⌊ k2 ⌋        k−1                         R4
        k-Agreement, k ≥ 4
        Maximum/Minimum
                                         #{y : x1 [y] ⊕ · · · ⊕ xk [y]}        k              1                           R2
        k-XOR
        Maximum
                                         #{y : x1 [y] ∧ · · · ∧ xk [y]}        k              k                           R4
        k-Inner Product
        Minimum
                                         #{y : x1 [y] ∧ · · · ∧ xk [y]}        k              k                           R4
        k-Inner Product
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, and M. Künnemann                                                30:7


into its corresponding regime depending solely on Hand (ψ) and Hdeg (ψ) – with the single
exception of formulas ψ with Hand (ψ) = 2 and Hdeg (ψ) ≥ 3. For these formulas (e.g.,
Maximum Exact-3-Cover), it remains open whether they belong to Regime 2 or 3, i.e.,
whether or not they admit an approximation scheme (see Open Problem 1).
    In the full version we give natural problems for each regime (showing in particular that
each regime is indeed non-empty). A particular highlight is that we can prove existence of
constant-factor approximable formulas that do not admit an approximation scheme, such as
Maximum-4-Agreement (see Section 3, Theorem 11 for a technical discussion of the lower
bound). In the full version of this paper, we give the details on how to calculate the hardness
parameters Hand (ψ) and Hdeg (ψ) for each example in Table 1.
    While the approximability of problems in the third and fourth regime seem rather
unsatisfactory, we also consider the setting of additive approximation, and show that for
every MaxSPk and MinSPk graph formula, there is an additive approximation scheme;
however, assuming the Sparse MAX-3-SAT hypothesis it cannot be an efficient one unless we
can optimize the problem exactly.
▶ Theorem 2 (Additive Approximation). For every ψ, we give an additive approximation
scheme, i.e., for every ε > 0, there is a δ > 0 such that we compute the optimum value up to
an additive ε|Y | error in time O(mk−δ ).
    If ψ does not belong to Regime 1, we show that unless the Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis
fails, for every δ > 0, there is some ε > 0 such that we cannot compute the optimum value
up to an additive ε|Y | error in time O(mk−δ ).
   Finally, we remark that our classification identifies general trends in MaxSPk and
MinSPk , including that exact optimizability is described by a simple algebraic criterion,
and that constant-factor approximation for minimization problems is equivalent to testing
whether the optimum is 0. We address these trends in Section 3.

On Plausibility of the Hypotheses. As tight unconditional lower bounds for polynomial-
time problems are barely existent, we give conditional lower bounds, based on established
assumptions in fine-grained complexity theory, such as SETH (see [65] for an excellent
survey). The essentially only exception is the only recently introduced Sparse Max-3-SAT
hypothesis [7]; we use this hypothesis only for giving evidence against approximation schemes
and for ruling out certain additive approximation schemes. While it is possible that this
hypothesis could ultimately be refuted, our classification describes the frontier of the current
state of the art. At the very least, our conditional lower bound for approximation schemes
reveals a rather surprising connection: To obtain an approximation scheme for polynomial-time
problems such as Maximum 4-Agreement, we need to give an exponential-time improvement
for exact solutions for Sparse Max-3-SAT!

1.2    Further Related Work
Parameterized Inapproximability. The problem settings we consider are related to a recent
and strong line of research on parameterized inapproximability, including [27, 51, 31, 59, 57]
(see [36] for a recent survey). In these contexts, one seeks to determine optimal approximation
guarantees within some running time of the form f (k)ng(k) (such as FPT running time
f (k) poly(n) or running time no(k) ) for some parameter k (such as the solution size). Unfor-
tunately, many of these results do not immediately establish hardness for specific values of k.
An important exception is work by Karthik, Laekhanukit, and Manurangsi [51], which among
other results establishes inapproximability of k-Dominating Set and the Maximum k-Inner
Product within running time O(nk−ε ), assuming SETH. We give a detailed comparison of
our setting to notions used in Karthik et al.’s work in the full version of this work.

                                                                                                   ICALP 2022
30:8   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


       Fine-Grained Complexity of First-Order Properties. Studying the fine-grained complexity
       of polynomial-time problem classes defined by first-order properties has been initiated
       in [68, 40], with different settings considered in [39, 38]. In particular, for model-checking
       first-order properties, [40] provides a completeness result (a fine-grained analogue of the
       Cook-Levin Theorem) and [24] provides a classification theorem (a fine-grained analogue of
       Schaefer’s Theorem, see also Section 3.1).
           For optimization in P, [23] provides completeness theorems for MaxSPk (a fine-grained
       analogue of MaxSNP-completeness of Max-3-SAT [60]). In contrast, the present paper gives
       a classification theorem (building a fine-grained analogue of the approximability classifications
       of optimization variants of CSPs [32, 53]).


           2       Preliminaries
       For an integer k ≥ 0, we set [k] = {1, . . . , k}. For a set A and integer k ≥ 0 we denote by A
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                         k
       the set of all size-k subsets of A. Let ϕ(z1 , . . . , zk ) a Boolean function, and let S ⊆ [k]. Any
       function obtained by instantiating all variables zi (i ̸∈ S) in ϕ by constant values is called
       an S-restriction of ϕ. Finally, we write Õ(·) to hide poly-logarithmic factors and denote by
       ω < 2.373 the exponent of square matrix multiplication [8].


       2.1         First-Order Model-Checking
       A relational structure consists of n objects and relations R1 , . . . , Rℓ (of arbitrary arities)
       between these objects. A first-order formula is a quantified formula of the form

               ψ = (Q1 x1 ) . . . (Qk+1 xk+1 ) ϕ(x1 , . . . , xk+1 ),

       where ϕ is a Boolean formula over the predicates R(xi1 , . . . , xiℓ ) and each Qi is either a
       universal or existential quantifier. Given a (k + 1)-partite structure on objects X1 ∪ · · · ∪ Xk+1 ,
       the model-checking problem (or query evaluation problem) is to check whether ψ holds on
       the given structure, that is, for xi ranging over Xi and by instantiating the predicates
       R(xi1 , . . . , xiℓ ) in ϕ according to the structure, ψ is valid.
            Following previous work in this line of research [40, 24], we usually assume that the input
       is represented sparsely – that is, we assume that the relational structure is written down as
       an exhaustive enumeration of all records in all relations; let m denote the total number of
       such entries6 . The convention is reasonable as this data format is common in the context of
       database theory and also for the representation of graphs (where it is called the adjacency
       list representation), see Section 4 for a further discussion.
            A first-order formula ψ is called a graph formula if it is defined over a single binary
       predicate E(xi , xj ). Many natural problems fall into this category; see [24] for a detailed
       discussion on the subject.


       2.2         MaxSPk and MinSPk
       In analogy to first-order properties with quantifier structure ∃k ∀ (with maximization instead
       of ∃ and counting instead of ∀) and following the definition in [23], we now introduce the
       class of optimization problems. Let MaxSPk be the class containing all formulas of the form


       6
           By ignoring objects not occurring in any relation, we may always assume that n ≤ O(m).
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, and M. Künnemann                                                   30:9




     ψ = max # ϕ(x1 , . . . , xk , y),                                                         (1)
          x1 ,...,xk y


where, as before, ϕ is a Boolean formula over some predicates R(xi1 , . . . , xiℓ ). We similarly
define MinSPk with “min” in place of “max”. Occasionally, we write OptSPk to refer to
both of these classes simultaneously, and we write “opt” as a placeholder for either “max” or
“min”. In analogy to the model-checking problem for first-order properties, we associate to
each formula ψ ∈ OptSPk an algorithmic problem:

▶ Definition 3 (Max(ψ) and Min(ψ)). Let ψ ∈ MaxSPk be as in (1). Given a (k + 1)-
partite structure on objects X1 ∪ · · · ∪ Xk ∪ Y , the Max(ψ) problem is to compute

     OPT =           max         # ϕ(x1 , . . . , xk , y).
              x1 ∈X1 ,...,xk ∈Xk y∈Y


We similarly define Min(ψ) for ψ ∈ MinSPk . Occasionally, for ψ ∈ OptSPk , we write
Opt(ψ) to refer to both problems simultaneously.

    For convenience, we introduce some further notation: For objects x1 ∈ X1 , . . . , xk ∈ Xk ,
we denote by Val(x1 , . . . , xk ) = #y∈Y ϕ(x1 , . . . , xk , y) the value of (x1 , . . . , xk ).
    The problem Opt(ψ) can be solved in time O(mk ) for all OptSPk formulas ψ, by a
straightforward extension of the model-checking baseline algorithm; see [23] for details. As
this is clearly optimal for k = 1, we will often implicitly assume that k ≥ 2 in the following.
    For a clean analogy between model-checking and the optimization classes MaxSPk and
MinSPk , we will from now view model-checking as “testing for zero”. More precisely, the
model-checking problem of ∃x1 . . . ∃xk ∀y ¬ϕ(x1 , . . . , xk , y) is equivalent to testing whether
Min(ψ) has optimal solution OPT = 0, where ψ = minx1 ,...,xk #y ϕ(x1 , . . . , xk , y). We refer
to the latter problem as Zero(ψ).
    Definition 3 introduces Max(ψ) and Min(ψ) as exact optimization problems (i.e., OPT
is required to be computed exactly). We say that an algorithm computes a (multiplicative)
c-approximation for Max(ψ) if it computes any value in the interval [c−1 · OPT, OPT].
Similarly, a (multiplicative) c-approximation for Min(ψ) computes a value in [OPT, c·OPT].

 3      Technical Overview
This section serves the purpose of stating our results formally, to provide the main proof ideas
and techniques, and to convey some intuition whenever possible. Due to space constraints,
we omit precise definitions of the fine-grained hypotheses here and instead refer to the full
version of this paper.
   We first introduce our hardness parameters: the and-hardness Hand (ψ) borrowed from
previous work [24] (reviewed below), as well as a novel algebraic parameter that we call
degree-hardness Hdeg (ψ). In the subsequent sections, we give an overview over our various
algorithmic and hardness results based on the values Hdeg (ψ), Hand (ψ) (see Figure 1), with
the formal proof of Theorem 1 given at the end of this section.

3.1     Bringmann et al.’s Model-Checking Dichotomy
Bringmann, Fischer and Künnemann [24] established a fine-grained classification of all ∃k ∀-
quantified graph properties into computationally easy and hard model-checking problems.
As our work extends that classification (and also since our results are of a similar flavor), we
briefly summarize their results. The hardness parameter presented in Definition 4 forms the
basis for the dichotomy.

                                                                                                      ICALP 2022
30:10   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


            Here, and for the remainder of this section, we write ψ0 to denote the Boolean func-
        tion obtained from ψ in the following way: Let ψ = optx1 ,...,xk #y ϕ(x1 , . . . , xk , y) be any
        graph formula, where ϕ is a propositional formula over the atoms E(xi , xj ) (i, j ∈ [k])
        and E(xi , y) (i ∈ [k]). Consider the Boolean function obtained from ϕ by replacing ev-
        ery atom E(xi , xj ) (i, j ∈ [k]) by false. What remains is a Boolean function over the
        k atoms E(xi , y) (i ∈ [k]) and we denote this formula by ψ0 . For example, if ψ =
        maxx1 ,x2 #y (¬E(x1 , x2 ) ∧ E(x1 , y) ∧ E(x2 , y)) then we define ψ0 : {0, 1}2 → {0, 1} by
        ψ0 (a1 , a2 ) = a1 ∧ a2 .
            As apparent in Definition 4, the core difficulty of a formula ψ is captured by ψ0 and thus
        not affected by the predicates E(xi , xj ). In the full version we elaborate on this phenomenon.

        ▶ Definition 4 (And-Hardness). Let ϕ be a Boolean function on k inputs. The and-hardness
        Hand (ϕ) of ϕ is the largest integer 0 ≤ h ≤ k such that, for any index set S ∈ [k]
                                                                                            
                                                                                           h , there
        exists some S-restriction of ϕ with exactly one satisfying assignment. (Set Hand (ϕ) = 0 for
        constant-valued ϕ.) For an OptSPk graph formula ψ, we define Hand (ψ) = Hand (ψ0 ).

           This hardness parameter essentially specifies the computational hardness of the model-
        checking problems Zero(ϕ); here, Hand (ψ) ≤ 2 is the critical threshold:

        ▶ Theorem 5 (Model-Checking, [24]). Let ψ be a MinSPk graph formula.
          If Hand (ψ) ≤ 2 and Hand (ψ) < k, then Zero(ψ) can be solved in time O(mk−δ ) for some
           δ > 0.
          If 3 ≤ Hand (ψ) or Hand (ψ) = k, then Zero(ψ) cannot be solved in time O(mk−δ ) for
          any δ > 0 unless the Max-3-SAT hypothesis fails.

        3.2    Exact Optimization
        We are now ready to detail our results. Our main contribution is a dichotomy for the exact
        solvability and approximability of Max(ψ) and Min(ψ) for all MaxSPk and MinSPk graph
        formulas ψ. For the exact case, the decisive criterion for the hardness of some formula ψ can
        be read off the polynomial extension of the function ψ0 . Specifically, for any Boolean function
        ϕ there exists a (unique) multilinear polynomial with real coefficients that computes ϕ on
        binary inputs. By abuse of notation, we refer to that polynomial by writing ϕ as well. The
        degree deg(ϕ) of ϕ is the degree of its polynomial extension.
            As an example, consider the Exact-3-Cover property: ϕ(z1 , z2 , z3 ) is true if and only
        if exactly one of its inputs z1 , z2 or z3 is true. Then its unique multilinear polynomial
        extension is

           ϕ(z1 , z2 , z3 ) = 3z1 z2 z3 − 2(z1 z2 + z2 z3 + z3 z1 ) + (z1 + z2 + z3 ),

        and therefore deg(ϕ) = 3.

        ▶ Definition 6 (Degree Hardness). Let ϕ be a Boolean function on k inputs. The degree
        hardness Hdeg (ϕ) of ϕ is the largest integer 0 ≤ h ≤ k such that, for any index set S ∈ [k]
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                  h ,
        there exists some S-restriction of ϕ of degree h. For an OptSPk graph formula ψ, we define
        Hdeg (ψ) = Hdeg (ψ0 ).

            It always holds that Hand (ψ) ≤ Hdeg (ψ), but in general these parameters behave very
        differently. With Hdeg in place of Hand , we are able to recover the same classification
        as Theorem 5 for both exact maximization and minimization:
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, and M. Künnemann                                                        30:11


▶ Theorem 7 (Exact Optimization). Let ψ be an OptSPk graph formula.
  If Hdeg (ψ) ≤ 2 and Hdeg (ψ) < k, then Opt(ψ) can be solved in time O(mk−δ ) for some
   δ > 0.
  If 3 ≤ Hdeg (ψ) or Hdeg (ψ) = k, then Opt(ψ) cannot be solved in time O(mk−δ ) for any
   δ > 0 unless the Max-3-SAT hypothesis fails.
     The algorithmic part is proven along the same lines as [24]: We first brute-force over all
but k = 3 quantifiers, and solve the remaining problem by a reduction to maximum-weight
triangle detection with small edge weights. Intuitively, since the degree of the resulting
3-variable problem is at most 2, we can express the objective as a sum of three parts depending
on two variables each (this approach is also used in a similar context in [67, Chapter 6.5]).
This allows us to label the edges of a triangle instance with corresponding parts, which can
be shown to yield average edge weight O(1).
     The conditional lower bound is more interesting. Our reduction is inspired by a standard
argument proving quadratic-time hardness of the Maximum Inner Product problem (MaxIP).
That lower bound is based on the OV hypothesis, so it consists of a reduction from an
OV instance X1 , X2 ⊆ {0, 1}d to an instance of MaxIP. The idea is to use a gadget that
maps every entry in xi ∈ Xi to a constant number of new entries;7 let x′i ∈ {0, 1}O(d)
denote the vector after applying the gadget coordinate-wise. The crucial property is that
⟨x′1 , x′2 ⟩ = d − ⟨x1 , x2 ⟩, and thus a pair of orthogonal vectors x1 , x2 corresponds to a pair of
vectors x′1 , x′2 of maximum inner product.
     To mimic the reduction for all problems which are hard in the sense of Theorem 7, we
settle for the weaker but sufficient property that the value of (x′1 , x′2 ) equals β1 d − β2 ⟨x1 , x2 ⟩,
for some positive integers β1 , β2 . It follows from our algebraic characterization of hard
functions that a gadget with such guarantees always exists. Ultimately, our hardness proof
makes use of that gadget in a similar way as for MaxIP.
     The hardness part of Theorem 7 can in fact be stated in a more fine-grained way: If
some problem Opt(ψ) has degree hardness h = Hdeg (ψ) ≥ 3, then the hardness proof can
be conditioned on the weaker h-Uniform HyperClique assumption. That connection can
be complemented by a partial converse, thus revealing a certain equivalence between exact
optimization and hyperclique detection. An analogous equivalence for model-checking graph
formulas could not be proved and was left as an open problem in [24].
▶ Theorem 8 (Equivalence of Opt(ψ) and HyperClique). Let ψ be an OptSPk graph
formula of degree hardness h = Hdeg (ψ) ≥ 2.
   If Opt(ψ) can be solved in time O(mk−δ ) for some δ > 0, then, for some (large)
                                                                             ′  ′
   k ′ = k ′ (k, h, δ), h-Uniform k ′ -HyperClique can be solved in time O(nk −δ ) for some
   δ ′ > 0.
   If h-Uniform (h + 1)-HyperClique can be solved in time O(nh+1−δ ) for some δ > 0,
                                                ′
   then Opt(ψ) can be solved in time O(mk−δ ) for some δ ′ > 0.

3.3      Approximation
Since Theorem 7 gives a complete classification for the exact solvability of Opt(ψ), the next
natural question is to study the approximability of properties which are hard to compute
exactly. Unlike the exact case, we use different techniques and tools to give our classification
for maximization and minimization problems.


7
    Every entry a in x1 is replaced by three new coordinates (a, 1 − a, 1 − a) and every entry b in x2 is
    replaced by (1 − b, b, 1 − b). The contribution to the inner product of the new vectors is equal to
    a(1 − b) + (1 − a)b + (1 − a)(1 − b) = 1 − ab.



                                                                                                            ICALP 2022
30:12   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


        3.3.1       Maximization
        We obtain a simple classification of all constant-factor approximable maximization problems,
        conditioned on the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH).
        ▶ Theorem 9 (Constant Approximation – Maximization). Let ψ be a MaxSPk graph formula.
          If Hand (ψ) < k (or equivalently, if ψ0 does not have exactly one satisfying assignment),
          then there exists a constant-factor approximation for Max(ψ) in time O(mk−δ ) for some
           δ > 0.
          Otherwise, if Hand (ψ) = k (or equivalently, ψ0 has exactly one satisfying assignment),
          then there exists no constant-factor approximation for Max(ψ) in time O(mk−δ ) for any
           δ > 0, unless SETH fails.
            We give a high-level explanation of our proof by focusing on two representative problems:
        On the one hand, strong conditional hardness results have been shown for the MaxIP
        problem [4, 28]. When ψ0 has a single satisfying assignment, Max(ψ) is equivalent (up to
        complementation) to MaxIP, so we adapt the hardness results for our setting.
            On the other hand, consider the Furthest Neighbor problem: Given two sets of
        bit-vectors X1 , X2 ⊆ {0, 1}d , compute the maximum Hamming distance between vectors
        x1 ∈ X1 and x2 ∈ X2 . There exists a simple linear-time 3-approximation for this problem:
        Fix some x1 ∈ X1 and compute its furthest neighbor x2 ∈ X2 . Then compute the furthest
        neighbor x′1 ∈ X1 of x2 and return the distance between x′1 and x2 as the answer. By applying
        the triangle inequality twice, it is easy to see that this indeed yields a 3-approximation.
        That argument generalizes for approximating Max(ϕ) whenever ψ0 satisfies the following
        property: If α is a satisfying assignment of ψ0 , then the component-wise negation of α is
        also satisfying. Finally, if ψ0 has at least two satisfying assignments, then Max(ψ) can be
        reduced to this special case via a reduction which worsens the approximation ratio by at
        most a constant factor. The essential insight for that last step is that we can always “cover”
        all satisfying assignments by only two satisfying assignments, as there always exists one
        satisfying assignment which contributes a constant fraction (depending on k) to the optimal
        value.
            We give a finer-grained view of the classification in Theorem 9 in two ways. First, we
        want to isolate properties which admit arbitrarily good constant-factor approximations. We
        make that notion precise in the following definition:
        ▶ Definition 10 (Approximation Scheme). Let ψ be an OptSPk formula. We say that Opt(ψ)
        admits an approximation scheme if for any ε > 0 there exists some δ > 0 and an algorithm
        computing a (1 + ε)-approximation of Opt(ψ) in time O(mk−δ ).8
           In the following theorem, we identify some formulas which admit such an approximation
        scheme, and some formulas for which this is unlikely:
        ▶ Theorem 11 (Approximation Scheme – Maximization). Let ψ be a MaxSPk graph formula.
          If Hand (ψ) ≤ 1, then there exists a randomized approximation scheme for Max(ψ).
          If 3 ≤ Hand (ψ) or Hand (ψ) = k, then there exists no approximation scheme for Max(ψ)
          unless the Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis fails.
           Unfortunately, we were not able to close the gap in Theorem 11, and it remains open
        whether problems with Hand (ϕ) = 2 admit approximation schemes. In Section 4, we give a
        specific example falling into this category.


        8
            We stress that in our work, ε is always a constant and cannot depend on m.
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, and M. Künnemann                                                          30:13


    For the first item, we give approximation schemes for any Max(ψ) with Hand (ψ) = 1 via
a reduction to Furthest Neighbor, which, as mentioned in the introduction, admits an
approximation scheme.
    The lower bound is more interesting: By Theorem 9 we know that if ψ has and-hardness
Hand (ψ) < k, then it admits a constant-factor approximation. Nevertheless, the lower
bound in Theorem 9 only addresses formulas of and-hardness Hand (ψ) = k. In particular,
Theorem 11 identifies a class of problems for which some (fixed) constant-factor approximation
is best-possible in terms of approximation.
    At a technical level, we make use of interesting machinery to obtain the lower bound.
The starting point is the distributed PCP framework, which was introduced in [4] and further
strengthened in [62, 28] to give hardness of approximation for Maximum k-Inner Product
(k-MaxIP). In this case, we cannot use this tool directly, since it crucially relies on the fact
that the target problem Max(ψ) has full hardness Hand (ψ) = k.9 Instead, we first show
Max-3-SAT-hardness of the following intermediate problem:
▶ Problem 12 ((k, 3)-OV). Given sets of n vectors X1 , . . . , Xk ⊆ {0, 1}d , where each
coordinate y ∈ [d] is associated to three active indices a, b, c ∈ [k], detect if there are vectors
x1 ∈ X1 , . . . , xk ∈ Xk such that for all y ∈ [d], it holds that xa [y] · xb [y] · xc [y] = 0 where
a, b, c are the active indices at y.
    We then provide a gap introducing reduction from (k, 3)-OV to Max(ψ), in the same
spirit as the PCP reduction gives such a reduction from k-OV to k-MaxIP. This involves
several technical steps as outlined in Figure 2. At a high level, we decompose a (k, 3)-OV
instance into a combination of multiple 3-OV instances and use the PCP reduction as a black
box on each of these. After combining the outputs of the reduction, we obtain instances
of Max(ψ) with the desired gap. The issue with this approach is that the PCP reduction
blows up the dimension of the input vectors exponentially,10 which makes the reduction
inapplicable to our case if we start from a moderate-dimensional (k, 3)-OV instance. To
show that (k, 3)-OV does not even have a O(mk−δ )-time algorithm when the dimension is
d = O(log n), we use the stronger Sparse Max-3-SAT hypothesis.11 See the full version of
this paper for further discussion of this hypothesis.
    The second way in which we get a closer look at Theorem 9 is by inspecting the hardest
regime, i.e., when Hand (ψ) = k:
▶ Theorem 13 (Polynomial-Factor Approximation). Let ψ be a MaxSPk graph formula of
full and-hardness Hand (ψ) = k.
    For every ε > 0, there exists some δ > 0 such that an mε -approximation for Max(ψ) can
    be computed in time O(mk−δ ).
    For every δ > 0, there exists an ε > 0 such that there exists no mε -approximation for
    Max(ψ) in time O(mk−δ ) unless SETH fails.
   The lower bound is obtained by applying the subsequent improvements on the distributed
PCP framework by [62, 28, 51], which improve the parameters of the reduction via algebraic
geometry codes and expander graphs. For the upper bound, we give a simple algorithm
which exploits the sparsity of the instances.

9
   More precisely, the reduction exploits the fact that ψ0 has a unique satisfying assignment to encode the
   communication protocol used in the reduction.
10
   An instance of k-OV on dimension d = c log n is reduced to multiple instances of k-MaxIP on dimension
   exp(c) log n.
11
   Morally, just as SETH implies the hardness of low-dimensional OV, the Sparse Max-3-SAT Hypothesis
   implies the hardness of low-dimensional (k, 3)-OV.




                                                                                                              ICALP 2022
30:14   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems



              Max-3-SAT                                          (k, 3)-OV                                     Approx. Max(ψ)
             on O(n) clauses                                  low-dimensional                                   with 3 ≤ Hand (ψ)



                    split                                           re-
                    & list                                        combine
                                                                                           Distributed PCP
                                           [30]                                                   [4]
                           3-ExactIP                       3-OV                      3-OV                    3-MaxIP


                       k
                                                 k
                                                                           k
                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                         
                       3       instances          3       instances         3       instances        3       instances


            Figure 2 The chain of reductions from Sparse Max-3-SAT to VMax(ψ) involving two main
        steps. Both proofs involve several intermediate steps as illustrated in the gray parts.


        3.3.2    Minimization
        There is an easier criterion for the hardness of approximating minimization problems. Namely,
        observe that giving a multiplicative approximation to a minimization problem Min(ψ) is at
        least as hard as testing if the optimal value is zero (recall that we refer to this problem as
        Zero(ψ)). More precisely, suppose that we are given an instance with OPT = 0. Then any
        multiplicative approximation must return an optimal solution.
            It turns out that this is the only source of hardness for Min(ψ) problems. We show a
        fine-grained equivalence of deciding Zero(ψ) and approximating Min(ψ) within a constant
        factor:

        ▶ Theorem 14 (Constant Approximation is Equivalent to Testing Zero). Let ψ be a MinSPk
        graph formula. Via a randomized reduction, there exists a constant-factor approximation
        algorithm for Min(ψ) in time O(mk−δ ) for some δ > 0 if and only if Zero(ψ) can be solved
                       ′
        in time O(mk−δ ) for some δ ′ > 0.

            To reduce approximating Min(ψ) to Zero(ψ), we make use of locality-sensitive hashing
        (LSH). This technique was for instance used to solve the Approximate Nearest Neighbors
        problem in Hamming spaces [44], and was recently adapted by Chen and Williams to show
        that Minimum Inner Product can be reduced to OV [30]. The latter result constitutes a
        singular known case for the general trend in MinSPk revealed by Theorem 14. In comparison,
        our reduction is simpler and more general, but gives weaker guarantees on the constant
        factor.
            We specifically use LSH for a reduction from approximating Min(ψ) to the intermediate
        problem of listing solutions to Zero(ψ) – the better the listing algorithm performs, the
        better the approximation guarantee. For instance, an algorithm listing L solutions in time
        O(mk−δ · Lδ/k ) for some δ > 0 results in a constant-factor approximation, while a listing
        algorithm in time Õ(mk−δ + L) leads to an approximation scheme. To finish the proof
        of Theorem 14, we show that any Zero(ψ) problem with an O(mk−δ )-time decider, for some
        δ > 0, also admits a listing algorithm in time O(mk−δ · Lδ/k ).
            Since the hardness of Zero(ψ) is completely classified [24], we obtain the following
        dichotomy as a consequence of Theorem 14:
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, and M. Künnemann                                            30:15


▶ Corollary 15 (Constant Approximation – Minimization). Let ψ be a MinSPk graph formula.
   If Hand (ψ) ≤ 2 and Hand (ψ) < k, then there exists a randomized constant-factor approxi-
   mation algorithm for Min(ψ) in time O(mk−δ ) for some δ > 0.
   If 3 ≤ Hand (ψ) or Hand (ψ) = k, then computing any approximation for Min(ψ) in time
   O(mk−δ ) for any δ > 0 is not possible unless the Max-3-SAT hypothesis fails.

   Similar to the maximization case, let us next consider approximation schemes for mini-
mization problems. We can reuse the general framework outlined in the previous paragraphs
to obtain an approximation scheme by giving an output-linear listing algorithm in time
Õ(mk−δ + L), for all formulas with and-hardness at most Hand (ψ) ≤ 1.

▶ Theorem 16 (Approximation Scheme – Minimization). Let ψ be a MinSPk graph formula.
If Hand (ψ) ≤ 1, then there exists a randomized approximation scheme for Min(ψ).


3.4    Efficient (Multiplicative) Approximation Schemes
Theorems 11 and 16 show that if Hand (ψ) ≤ 1, then we can give approximation schemes
for Opt(ψ). In the full version, we complement this result by ruling out the existence of
efficient approximation schemes for most regimes. We say that Opt(ψ) admits an efficient
(multiplicative) approximation scheme if there is some fixed constant δ > 0 such that for any
ε > 0, a multiplicative (1 + ε)-approximation for Opt(ψ) can be computed in time O(mk−δ ).

▶ Theorem 17. Let ψ be an OptSPk graph formula. If 3 ≤ Hdeg (ψ) or Hdeg (ψ) = k, then
there exists no efficient approximation scheme for Opt(ψ) assuming the Sparse Max-3-SAT
Hypothesis.


3.5    Proving the Main Theorem
We can now put things together to prove Theorem 1.


Proof of Theorem 1. We only sketch the proof for a maximization problem ψ with k ≥ 3;
the other cases are similar. We show how to classify ψ into one of the four stated regimes
with a case distinction based on the hardness parameters Hand (ψ) and Hdeg (ψ). This case
distinction can also be read off Figure 1.
   If Hdeg (ψ) ≤ 2: By Theorem 7, ψ is efficiently optimizable, so it lies in R1.
   Otherwise, it holds that 3 ≤ Hdeg (ψ) ≤ k. In this case, we make a further distinction:
      Hand (ψ) ≤ 1: By Theorem 11, ψ admits an approximation scheme but by Theorem 17
      not an efficient one, so it lies in R2.
      Hand (ψ) = 2: By Theorem 9, ψ admits an efficient constant-factor approximation
      but by Theorem 17, it does not admit an efficient approximation scheme. Thus,
      depending on whether ψ admits an approximation scheme or not, it lies in R2 or R3.
      (As mentioned below Theorem 1, this is the single case where we cannot place the
      formula in its precise regime, see also Open Problem 1.)
      3 ≤ Hand (ψ) < k: By Theorem 9, ψ admits an efficient constant factor approximation
      but by Theorem 11 it has no approximation scheme, so it lies in R3.
      Hand (ψ) = k: By Theorem 13, ψ admits an efficient polynomial-factor approximation,
      and this is best possible, so it lies in R4.                                     ◀




                                                                                                ICALP 2022
30:16   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


         4     Discussion and Open Problems
        Our investigation reveals all possible approximability types (in better-than-exhaustive-search
        time) for general classes of polynomial-time optimization problems, namely graph formulas in
        MaxSPk and MinSPk . Our results, which give an almost complete characterization, open
        up the following questions:
           Can we extend our classification beyond graph formulas, i.e., when we allow more binary
           relations, or even higher-arity relations? Such settings include, e.g., generalizations of
           Max k-XOR from F2 to Fq , or variants of the densest subgraph problem on hypergraphs.
           In our setting, each variable xi ranges over a separate set Xi , also known as a multichro-
           matic setting. We leave it open to transfer our results to the monochromatic setting (see
           e.g. [52]).
           While we consider running times expressed in the input size (as usual in database contexts),
           it would also be natural to consider parameterization in the number n of objects in the
           relational structure, see [68].
        Besides these extensions, we ask whether one can close the remaining gap in our classification:
        Do formulas ψ with Hand (ψ) = 2 and Hdeg (ψ) ≥ 3 admit an approximation scheme? As a
        specific challenge, we give the following open problem:
        ▶ Open Problem 1. Is there an approximation scheme for Maximum Exact-3-Cover (or its
        minimization variant)? Specifically, can we prove or rule out that for every ε > 0, there is
        some δ > 0 such that we can (1 + ε)-approximate Maximum Exact-3-Cover in time O(m3−δ )?
            It appears likely that showing existence of an approximation scheme for Maximum
        Exact-3-Cover would lead to a full characterization of MaxSPk .
            Finally, while we focused on the qualitative question whether or not exhaustive search
        can be beaten, a follow-up question is to determine precise approximability-time tradeoffs. In
        this vein, consider the well-studied Maximum k-Cover problem: A simple linear-time greedy
        approach is known to establish a (1 − 1/e)−1 -approximation [46]. Subsequent lower bounds
        show that this is conditionally best possible in polynomial-time [35] and even f (k)mo(k) -time
        (under Gap-ETH) [31, 59]. On the other hand, for every fixed k, we show (1) existence of
        an approximation scheme, but (2) rule out an efficient one assuming SETH, i.e., for every
        δ > 0, there is some ε > 0 such that an (1 + ε)-approximation requires time Ω(mk−δ ).
        ▶ Open Problem 2. Let k ≥ 2. Can we determine, for every 1 ≤ γ ≤ (1 − 1/e)−1 , the
        optimal exponent α of the fastest γ-approximation for Maximum k-Cover running in time
        O(mα±o(1) ), assuming plausible fine-grained hardness assumptions?
        Note that the extreme cases for γ = 1 and γ = (1 − 1/e)−1 are already settled and that
        [59] shows that for all immediate cases, α must have a linear dependence on k, assuming
        Gap-ETH.

              References
         1   Amir Abboud and Arturs Backurs. Towards hardness of approximation for polynomial time
             problems. In Proceedings of the 8th Conference on Innovations in Theoretical Computer
             Science, volume 67 of ITCS ’17, pages 11:1–11:26. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
             Informatik, 2017.
         2   Amir Abboud, Arturs Backurs, and Virginia Vassilevska Williams. Tight hardness results
             for LCS and other sequence similarity measures. In Proceedings of the 56th IEEE Annual
             Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’15, pages 59–78. IEEE Computer
             Society, 2015.
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, and M. Künnemann                                                   30:17


 3   Amir Abboud and Aviad Rubinstein. Fast and deterministic constant factor approximation
     algorithms for LCS imply new circuit lower bounds. In Proceedings of the 9th Conference
     on Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science, volume 94 of ITCS ’18, pages 35:1–35:14.
     Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018.
 4   Amir Abboud, Aviad Rubinstein, and Ryan Williams. Distributed PCP theorems for hardness
     of approximation in P. In Proceedings of the 58th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations
     of Computer Science, FOCS ’17, pages 25–36. IEEE Computer Society, 2017.
 5   Josh Alman, Timothy Chan, and Ryan Williams. Polynomial representations of threshold
     functions and algorithmic applications. In Proceedings of the 57th IEEE Annual Symposium on
     Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’16, pages 467–476. IEEE Computer Society, 2016.
 6   Josh Alman, Timothy Chan, and Ryan Williams. Faster deterministic and Las Vegas algorithms
     for offline approximate nearest neighbors in high dimensions. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual
     ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’20, pages 637–649. SIAM, 2020.
 7   Josh Alman and Virginia Vassilevska Williams. OV graphs are (probably) hard instances. In
     Proceedings of the 11th Conference on Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science, volume
     151 of ITCS ’20, pages 83:1–83:18. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020.
 8   Josh Alman and Virginia Vassilevska Williams. A refined laser method and faster matrix
     multiplication. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
     Algorithms, SODA ’21, pages 522–539. SIAM, 2021.
 9   Alexandr Andoni and Piotr Indyk. Near-optimal hashing algorithms for approximate near-
     est neighbor in high dimensions. In Proceedings of the 47th IEEE Annual Symposium on
     Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’06, pages 459–468. IEEE Computer Society, 2006.
10   Alexandr Andoni, Piotr Indyk, Huy L. Nguyen, and Ilya P. Razenshteyn. Beyond locality-
     sensitive hashing. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
     Algorithms, SODA ’14, pages 1018–1028. SIAM, 2014.
11   Alexandr Andoni, Piotr Indyk, and Ilya P. Razenshteyn. Approximate nearest neighbor search
     in high dimensions. In Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, ICM ’18,
     pages 3287–3318, 2018.
12   Alexandr Andoni, Robert Krauthgamer, and Krzysztof Onak. Polylogarithmic approximation
     for edit distance and the asymmetric query complexity. In Proceedings of the 51st IEEE
     Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’10, pages 377–386. IEEE
     Computer Society, 2010.
13   Alexandr Andoni and Negev Shekel Nosatzki. Edit distance in near-linear time: it’s a constant
     factor. In Proceedings of the 61st IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
     Science, FOCS ’20, pages 990–1001. IEEE, 2020.
14   Alexandr Andoni and Krzysztof Onak. Approximating edit distance in near-linear time. In
     Proceedings of the 41st Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’09, pages
     199–204. ACM, 2009.
15   Alexandr Andoni and Ilya P. Razenshteyn. Optimal data-dependent hashing for approximate
     near neighbors. In Proceedings of the 47th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
     STOC ’15, pages 793–801. ACM, 2015.
16   Arturs Backurs, Liam Roditty, Gilad Segal, Virginia Vassilevska Williams, and Nicole Wein.
     Towards tight approximation bounds for graph diameter and eccentricities. In Proceedings of
     the 50th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’18, pages 267–280. ACM,
     2018.
17   Ziv Bar-Yossef, T. S. Jayram, Robert Krauthgamer, and Ravi Kumar. Approximating edit
     distance efficiently. In Proceedings of the 45th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of
     Computer Science, FOCS ’04, pages 550–559. IEEE Computer Society, 2004.
18   Tugkan Batu, Funda Ergün, Joe Kilian, Avner Magen, Sofya Raskhodnikova, Ronitt Rubinfeld,
     and Rahul Sami. A sublinear algorithm for weakly approximating edit distance. In Proceedings
     of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’03, pages 316–324.
     ACM, 2003.




                                                                                                       ICALP 2022
30:18   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


        19    Tugkan Batu, Funda Ergün, and Süleyman Cenk Sahinalp. Oblivious string embeddings and
              edit distance approximations. In Proceedings of the 17th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
             Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’06, pages 792–801. SIAM, 2006.
        20    Allan Borodin, Rafail Ostrovsky, and Yuval Rabani. Subquadratic approximation algorithms
              for clustering problems in high dimensional spaces. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM
             Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’99, pages 435–444. ACM, 1999.
        21    Joshua Brakensiek and Aviad Rubinstein. Constant-factor approximation of near-linear edit
              distance in near-linear time. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory
             of Computing, STOC ’20, pages 685–698. ACM, 2020.
        22    Karl Bringmann. Why walking the dog takes time: Fréchet distance has no strongly sub-
              quadratic algorithms unless SETH fails. In Proceedings of the 55th IEEE Annual Symposium
             on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’15, pages 661–670. IEEE Computer Society,
             2014.
        23    Karl Bringmann, Alejandro Cassis, Nick Fischer, and Marvin Künnemann. Fine-grained
              completeness for optimization in P. In APPROX-RANDOM, volume 207 of LIPIcs, pages
              9:1–9:22. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2021.
        24    Karl Bringmann, Nick Fischer, and Marvin Künnemann. A fine-grained analogue of Schaefer’s
              theorem in P: Dichotomy of ∃k ∀-quantified first-order graph properties. In Proceedings of the
             34th Computational Complexity Conference, volume 137 of CCC ’19, pages 31:1–31:27. Schloss
              Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019.
        25    Karl Bringmann, Marvin Künnemann, and Karol Wegrzycki. Approximating APSP without
              scaling: Equivalence of approximate min-plus and exact min-max. In Proceedings of the 51st
             Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’19, pages 943–954. ACM, 2019.
        26    Diptarka Chakraborty, Debarati Das, Elazar Goldenberg, Michal Koucký, and Michael E.
              Saks. Approximating edit distance within constant factor in truly sub-quadratic time. In
             Proceedings of the 59th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS
             ’18, pages 979–990. IEEE Computer Society, 2018.
        27    Parinya Chalermsook, Marek Cygan, Guy Kortsarz, Bundit Laekhanukit, Pasin Manurangsi,
              Danupon Nanongkai, and Luca Trevisan. From gap-ETH to FPT-inapproximability: Clique,
              dominating set, and more. In Proceedings of the 58th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations
             of Computer Science, FOCS ’17, pages 743–754. IEEE Computer Society, 2017.
        28    Lijie Chen. On the hardness of approximate and exact (bichromatic) maximum inner product.
              In Proceedings of the 33th Computational Complexity Conference, volume 102 of CCC ’18,
              pages 14:1–14:45. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018.
        29    Lijie Chen, Shafi Goldwasser, Kaifeng Lyu, Guy N. Rothblum, and Aviad Rubinstein. Fine-
              grained complexity meets IP = PSPACE. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM-SIAM
             Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’19, pages 1–20. SIAM, 2019.
        30    Lijie Chen and Ryan Williams. An equivalence class for orthogonal vectors. In Proceedings
             of the 30th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’19, pages 21–40.
              SIAM, 2019.
        31    Vincent Cohen-Addad, Anupam Gupta, Amit Kumar, Euiwoong Lee, and Jason Li. Tight
              FPT approximations for k-median and k-means. In Proceedings of the 46th International
             Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, volume 132 of ICALP ’19, pages
             42:1–42:14. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019.
        32    Nadia Creignou. A dichotomy theorem for maximum generalized satisfiability problems. J.
             Comput. Syst. Sci., 51(3):511–522, 1995.
        33    Martin Dietzfelbinger, Philipp Schlag, and Stefan Walzer. A subquadratic algorithm for 3XOR.
              In Proceedings of the 43rd International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer
             Science, volume 117 of MFCS ’18, pages 59:1–59:15. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
              Informatik, 2018.
        34    Ran Duan and Seth Pettie. Linear-time approximation for maximum weight matching. J.
             ACM, 61(1):1:1–1:23, 2014.
K. Bringmann, A. Cassis, N. Fischer, and M. Künnemann                                                    30:19


35   Uriel Feige. A threshold of ln n for approximating set cover. J. ACM, 45(4):634–652, 1998.
36   Andreas Emil Feldmann, C. S. Karthik, Euiwoong Lee, and Pasin Manurangsi. A survey on
     approximation in parameterized complexity: Hardness and algorithms. Electronic Colloquium
     on Computational Complexity (ECCC), 27:86, 2020.
37   Harold N. Gabow. Scaling algorithms for network problems. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 31(2):148–
     168, 1985.
38   Jiawei Gao. On the fine-grained complexity of least weight subsequence in multitrees and
     bounded treewidth DAGs. In Proceedings of the 14th International Symposium on Parameter-
     ized and Exact Computation, volume 148 of IPEC ’19, pages 16:1–16:17. Schloss Dagstuhl -
     Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019.
39   Jiawei Gao and Russell Impagliazzo. The fine-grained complexity of strengthenings of first-order
     logic. Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC), 26:9, 2019.
40   Jiawei Gao, Russell Impagliazzo, Antonina Kolokolova, and Ryan Williams. Completeness
     for first-order properties on sparse structures with algorithmic applications. ACM Trans.
     Algorithms, 15(2):23:1–23:35, 2019.
41   Aristides Gionis, Piotr Indyk, and Rajeev Motwani. Similarity search in high dimensions
     via hashing. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases,
     VLDB ’99, pages 518–529. Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.
42   Ashish Goel, Piotr Indyk, and Kasturi R. Varadarajan. Reductions among high dimensional
     proximity problems. In Proceedings of the 12th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
     Algorithms, SODA ’01, pages 769–778. SIAM, 2001.
43   Elazar Goldenberg, Aviad Rubinstein, and Barna Saha. Does preprocessing help in fast
     sequence comparisons? In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
     Computing, STOC ’20, pages 657–670. ACM, 2020.
44   Sariel Har-Peled, Piotr Indyk, and Rajeev Motwani. Approximate nearest neighbor: Towards
     removing the curse of dimensionality. Theory of Computing, 8(1):321–350, 2012.
45   Johan Håstad. Some optimal inapproximability results. J. ACM, 48(4):798–859, 2001.
46   Dorit S. Hochbaum. Approximating Covering and Packing Problems: Set Cover, Vertex Cover,
     Independent Set, and Related Problems, pages 94–143. PWS Publishing Co., 1996.
47   Piotr Indyk. Dimensionality reduction techniques for proximity problems. In Proceedings of
     the 11th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’00, pages 371–378.
     SIAM, 2000.
48   Piotr Indyk. Better algorithms for high-dimensional proximity problems via asymmetric
     embeddings. In Proceedings of the 14th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms,
     SODA ’03, pages 539–545. SIAM, 2003.
49   Piotr Indyk and Rajeev Motwani. Approximate nearest neighbors: Towards removing the
     curse of dimensionality. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
     Computing, STOC ’98, pages 604–613. ACM, 1998.
50   Zahra Jafargholi and Emanuele Viola. 3SUM, 3XOR, triangles. Algorithmica, 74(1):326–343,
     2016.
51   C. S. Karthik, Bundit Laekhanukit, and Pasin Manurangsi. On the parameterized complexity
     of approximating dominating set. J. ACM, 66(5):33:1–33:38, 2019.
52   Karthik C. S. and Pasin Manurangsi. On closest pair in euclidean metric: Monochromatic is
     as hard as bichromatic. In Proceedings of the 10th Conference on Innovations in Theoretical
     Computer Science, volume 124 of ITCS ’19, pages 17:1–17:16. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-
     Zentrum für Informatik, 2019.
53   Sanjeev Khanna, Madhu Sudan, Luca Trevisan, and David P. Williamson. The approximability
     of constraint satisfaction problems. SIAM J. Comput., 30(6):1863–1920, 2000.
54   Donald E. Knuth. Dancing links. CoRR, abs/cs/0011047, 2000. arXiv:0011047.
55   Michal Koucký and Michael E. Saks. Constant factor approximations to edit distance on far
     input pairs in nearly linear time. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual ACM Symposium on
     Theory of Computing, STOC ’20, pages 699–712. ACM, 2020.




                                                                                                        ICALP 2022
30:20   A Structural Investigation of the Approximability of Polynomial-Time Problems


        56   Gad M. Landau, Eugene W. Myers, and Jeanette P. Schmidt. Incremental string comparison.
             SIAM J. Comput., 27(2):557–582, 1998.
        57   Bingkai Lin. Constant approximating k-clique is w[1]-hard. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual
             ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’21, pages 1749–1756. ACM, 2021.
        58   Andrea Lincoln, Virginia Vassilevska Williams, and Ryan Williams. Tight hardness for shortest
             cycles and paths in sparse graphs. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium
             on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’18, pages 1236–1252. SIAM, 2018.
        59   Pasin Manurangsi. Tight running time lower bounds for strong inapproximability of maximum
             k-coverage, unique set cover and related problems (via t-wise agreement testing theorem). In
             Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’20,
             pages 62–81. SIAM, 2020.
        60   Christos H. Papadimitriou and Mihalis Yannakakis. Optimization, approximation, and
             complexity classes. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 43(3):425–440, 1991.
        61   Liam Roditty and Virginia Vassilevska Williams. Fast approximation algorithms for the
             diameter and radius of sparse graphs. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual ACM Symposium on
             Theory of Computing, STOC ’13, pages 515–524. ACM, 2013.
        62   Aviad Rubinstein. Hardness of approximate nearest neighbor search. In Proceedings of the
             50th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’18, pages 1260–1268. ACM,
             2018.
        63   Noah Stephens-Davidowitz and Vinod Vaikuntanathan. SETH-hardness of coding problems.
             In Proceedings of the 60th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
             FOCS ’19, pages 287–301. IEEE Computer Society, 2019.
        64   Gregory Valiant. Finding correlations in subquadratic time, with applications to learning
             parities and the closest pair problem. J. ACM, 62(2), 2015.
        65   Virginia Vassilevska Williams. On some fine-grained questions in algorithms and complexity.
             In Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, ICM ’18, pages 3447–3487,
             2018.
        66   Ryan Williams. A new algorithm for optimal 2-constraint satisfaction and its implications.
             Theor. Comput. Sci., 348(2-3):357–365, 2005.
        67   Ryan Williams. Algorithms and resource requirements for fundamental problems. ProQuest
             LLC, Ann Arbor, MI, 2007. Thesis (Ph.D.)–Carnegie Mellon University.
        68   Ryan Williams. Faster decision of first-order graph properties. In Proceedings of the Joint
             Meeting of the 23rd EACSL Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic (CSL) and the
             29th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS), CSL-LICS ’14.
             ACM, 2014.
        69   Ryan Williams. On the difference between closest, furthest, and orthogonal pairs: Nearly-linear
             vs barely-subquadratic complexity. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium
             on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’18, pages 1207–1215. SIAM, 2018.
        70   Uri Zwick. All pairs shortest paths using bridging sets and rectangular matrix multiplication.
             J. ACM, 49(3):289–317, 2002.
