                                                                       Pseudo-Deterministic Proofs
                                                          Shafi Goldwasser             Ofer Grossman               Dhiraj Holden

                                                                                       June 16, 2017
arXiv:1706.04641v1 [cs.CC] 14 Jun 2017




                                                                                          Abstract
                                                  We introduce pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs (psdAM): interactive proof systems
                                              for search problems where the verifier is guaranteed with high probability to output the same
                                              output on different executions. As in the case with classical interactive proofs, the verifier is a
                                              probabilistic polynomial time algorithm interacting with an untrusted powerful prover.
                                                  We view pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs as an extension of the study of pseudo-
                                              deterministic randomized polynomial time algorithms: the goal of the latter is to find canonical
                                              solutions to search problems whereas the goal of the former is to prove that a solution to a
                                              search problem is canonical to a probabilistic polynomial time verifier. Alternatively, one may
                                              think of the powerful prover as aiding the probabilistic polynomial time verifier to find canonical
                                              solutions to search problems, with high probability over the randomness of the verifier. The
                                              challenge is that pseudo-determinism should hold not only with respect to the randomness, but
                                              also with respect to the prover: a malicious prover should not be able to cause the verifier to
                                              output a solution other than the unique canonical one.
                                                  We show the following results:
                                                 • A natural and illustrative example of a search problem in psdAM is the language where
                                                   given two isomorphic graphs (G0 , G1 ), the goal is to find an isomorphism φ from G0 to
                                                   G1 . We will show a constant round interactive proof where on every pair of input graphs
                                                   (G0 , G1 ), the verifier with high probability will output a unique isomorphism φ from G0
                                                   to G1 , although many isomorphisms may exist.
                                                 • In contrast, we show that it is unlikely that psdAM proofs with constant rounds exist for
                                                   NP-complete problems by showing that if any NP-complete problem has an psdAM proto-
                                                   col where the verifier outputs a unique witness with high probability, then the polynomial
                                                   hierarchy collapses.
                                                 • We show that for every problem in search-BPP, there exists a pseudo-deterministic MA
                                                   protocol which succeeds on infinitely many input lengths, where the verifier takes subex-
                                                   ponential time.
                                                 • Finally, we consider non-deterministic log-space NL algorithms with canonical outputs,
                                                   which we name pseudo-deterministic NL: on every input, for every non-deterministic choice
                                                   of the algorithm, either the algorithm rejects or it outputs a canonical unique output. We
                                                   show that every search problem in search-NL (solvable by a nondeterministic log-space
                                                   algorithm), is in pseudo-deterministic NL.
                                                 • We show that the class of pseudo-deterministic AM protocols equals the class of problems
                                                   solvable by polynomial time search algorithms with oracle access to promise-AM ∩ coAM,
                                                   where queries to the oracle must be in the promise. We show similar results for pseudo-
                                                   deterministic NP and pseudo-deterministic MA.


                                         1    Introduction
                                         In [6], Gat and Goldwasser initiated the study of probabilistic (polynomial-time) search algorithms
                                         that, with high probability, output the same solution on different executions. That is, for all inputs

                                                                                              1
x, the randomized algorithm A satisfies P rr1 ,r2 (A(x, r1 ) = A(x, r2 )) ≥ 1 − 1/poly(n).
    Another way of viewing such algorithms is that for a fixed binary relation R, for every x the
algorithm associates a canonical solution s(x) satisfying (x, s(x)) ∈ R, and on input x the algorithm
outputs s(x) with overwhelmingly high probability. Algorithms that satisfy this condition are
called pseudo-deterministic, because they essentially offer the same functionality as deterministic
algorithms; that is, they produce a canonical output for each possible input (except with small
error probability)1 . In contrast, arbitrary probabilistic algorithms that solve search problems may
output different solutions when presented with the same input (but using different internal coin
tosses); that is, on input x, the output may arbitrarily distributed among all valid solutions for x
(e.g. it may be uniformly distributed).
    Several pseudo-deterministic algorithms have been found which improve (sometimes signifi-
cantly) on the corresponding best known deterministic algorithm. This is the case for finding
quadratic non-residues modulo primes, generators for certain cyclic groups, non-zeros of multi-
variate polynomials, matchings in bipartite graphs in RNC, and sub-linear algorithms for several
problems [7, 9, 6, 12]. For other problems, such as finding unique primes of a given length, pseudo-
deterministic algorithms remain elusive (for the case of primes, it has been shown that there exists
a subexponential time pseudo-deterministic algorithm which works on infinitely many input sizes
[17]). Many general questions come to mind, the most significant being: Do polynomial-time
pseudo-deterministic algorithms exist for all search problems that can be solved in probabilistic
polynomial time?
    In this work we extend the study of pseudo-determinism in the context of probabilistic algo-
rithms to the context of interactive proofs and non-determinism. We view pseudo-deterministic
interactive proofs as a natural extension pseudo-deterministic randomized polynomial time algo-
rithms: the goal of the latter is to find canonical solutions to search problems whereas the goal of
the former is to prove that a solution to a search problem is canonical to a probabilistic polynomial
time verifier.

1.1    Our Contribution
Consider the search problem of finding a large clique in a graph. A nondeterministic efficient
algorithm for this problem exists: simply guess a set of vertices C, confirm in polynomial time that
the set of vertices forms a clique, and either output C or reject if C is not a clique. Interestingly,
in addition to being nondeterministic, there is another feature of this algorithm; on the same input
there may be many possible solutions to the search problem and any one of them may be produced
as output. Namely, on different executions of the algorithm, on the same input graph G, one
execution may guess clique C and another execution may guess clique C ′ 6= C, and both are valid
accepting executions. The Satisfiability (SAT) problem is another example for which the standard
non-deterministic algorithm may more than one output when one exists, i.e., there may be more
than one accepting path for the nondeterministic machine and different paths result in different
satisfying assignments.
    A natural question is whether for each satisfiable formula, there exists a unique canonical
satisfying assignment which can be verified in polynomial time: that is, can the verifier V be
convinced both of the satisfiability of the formula and that the satisfying assignment given to V is
canonical? We note that natural candidates which come to mind, such as the lexicographically first
satisfying assignment, are not known to be verifiable in polynomial time (but seem to require the
power of Σ2 computation). Furthermore, the work of Hemaspaandra et al [13] implies the collapse
   1
     In fact, by amplifying the success probability, one can ensure that as black boxes, pseudo-deterministic algorithms
are indistinguishable from deterministic algorithms by a polynomial time machine.


                                                           2
of the polynomial time hierarchy if for every SAT formula there exists a unique assignment which
is polynomial time verifiable in a one round deterministic protocol.
Pseudo-determinism for Interactive Proofs and Non-Deterministic Computations: In
this paper, we consider the setting of interactive proofs for search problems. Such interactive
proofs consist of a a pair of interacting algorithms: a probabilistic polynomial time verifier and a
computationally unbounded prover which on a common input x engage in rounds of interaction at
the end of which the verifier outputs y - a solution for the search problem on x. Analogously to the
case of interactive proofs for languages, we require that for every x, there exists an honest prover
which outputs a correct solution when one exists and for all dishonest provers the probability that
the verifier will accept an incorrect solution is small. We are interested in an additional feature:
the verifier is guaranteed with high probability over its randomness to accept a canonical (unique)
output solution and otherwise reject. Importantly, a dishonest prover may not cause the verifier to
output a solution other than the canonical (unique) one (except with very low probability).
    One may think of the powerful prover as aiding the probabilistic polynomial time verifier to find
canonical solutions to search problems, with high probability over the randomness of the verifier.
The challenge is that pseudo-determinism should hold not only with respect to the randomness,
but also with respect to the prover: a malicious prover should not be able to cause the verifier
to output a solution other than the canonical unique one. In addition to the intrinsic complexity
theoretic interest in this problem, consistency or predictability of different executions on the same
input are natural requirements from protocols.
    To formally study this problem, we define pseudo-deterministic IP (psdIP) to be the class of
search problems R (relation on inputs and solutions) for which there exists a probabilistic polyno-
mial time verifier for which for every x ∈ RL , there is a good powerful prover that will convince
the verifier to output with high probability a unique witness s(x) (referred to as the “canonical”
witness) such that (x, s(x)) ∈ R; and for every x not in RL (the set of x such that there does
not exist a y satisfying (x, y) ∈ R), for all provers the verifier will reject with high probability.
Furthermore, for all provers , the probability that on x ∈ RL , the verifier will output any witness y
other than the “canonical” s(x) is small. We let psdAM refer to those interactive proofs in which
a constant number of rounds is used.
    We remark that proving uniqueness of a witness for any NP problem can be done in by an inter-
active proof with a PSPACE prover – the prover can convince the verifier that a witness provided
is a lexicographically smallest witness – using an Arthur-Merlin proof which takes a polynomial
number of rounds of interaction between prover and verifier following the celebrated Sum-Check
protocol. The interesting question to ask is: do constant-round pseudo-deterministic interactive
proofs exist for hard problems in NP for which many witnesses exist?

Our Results

   • We show that there exists a pseudo-deterministic constant-round Arthur-Merlin protocol for
     finding an isomorphism between two given graphs.
     Recall that the first protocol showing graph non-isomorphism is in constant round IP was
     shown by [8] and later shown to be possible using public coins via the general transformation
     of private to public coins [10]. Our algorithm finds a unique isomorphism by producing the
     lexicographically first isomorphism. In order to prove that a particular isomorphism between
     input graph pairs is lexicographically smallest, the prover will prove in a sequence of sub-
     protocols to the verifier that a sequence of graphs suitably defined are non-isomorphic. In an
     alternative construction, we exhibit an interactive protocol that computes the automorphism
     group of a graph in a verifiable fashion.

                                                  3
   • We prove that if any NP-complete problem has a a pseudo-deterministic constant round AM
     protocol, then, NP ⊆ coNP/poly and the polynomial hierarchy collapses to the third level,
     showing that it is unlikely that NP complete problems have pseudo-deterministic constant
     round AM protocols. This result extends the work of [13] which shows that if there are
     polynomial time unique verifiable proofs for SAT, then the polynomial hierarchy collapses.
     Essentially, their result held for deterministic interactive proofs (i.e., NP), and we extend
     their result to probabilistic interactive proofs with constant number of rounds (i.e., AM).
   • For every problem in search-BPP, there exists a pseudo-deterministic MA protocol where the
     verifier takes subexponential time on infinitely many input lengths.
      The idea of the result is to use known circuit lower bounds to get pseudo-deterministic subex-
      ponential time MA protocols for problems in search-BPP for infinitely many input lengths.
      We remark that recently Oliveira and Santhanam [17] showed a subexponential time pseudo-
      deterministic algorithm for infinitely many input lengths for all properties which have inverse
      polynomial density, and are testable in polynomial time. In their construction, the condi-
      tion of high density is required. In the case of MA, unconditional circuit lower bounds for
      MA with a verifier which runs in exponential time have been shown by Miltersen et al [15],
      which means that inverse polynomial density is no longer required. Hence, we can obtain
      a pseudo-deterministic MA algorithm from circuit lower bounds. Thus, compared to [17],
      our result shows a pseudo-derandomization (for a subexponential verifier and infinitely many
      input sizes n) for all problems in search-BPP (and not just those with high density), but
      requires a prover.
   • For every search problem in search-NL, there exists a pseudo-deterministic NL protocol.
      We define pseudo-deterministic NL to be the class of search problems R (a relation on inputs
      and solutions) for which there exists log-space non-deterministic algorithm M (Turing ma-
      chines) such that for every input x, there exists a unique s(x) such that R(x, s(x)) = 1 and
      M (x) outputs s(x) or rejects x. Namely, there are no two accepting paths for input x that
      result in different outputs.
   • We show structural results regarding pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs. Specifically,
     we show that psdAM equals to the class search−Ppromise−(AM∩coAM) , where for valid inputs
     x, all queries to the oracle must be in the promise. We show similar results in the case of
     pseudo-deterministic MA and pseudo-deterministic NP.

1.2   Other Related Work
In their seminal paper on NP with unique solutions, Valiant and Vazirani asked the following
question: is the inherent intractability of NP-complete problems caused by the fact that NP-
complete problems have many solutions? They show this is not the case by exhibiting a problem
– SAT with unique solutions– which is NP-hard under randomized reductions. They then showed
how their result enables to show the NP-hardness under randomized reductions for a few related
problems such as parity-SAT. We point out that our question is different. We are not restricting
our study to problems (e.g. satisfiable formulas) with unique solutions. Rather, we consider hard
problems for which there may be exponentially many solutions, and ask if one can focus on one of
them and verify it in polynomial time. In the language of satisfiability, φ can be any satisfiable
formula with exponentially many satisfying assignments; set s(φ) to be a unique valued function
which outputs a satisfying assignment for φ. We study whether there exists an s which can be
efficiently computed, or which has an efficient interactive proof.

                                                 4
    The question of computing canonical labellings of graphs was considered by Babai and Luks
[4] in the early eighties. Clearly graph isomorphism is polynomial time reducible to computing
canonical labellings of graphs (compute the canonical labeling for your graphs and compare), how-
ever it is unknown whether the two problems are equivalent (although finding canonical labellings
in polynomial time seems to be known for all classes of graphs for which isomorphism can be
computed in polynomial time). The problem of computing a set of generators (of size O(log n))
of the automorphism group of a graph G was shown by Mathon [14] (among other results) to be
polynomial-time reducible to the problem of computing the isomorphism of a graph. We use this
in our proof that graph isomorphism is in psdAM.
    Finally, we mention that recently another notion of uniqueness has been studied in the context
of interactive proofs by Reingold et al [18], called unambiguous interactive proofs where the prover
has a unique successful strategy. This again differs from pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs, in
that we don’t assume (nor guarantee) a unique strategy by the successful prover, we only require
that the prover proves that the solution (or witness) the verifier receives is unique (with high
probability).


2     Definitions
In this section, we define pseudo-determinism in the context of nondeterminism and interactive
proofs. We begin by defining a search problem. Intuitively speaking, a search problem is a problem
where for an input, there may be multiple possible outputs.

Definition 2.1 (Search Problem). A search problem is a relation R consisting of pairs (x, y). We
define LR to be the set of x’s such that there exists a y satisfying (x, y) ∈ R. An algorithm solving
the search problem is an algorithm that, when given x ∈ LR , finds a y such that (x, y) ∈ R. When
LR contains all strings, we say that R is a total search problem. Otherwise, we say R is a promise
search problem.

    We now define pseudo-determinism in the context of interactive proofs. Intuitively speaking,
we say that an interactive proof is pseudo-deterministic if an honest prover causes the verifier to
output the same unique solution with high probability, and dishonest provers can only cause the
verifier to output either the unique solution or ⊥ with high probability. In other words, dishonest
provers cannot cause the verifier to output an answer which is not the unique answer. We note that
we use psdIP, psdAM, psdNP, psdMA, and so on, to refer to a class of promise problems, unless
otherwise stated.

Definition 2.2 (Pseudo-deterministic IP). A search problem R is in pseudo-deterministic IP (often
denoted psdIP) if there exists an interactive protocol between a probabilistic polynomial time
verifier algorithm V and a prover (unbounded algorithm) P such that for every x ∈ LR , there
exists a s(x) satisfying (x, s(x)) ∈ R and:

    1. There exists a P such that Prr [(P, V )(x, r) = s(x)] ≥ 23 .

    2. For all P ′ , Prr [(P ′ , V )(x, r) = s(x) or ⊥] ≥ 32 .

                / LR , for all provers P ′ , Prr [(P ′ , V )(x, r) 6= ⊥] ≤ 31 .
And for every x ∈

    One can similarly define pseudo-deterministic MA, and pseudo-deterministic AM, where MA
is a 1-round protocol, and AM is a 2-round protocol. One can show that any constant-round
interactive protocol can be reduced to a 2-round interactive protocol [3]. Hence, the definition of

                                                          5
pseudo-deterministic AM captures the set of all search problems solvable in a constant number of
rounds of interaction. Furthermore, in the definition of pseudo-deterministic AM, we use public
coins. One can show that any protocol using private coins can be simulated using public coins2 [10].
Definition 2.3 (Pseudo-deterministic AM). A search problem R is in pseudo-deterministic AM
(often denoted psdAM) if there exists a probabilistic polynomial time verifier algorithm V , polyno-
mials p and q, and for every x ∈ LR , there exists an s(x) of polynomial size satisfying (x, s(x)) ∈ R
and:
   1. Prr∈{0,1}p(n) (∃z ∈ {0, 1}q(n) V (x, r, z) = s(x)) ≥ 23

   2. Prr∈{0,1}p(n) (∀z ∈ {0, 1}q(n) V (x, r, z) ∈ {s(x), ⊥}) ≥ 23 .

                / LR , we have Prr∈{0,1}p(n) (∀z ∈ {0, 1}q(n) V (x, r, z) = {⊥}) ≥ 32 .
And for every x ∈
Definition 2.4 (Pseudo-deterministic MA). A search problem R is in pseudo-deterministic MA if
there is a probabilistic polynomial time verifier V such that for every x ∈ LR , there exists an s(x)
of polynomial size satisfying3 :
   1. There exists a message M of polynomial size such that Prr [V (x, M, r) = s(x)] ≥ 23 .

   2. For all M ′ , Prr [V (x, M ′ , r) = s(x) or ⊥] > 23 .
                / LR , for all M ′ , Prr [V (x, M ′ , r) 6= ⊥] ≤ 31 .
And for every x ∈
   Pseudo-determinism can similarly be defined in the context of nondeterminism (which can be
viewed as a specific case of an interactive proof):
Definition 2.5 (Pseudo-deterministic NP). A search problem R is in pseudo-deterministic NP if
there is a deterministic polynomial time verifier V such that for every x ∈ LR , there exists an s(x)
of polynomial size satisfying (x, s(x)) ∈ R and:
   1. There exists a message M of polynomial size such that V (x, M ) = s(x).

   2. For all M ′ , V (x, M ′ ) = s(x) or V (x, M ′ ) = ⊥.
                / LR , for all M ′ , we have V (x, M ′ , r) = ⊥.
And for every x ∈
   One can also consider the following alternate equivalent definition for pseudo-deterministic NP.
On an input x ∈ LR , we require that for all nondeterministic choices of the machine, either the
machine outputs ⊥ or s(x). Furthermore, we require that there exist a sequence of nondeter-
ministic choices such that the output is s(x). In the case where x ∈  / LR , we require that for all
nondeterministic choices of the machine, the output is ⊥.
   Another alternate equivalent definition is that a search problem is in NP if it can be solved by
an NP machine which has a unique accept configuration (i.e., the set of possible configurations of
the NP machine and its tape when reaching an accept state has a single element).
   We now define pseudo-deterministic NL:
Definition 2.6 (Pseudo-deterministic NL). A search problem R is in pseudo-deterministic NL if
there is a nondeterministic log-space machine V such that for every x ∈ LR , there exists an s(x) of
polynomial size satisfying (x, s(x)) ∈ R and:
   2
    In the case where the prover is not unbounded, private coins may be more powerful than public coins.
   3
    We remark that we use M to denote the proof sent by the prover Merlin, and not the algorithm implemented by
the prover.


                                                        6
    1. There exist nondeterministic choices N for the machine such that such that V (x, N ) = s(x).

    2. For all possible nondeterministic choices N ′ , V (x, N ′ ) = s(x) or V (x, N ′ ) = ⊥.

                / LR , for all nondeterministic choices N ′ , V (x, N ′ ) = ⊥.
And for every x ∈

   It is valuable to contrast the above definition with the definition of search-NL, in which it is
possible to have different nondeterministic guesses of the machine result in different answers:

Definition 2.7 (search-NL). A search problem R is in search-NL if there is a nondeterministic
log-space machine V such that for every x ∈ LR ,

    1. There exist nondeterministic choices N for the machine such that such that V (x, N ) = y,
       and (x, y) ∈ R.

    2. For all possible nondeterministic choices N ′ , (x, V (x, N ′ )) ∈ R, or V (x, N ′ ) = ⊥.

                / LR , for all nondeterministic choices N ′ , V (x, N ′ ) = ⊥.
And for every x ∈

    Intuitively speaking, in the case of search-NL, it is okay for the algorithm to output different
correct solutions when using different nondeterministic choices. In the case of pseudo-deterministic-
NL, there should not be two nondeterministic choices for the algorithm which result in different
answers (on input x, every set of nondeterministic choices which leads to an answer which is not
⊥ should lead to the same answer s(x)).
    We will also use the following definition of search-BPP, the class of search problem solvable
(and verifiable) in probabilistic polynomial time:

Definition 2.8 (Search-BPP). A binary relation R is in search-BP P if

    1. There is a probabilistic polynomial time algorithm A that given x ∈ RL , outputs a y such
       that with probability at least 2/3, (x, y) ∈ R.

    2. There is a probabilistic polynomial time machine B such if y is output by A when run on
       x, and (x, y) ∈
                     / R, then B rejects on (x, y) with probability at least 2/3. Furthermore, with
       probability at least 1/2, B accepts on (x, y) with probability at least 1/2.

When x ∈
       / RL , A outputs ⊥ with probability at least 2/3.

   The intuition of the above definition is that A is used to find an output y, and then B can be
used to verify y, and amplify the success probability.


3     Pseudo-deterministic-AM algorithm for graph isomorphism
In this section, we show an interactive protocol for graph isomorphism that produces a unique
isomorphism with high probability. The method we use to do this involves finding the lexicographi-
cally first isomorphism using group theory. In particular, the verifier will obtain the automorphism
group of one of the graphs from the prover and verify that it is indeed the automorphism group, and
then the verifier will convert an isomorphism obtained from the prover into the lexicographically
first isomorphism between the two graphs. We will define the group-theoretic terms used below.
     We present an alternate proof of the same result in the appendix (the proof in the appendix is
more combinatorial, whereas the proof below is more group theoretic).



                                                      7
Definition 3.1 (Automorphism Group). The automorphism group Aut(G) of a graph is the set of
permutations φ : G → G such that for every u, v ∈ V (G), (u, v) ∈ E(G) ⇐⇒ (φ(u), φ(v)) ∈ E(G)
(i.e., φ is an automorphism of G).

Definition 3.2 (Stabilize). Given a set S and elements α1 , α2 , ..., αi ∈ S, we say that a permutation
φ : S → S stabilizes {α1 , α2 , ..., αk } iff φ(αi ) = αi for i ∈ {1, ..., k}. We also say that a group G
stabilizes {α1 , α2 , ..., αk } when every φ ∈ G stabilizes {α1 , α2 , ..., αk }.

Definition 3.3 (Stabilizer). The stabilizer of an element s in S for a group G acting on S is the
set of elements of G that stabilize s.

Lemma 3.4. Suppose that we are given a tuple (G1 , G2 , H, φ) where G1 and G2 are graphs, H =
Aut(G1 ) is represented as a set of generators, and φ an isomorphism between G1 and G2 . Then,
in polynomial time, we can compute a unique isomorphism φ∗ from G1 to G2 independent of the
choice of φ and the representation of H.

Proof. We use the algorithm given in [5] to compute a canonical coset representative, observing
that the set of isomorphisms between G1 and G2 is a coset of the automorphism group of G1 . Let
α1 , ..., αt be a basis of H, i.e., a set such that any h ∈ H fixing α1 , ..., αt is the identity. Let Hi be
the subgroup of H that stabilizes α1 , ..., αi−1 . Now, let Ui be a set of coset representatives of Hi+1
in Hi . Given the generators of Hi , we can calculate Ui , and by Schreier’s theorem we can calculate
the generators for Hi+1 . In this fashion, we can get generators and coset representatives for all the
Hi . To produce φ∗ , we do the following.

Find-First-Isomorphism
1 φ∗ = φ
2 For i = 1, ..., t
3      Let Pi = {φ∗ u|u ∈ Ui }.
4      Set φ∗ = arg minφ∈Pi (φ(αi )).
To see that this produces a unique isomorphism that does not depend on φ, observe that φ∗ (α1 )
is the minimum possible value of φ(α1 ) over all isomorphisms of G1 to G2 as U1 is a set of coset
representatives for the stabilizer of α1 over H. Also, if φ∗ (αi ) is fixed for i ∈ {1, ..., k}, then φ∗ (αk+1 )
is the minimum possible value of φ(αk+1 ) over all isomorphisms which take α1 to φ∗ (α1 ), α2 to
φ∗ (α2 ),..., and αk to φ∗ (αk ), as Ui+1 stabilizes α1 , ..., αk , so everything in Pi+1 takes α1 to φ∗ (α1 ),
α2 to φ∗ (α2 ),..., and αk to φ∗ (αk ). This implies that φ∗ does not depend on φ and is unique.

    Given this result, this means that it suffices to show a protocol that lets the verifier obtain a
set of generators for the automorphism group of G1 and an isomorphism that are correct with high
probability, as by the above lemma this can be used to obtain a unique isomorphism between G1
and G2 independent of the isomorphism or the generators.

Theorem 3.5. There exists an interactive protocol for graph isomorphism such that with high
probability, the isomorphism that is output by the verifier is unique, where in the case of a cheating
prover the verifier fails instead of outputting a non-unique isomorphism. In other words, finding
an isomorphism between graphs can be done in psdAM.

Proof. From Lemma 3.4, it suffices to show an interactive protocol that computes the automorphism
group of a graph in a verifiable fashion. [14] reduces the problem of computing the generators of
the automorphism group to the problem of finding isomorphisms. Using this reduction, we can
make a constant-round interactive protocol to determine the automorphism group by finding the

                                                       8
isomorphisms in parallel. The reason we can do this in parallel is that [14] implies that there
are O(n4 ) different pairs of graphs to check and for each pair of graphs we either run the graph
isomorphism protocol or the graph non-isomorphism protocol. In the case of the graph isomorphism
protocol, the verifier need only accept with an isomorphism in hand; for graph non-isomorphism, the
messages sent to the prover are indistinguishable between the two graphs when they are isomorphic,
so since the graphs and permutations are chosen independently, there is no way for the prover to
correlate their answers to gain a higher acceptance probability for isomorphic graphs. Thus this
means that the verifier can determine the automorphism group of a graph and verify that it is indeed
the entire automorphism group. Using Lemma 3.4 we then see that the prover just has to give the
verifier an isomorphism, and verifier can compute a unique isomorphism using the automorphism
group.

    We note that in the above protocol, the prover only needs to have the power to solve graph
isomorphism (and graph non-isomorphism). Also, we note that the above protocol uses private
coins. While the protocol can be simulated with a public coin protocol [10], the simulation requires
the prover to be very powerful. It remains open to determine whether there is a pseudo-deterministic
AM protocol for graph isomorphism which uses public coins, and uses a “weak” prover (one which
is a polynomial time machine with access to an oracle solving graph isomorphism).


4    Lower bound on pseudo-deterministic AM algorithms
In this section, we establish that if any NP-complete problem has an AM protocol that outputs a
unique witness with high probability, then the polynomial hierarchy collapses. We rely on tech-
niques in [13] combined with the fact that AM is contained in NP/poly.
    We begin by proving that psdAM ⊆ psdNP/poly:

Lemma 4.1. Suppose that there is a psdAM protocol for a search problem R, which on input
x ∈ LR , outputs f (x). Then, the search problem R has a psdNP/poly algorithm which, on input x,
outputs f (x).

Proof. This proof is similar to the proof that AM ⊆ NP/poly, which uses techniques similar to
those of Adleman’s theorem [1], showing BPP ⊆ P/poly.
    Consider the psdAM protocol, and suppose that on input x ∈ LR , it outputs f (x).
    Since we are guaranteed that when the verifier of the the psdAM accepts, it will output f (x)
with high probability, we can use standard amplification techniques to show that the verifier will
output f (x) with probability 1 − o(exp(−n)), assuming an honest prover, and will output anything
other than f (x) with probability o(exp(−n)), even with a malicious prover. Then, by a union
bound, there exists a choice of random string r that makes the verifier output f (x) for all inputs
x ∈ {0, 1}n of size n with an honest prover, and that for malicious provers, the verifier will either
reject or output f (x). We encode this string r as the advice string for the NP/poly machine.
    The NP/poly machine computing f can read r off the advice tape and then guess the prover’s
message, and whenever the verifier accepts, f (x) will be output by that branch. Thus f (x) can be
computed by an NP/poly machine.

   Next, we show that if an NP-complete problem has a pseudo-deterministic-NP/poly algorithm,
then the polynomial hierarchy collapses.

Theorem 4.2. Let L ∈ NP be an NP-complete problem. Let R be a polynomial time algorithm
such that there exists a polynomial p so that x ∈ L if and only if ∃y ∈ {0, 1}p(|x|) R(x, y). Suppose


                                                 9
that there is a psdAM protocol that when given some x ∈ L, outputs a unique f (x) ∈ {0, 1}p(|x|)
such that R(x, f (x)) = 1. Then, NP ⊆ coNP/poly and the polynomial hierarchy collapses to the
third level.

Proof. From Lemma 4.1, we have that there exists psdNP/poly algorithm that given x ∈ L, outputs
a unique witness f (x) for x. Given this function f , we construct a function g(x, y) which outputs
one of x, y or ⊥, such that either g(x, y) = ⊥ or g(x, y) ∈ L (where the latter holds if at least one
of x or y is in L). Furthermore, we will ensure that g is computable in NP/poly.
    To see this, let g′ (x, y) be the function which outputs the set {x, y} ∩ L. We construct g by
reducing the language {(x, y)|g′ (x, y) 6= ∅} (which is in NP, and hence reducible to L, since L is
NP-complete) to L and computing f to find a unique witness in NP/poly. We then test whether
that witness is a witness for x or for y. If the witness is for x, we set g(x, y) = x. Otherwise, if
the witness is for y, we set g(x, y) = y. We view g as a function on the set {x, y}. That is, we set
g(x, y) = g(y, x) (if a function g does not satisfy this property, we can create a g∗ satisfying this
property by setting g∗ (x, y) = g(min(x, y), max(x, y))).
    Using g, we will show how to compute L in coNP/poly. We construct the advice string for L
for length n as follows. Start out with S = ∅. Every iteration, we can find a y ∈ {0, 1}n ∩ L such
that g(x, y) = x for at least half of the set {x ∈ {0, 1}n ∩ L|g(x, s) = s∀s ∈ S}. Such an s exists
since in expectation, when picking a random s, half of the x’s will satisfy g(x, s) = x. If we keep
doing this, we get a set S with |S| ≤ poly(n) such that for every x ∈ L of length n, there exists an
s ∈ S such that g(x, s) = x.
    Now, the algorithm to check if x ∈   / L in NP/poly is as follows: first, we compute g(x, s) for
every s ∈ S, where S is constructed as above and put on the advice tape, which can be done in
NP/poly, and check that g(x, s) = s for every s ∈ S which is possible because |S| is polynomial in
n. It is clear that this algorithm accepts if x ∈
                                                / L and rejects if x ∈ L, so therefore L ∈ coNP/poly,
which implies that NP ⊆ coNP/poly. Furthermore, NP ⊆ coNP/poly implies that the polynomial
hierarchy collapses to the third level.


5       Pseudo-deterministic derandomization for BPP in subexponen-
        tial time MA
In this section, we will show how to use known circuit lower bounds to get pseudo-deterministic
subexponential time MA protocols for problems in search-BPP for infinitely many input lengths.
In [17], it is shown that there is a subexponential time pseudo-deterministic ZPP algorithm for
infinitely many input lengths for all properties which have inverse polynomial density, and are
testable in polynomial time4 . A notable example of such a property is primality. So as a corollary,
in [17] it is shown that given some integer n, one can find a prime greater than n in pseudo-
deterministic subexponential time, for infinitely many input lengths.
    In their construction, the condition of high density is required because they show that either
there exists a subexponential sized hitting set for infinitely many input lengths which can be used
to find strings with the property deterministically, or a complexity collapse happens which implies
circuit lower bounds which give pseudo-deterministic algorithms. In the case of MA, unconditional
circuit lower bounds for MAEXP have been shown [15], which means that inverse polynomial density
is no longer required. Hence, we can obtain a pseudo-deterministic MA algorithm directly from cir-
cuit lower bounds. Compared to [17], our result manages to show a certain pseudo-derandomization
    4
    We believe that their analysis can be improved to get a half-exponential time bounded-error pseudo-deterministic
algorithm, which is better than our result for properties of inverse polynomial density.


                                                        10
for all problems in search-BPP (and not just those with high density), but requires a prover.

Theorem 5.1. Given a problem R in search-BPP, it is possible to obtain a pseudo-deterministic
MA algorithm for R where the verifier takes subexponential time for infinitely many input lengths.

Proof. From [15], we see that MAEXP ∩ coMAEXP cannot be approximated by half-exponential
sized circuits for infinitely many input lengths. From [16], this means that in half-exponential time
MA, we can construct a pseudorandom generator with half-exponential stretch which is secure
against any given polynomial-size circuit for infinitely many input lengths. If the verifier then
runs through each output of the pseudorandom generator on the search-BPP problem and for each
possible output tests whether it is a valid output (which can be done in BPP, and hence also in
MA). Then, it returns the first such valid output.
    This will output the same solution whenever the verifier both gets the correct truth-table for the
PRG, and succeeds in testing for each PRG output whether the output it provides is valid. Both
of these happen with high probability, and thus this is a pseudo-deterministic subexponential-time
MA algorithm for any problem in search-BPP which succeeds on infinitely many input lengths.


6    Uniqueness in NL
In this section, we prove that every problem in search-NL can be made pseudo-deterministic:

Theorem 6.1 (Pseudo-determinism NL). Every search problem in search-NL is in psdNL.

    Intuitively speaking, one can think of the search problem as: given a directed graph G, and
two vertices s and t such that there is a path from s to t, find a path from s to t. Note that
the standard nondeterministic algorithm of simply guessing a path will result in different paths
for different nondeterministic guesses. Our goal will be to find a unique path, so that on different
nondeterministic choices, we will not end up with a path which is not the unique one.
    The idea will be to find the lexicographically first shortest path (i.e, if the min-length path from
s to t is of length d, we will output the lexicographically first path of length d from s to t). To do
so, first we will determine the length d of the min-length path from s to t. Then, for each neighbor
of s, we will check if it has a path of length d − 1 to t, and move to the first such neighbor. Now,
we have reduced the problem to finding a unique path of length d − 1, which we can do recursively.
    The full proof is given below:

Proof. Given a problem in search-NL, consider the set of all min-length computation histories. We
will find the lexicographically first successful computation history in this set.
    To do so, we first (nondeterministically) compute the length of the min-length computation
history. This can be done because coNL = NL (so if the shortest computation history is of size T ,
one can show a history of size T . Also, because it is coNL to show that there is no history of size
up to T − 1, we can show that there is no history of size less than T in NL).
    In general, using the same technique, given a state S of the NL machine, we can tell what is
the shortest possible length for a successful computation history starting at S.
    Our algorithm will proceed as follows. Given a state S (which we initially set to be the initial
configuration of the NL machine), we will compute T , the length of the shortest successful com-
putation path starting at S. Then, for each possible nondeterministic choice, we will check (in
NL) whether there exists a computation history of length T − 1 given that nondeterministic choice.
Then, we will choose the lexicographically first such nondeterministic choice, and recurse.



                                                  11
   This algorithm finds the lexicographically first computation path of minimal length which is
unique. Hence, the algorithm will always output the same solution (or reject), so the algorithm is
pseudo-deterministic.


7        Structural Results
In [7], Goldreich et al showed that the set of total search problems solved by pseudo-deterministic
polynomial time randomized algorithms equals the set of total search problems solved by determin-
istic polynomial time algorithms, with access to an oracle to decision problems in BPP. In [9], this
result was extended to the context of RNC. We show analogous theorems here. In the context of
MA, we show that for total search problems, psdMA = search−PMA∩coMA .5 In other words, any
pseudo-deterministic MA algorithm can be simulated by a polynomial time search algorithm with
an oracle solving decision problems in MA ∩ coMA, and vice versa.
    In the case of search problems that are not total, we show that psdMA equals to the class
search−Ppromise−(MA∩coMA) , where when the input x is in LR , all queries to the oracle must be in
the promise. We note that generally, when having an oracle to a promise problem, one is allowed
to query the oracle on inputs not in the promise, as long as the output of the algorithm as a whole
is correct for all possible answers the oracle gives to such queries. In our case, we simply do not
allow queries to the oracle to be in the promise. Such reductions have been called smart reductions
[11].
    We show similar theorems for AM, and NP. Specifically, we show psdAM = search−Ppromise−(AM∩coAM)
and psdNP = search−Ppromise−(NP∩coNP) , where the reductions to the oracles are smart reductions.
    In the case of total problems, one can use a similar technique to show psdAM = search−PAM∩coAM
and psdNP = search−PNP∩coNP , where the oracles can only return answers to total decision prob-
lems.
Theorem 7.1. The class psdMA equals the class search−Ppromise−(MA∩coMA) , where on any input
x ∈ LR , the all queries to the oracle are in the promise.
Proof. The proof is similar to the proofs in [7] and [9] which show similar reductions to decision prob-
lems in the context of pseudo-deterministic polynomial time algorithms and pseudo-deterministic
NC algorithms.
    First, we show that a polynomial time algorithm with an oracle for promise−(MA ∩ coMA)
decision problems which only asks queries in the promise has a corresponding pseudo-deterministic
MA algorithm. Consider a polynomial time algorithm A which uses an oracle for promise−(MA ∩
coMA). We can simulate A by an MA protocol where the prover sends the verifier the proof for
every question which A asks the oracle. Then, the verifier can simply run the algorithm from A,
and whenever he accesses the oracle, he instead verifies the proof sent to him by the prover.
    We note that the condition of a smart reduction is required in order for the prover to be able to
send to the verifier the list of all queries A will make to the oracle. If A can ask the oracle queries
not in the promise, it may be that on different executions of A, different queries will be made to
the oracle (since A is a adaptive, and the queries A makes may depend on the answers returned
by the oracle for queries not in the promise), so the prover is unable to predict what queries A will
need answered.
    We now show that a pseudo-deterministic MA algorithm B has a corresponding polynomial time
algorithm A that uses a promise−(MA∩coMA) oracle while only querying on inputs in the promise.
On input x ∈ LR , the polynomial time algorithm can ask the promise−(MA ∩ coMA) oracle for the
    5
        What we call search−P is often denoted as FP.


                                                        12
first bit of the unique answer given by B. This is a decision problem in promise−(MA∩coMA) since
it has a constant round interactive proof (namely, run B and then output the first bit). Similarly,
the algorithm A can figure out every other bit of the unique answer, and then concatenate those
bits to obtain the full output.
     Note that it is required that the oracle is for promise−(MA∩coMA), and not just for promise−MA,
since if one of the bits of the output is 0, the verifier must be able to convince the prover of that
(and this would require a promise−coMA protocol).

   A very similar proof shows the following:
Theorem 7.2. The class psdNP equals the class search−Ppromise−(NP∩coNP) , where on any input
x ∈ LR , all queries to the oracle are in the promise.
   We now prove a similar theorem for the case of AM protocols. We note that this is slightly
more subtle, since it’s not clear how to simulate a search−Ppromise−(AM∩coAM) protocol using only a
constant number of rounds of interaction, since the search-P algorithm may ask polynomial many
queries in an adaptive fashion.
Theorem 7.3. The class psdAM equals the class search−Ppromise−(AM∩coAM) , where on any input
x ∈ LR , the all queries to the oracle are in the promise.
Proof. First, we show that a polynomial time algorithm with an oracle for promise−(AM ∩ coAM)
decision problems where the queries are all in the promise has a corresponding pseudo-deterministic
AM algorithm. We proceed similarly to the proof of Theorem 7.1. Consider a polynomial time
algorithm A which uses an oracle for promise−(AM ∩ coAM). The prover will internally sim-
ulate that algorithm A, and then send to the verifier a list of all queries that A makes to the
promise−(AM ∩ coAM) oracle. Then, the prover can prove the answer (in parallel), to all of those
queries.
    To prove correctness, suppose that the prover lies about at least one of the oracle queries. Then,
consider the first oracle query to which the prover lied. Then, by a standard simulation argument,
one can show that it can be made overwhelmingly likely that the verifier will discover that the
prover lied on that query.
    Once all queries have been answered by the verifier the algorithm B can run like A, but instead
of querying the oracle, it already knows the answer since the prover has proved it to him.
    The proof that a pseudo-deterministic MA algorithm B has a corresponding polynomial time
algorithm A that uses an promise−(AM ∩ coAM) oracle is identical to the proof of Theorem 7.1

    As a corollary of the above, we learn that private coins are no more powerful than public coins
in the pseudo-deterministic setting:
Corollary 7.4. A pseudo-deterministic constant round interactive proof using private coins can be
simulated by a pseudo-deterministic constant round interactive proof using public coins.
Proof. By Theorem 7.3, we can view the algorithm as an algorithm in search−PAM∩coAM .
    By a similar argument to that in Theorem 7.3, one can show that psdIP = search−PIP∩coIP ,
where in this context IP refers to constant round interactive proofs using private coins, and AM
refers to constant round interactive proofs using public coins. Since promise−(AM ∩ coAM) =
promise−(IP∩coIP), since every constant round private coin interactive proof for decision problems
can be simulated by a constant round interactive proof using public coins [10], we have:

            psdAM = search−Ppromise−(AM∩coAM) = search−Ppromise−(IP∩coIP) = psdIP.



                                                 13
8    Discussion and Open Problems
Pseudo-determinism and TFNP: The class of total search problems solvable by pseudo-
deterministic NP algorithms is a very natural subset of TFNP, the set of all total NP search
problems. It is interesting to understand how the set of total psdNP problems fits in TFNP. For
example, it is not known whether TFNP = psdNP. It would be interesting either to show that
every problem in TFNP has a pseudo-deterministic NP algorithm, or to show that under plausible
assumptions there is a problem in TFNP which does not have a pseudo-deterministic NP algorithm.
     Similarly, it is interesting to understand the relationship of psdNP to other subclasses of TFNP.
For example, one can ask whether every problem in PPAD has a pseudo-deterministic NP algorithm
(i.e., given a game, does there exists a pseudo-deterministic NP or AM algorithm which outputs a
Nash Equilibrium), or whether under plausible assumptions this is not the case. Similar questions
can be asked for CLS, PPP, and so on.

Pseudo-determinism in Lattice problems: There are several problems in the context of
lattices which have NP (and often also NP ∩ coNP) algorithms [2]. Notable examples include gap-
SVP and gap-CVP, for certain gap sizes. It would be interesting to show pseudo-deterministic
interactive proofs for those problems. In other words, one could ask: does there exists an AM
protocol for gap-SVP so that when a short vector exists, the same short vector is output every
time. Perhaps more interesting would be to show, under plausible cryptographic assumptions, that
certain such problems do not have psdAM protocols.

Pseudo-determinism and Number Theoretic Problems: The problem of generating primes
(given a number n, output a prime greater than n), and the problem of finding primitive roots (given
a prime p, find a primitive root mod p) have efficient randomized algorithms, and have been studied
in the context of pseudo-determinism [12, 6, 17], though no polynomial time pseudo-deterministic
algorithms have been found. It is interesting to ask whether these problems have polynomial time
psdAM protocols.

The Relationship between psdAM and search−BPP: One of the main open problems in
pseudo-determinism is to determine whether every problem in search−BPP also has a polyno-
mial time pseudo-deterministic algorithm. This remains unsolved. As a step in that direction
(and as an interesting problem on its own), it is interesting to determine whether search−BPP ⊆
psdAM. In this paper, we proved a partial result in this direction, namely that search−BPP ⊆
i.o.psdMASUBEXP .

Zero Knowledge Proofs of Uniqueness: The definition of pseudo-deterministic interactive
proofs can be extended to the context of Zero Knowledge. In other words, the verifier gets no
information other than the answer, and knowing that it is the unique/canonical answer. It is
interesting to examine this notion and understand its relationship to psdAM.

The Power of the Prover in pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs: Consider a search
problem which can be solved in IP where the prover, instead of being all-powerful, is computa-
tionally limited. We know that such a problem can be solved in psdIP if the prover has unlimited
computational power (in fact, one can show it is enough for the prover to be in PSPACE). In
general, if the prover can be computationally limited for some IP protocol, can it also be compu-
tationally limited for a psdIP protocol for the same problem? It is also interesting in general to


                                                 14
compare the power needed for the psdIP protocol compared to the power needed to solve the search
problem non-pseudo-deterministically. Similar questions can be asked in the context of AM.

The Power of the Prover in pseudo-deterministic private vs public coins proofs: In
our psdAM protocol for Graph Isomorphism, the verifier uses private coins, and the prover is weak
(it can be simulated by a polynomial time machine with an oracle for graph isomorphism). If using
public coins, what power would the prover need? In general, it is interesting to compare the power
needed by the prover when using private coins vs public coins in psdAM and psdIP protocols.

Pseudo-deterministic interactive proofs for setting cryptographic global system param-
eters: Suppose an authority must come up with global parameters for a cryptographic protocol
(for instance, a prime p and a primitive root g of p, which would be needed for a Diffie-Hellman
key exchange). It may be important that other parties in the protocol know that the authority
did not come up with these parameters because he happens to have a trapdoor to them. If the
authority proves to the other parties that the parameters chosen are canonical, the other parties
now know that the authority did not just pick these parameters because of a trapdoor (instead, the
authority had to pick those parameters, since those are the canonical ones). It would be interesting
to come up with a specific example of a protocol along with global parameters for which there is a
pseudo-deterministic interactive proof showing the parameters are unique.


References
 [1] Leonard Adleman. Two theorems on random polynomial time. In Foundations of Computer
     Science, 1978., 19th Annual Symposium on, pages 75–83. IEEE, 1978.

 [2] Dorit Aharonov and Oded Regev. Lattice problems in NP ∩ coNP. Journal of the ACM
     (JACM), 52(5):749–765, 2005.

 [3] László Babai. Trading group theory for randomness. In Proceedings of the seventeenth annual
     ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 421–429. ACM, 1985.

 [4] László Babai and Eugene M Luks. Canonical labeling of graphs. In Proceedings of the fifteenth
     annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 171–183. ACM, 1983.

 [5] John J Cannon. Construction of defining relators for finite groups. Discrete Mathematics,
     5(2):105–129, 1973.

 [6] Eran Gat and Shafi Goldwasser. Probabilistic search algorithms with unique answers and their
     cryptographic applications. In Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC),
     volume 18, page 136, 2011.

 [7] Oded Goldreich, Shafi Goldwasser, and Dana Ron. On the possibilities and limitations of pseu-
     dodeterministic algorithms. In Proceedings of the 4th conference on Innovations in Theoretical
     Computer Science, pages 127–138. ACM, 2013.

 [8] Oded Goldreich, Silvio Micali, and Avi Wigderson. Proofs that yield nothing but their validity
     or all languages in NP have zero-knowledge proof systems. Journal of the ACM (JACM),
     38(3):690–728, 1991.



                                                15
 [9] Shafi Goldwasser and Ofer Grossman. Perfect bipartite matching in pseudo-deterministic RNC.
     In Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC), volume 22, page 208, 2015.

[10] Shafi Goldwasser and Michael Sipser. Private coins versus public coins in interactive proof
     systems. In Proceedings of the eighteenth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing,
     pages 59–68. ACM, 1986.

[11] Joachim Grollmann and Alan L Selman. Complexity measures for public-key cryptosystems.
     SIAM Journal on Computing, 17(2):309–335, 1988.

[12] Ofer Grossman. Finding primitive roots pseudo-deterministically. In Electronic Colloquium
     on Computational Complexity (ECCC), volume 22, page 207, 2015.

[13] Lane A Hemaspaandra, Ashish V Naik, Mitsunori Ogihara, and Alan L Selman. Computing
     solutions uniquely collapses the polynomial hierarchy. SIAM Journal on Computing, 25(4):697–
     708, 1996.

[14] Rudolf Mathon. A note on the graph isomorphism counting problem. Information Processing
     Letters, 8(3):131–136, 1979.

[15] Peter Bro Miltersen, N Variyam Vinodchandran, and Osamu Watanabe. Super-polynomial
     versus half-exponential circuit size in the exponential hierarchy. In International Computing
     and Combinatorics Conference, pages 210–220. Springer, 1999.

[16] Noam Nisan and Avi Wigderson. Hardness vs randomness. Journal of computer and System
     Sciences, 49(2):149–167, 1994.

[17] Igor C Oliveira and Rahul Santhanam. Pseudodeterministic constructions in subexponential
     time. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.01817, 2016.

[18] Omer Reingold, Guy N Rothblum, and Ron D Rothblum. Constant-round interactive proofs
     for delegating computation. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on
     Theory of Computing, pages 49–62. ACM, 2016.


A      Alternate Algorithm for Graph Isomorphism in pseudo-deterministic
       AM
In this section, we present another psdAM algorithm for Graph Isomorphism, this one more com-
binatorial (as opposed to the more group theoretic approach of the algorithm in Section 3).

Proof. Let the vertices of G1 be v1 , v2 , . . . , vn , and the vertices of G2 be u1 , u2 , . . . , un . We will show
an AM algorithm which outputs a unique isomorphism φ. Our algorithm will proceed in n stages
(which we will later show can be parallelized). After the kth stage, the values φ(v1 ), φ(v2 ), . . . , φ(vk )
will be determined.
    Suppose that the values φ(v1 ), φ(v2 ), . . . , φ(vk ) have been determined. Then we will determine
the smallest r such that there exists an isomorphism φ∗ such that for 1 ≤ i ≤ k, we have φ∗ (vi ) =
φ(vi ), and in addition, φ∗ (vk+1 ) = ur . If we find r, we can set φ(vk+1 ) = φ∗ (vk+1 ) and continue to
the k + 1th stage.
    To find the correct value of r, the (honest) prover will tell the verifier the value of r and φ.
Then, to show that the prover is not lying, for each r ′ < r, the prover will prove that there exists
no isomorphism φ′ such that for 1 ≤ i ≤ k, we have φ′ (vi ) = φ(vi ), and in addition, φ′ (vk+1 ) = ur′ .

                                                         16
To prove this, the verifier will pick G1 or G2 , each with probability 1/2. If the verifier picked G1 ,
he will randomly shuffle the vertices vk+2 , . . . , vn , and send the shuffled graph to the prover. If the
verifier picked G2 , he will set u′i = φ(vi ) for 1 ≤ i ≤ k, and u′k+1 = ur′ , and shuffle the rest of
the vertices. If the prover can distinguish between whether the verifier initially picked G1 or G2 ,
then that implies there is no isomorphism sending vi to φ(vi ) for 1 ≤ i ≤ k, and sending vk+1 to
ur′ . The prover now can show this for all r ′ ≤ r (in parallel), as well as exhibit the isomorphism
φ, thus proving that r is the minimum value such that there is an isomorphism sending vi to φ(vi )
for 1 ≤ i ≤ k, and sending vk+1 to ur .
     We now show that the above n stages can be done in parallel in order to achieve a constant round
protocol. To do so, in the first stage, the prover sends the isomorphism φ to the verifier. Then, the
verifier can test (in parallel) for each k whether under the assumption that φ(v1 ), φ(v2 ), . . . , φ(vk )
are correct, φ(vk+1 ) is the lexicographically minimal vertex which vk+1 can be sent to. We now
show that using this parallelized protocol, the prover cannot cheat. To show this, suppose that the
prover sent some φ′ 6= φ. Then, consider the smallest i for which φ(vi ) 6= φ′ (vi ). The prover will
have to prove that φ′ (vi ) is the lexicographically minimal vertex which vi can be mapped to, given
φ(v1 ), φ(v2 ), . . . , φ(vi−1 ). We note that by a standard simulation argument, because the questions
asked by the verifier in other stages (which are now in parallel) can be simulated by the prover, the
above n stages can be done in parallel while maintaining the low failure probability, so the protocol
can be adapted so it requires only a constant number of rounds.




                                                    17
