                                                        SIGACT News Complexity Theory Column, March 2022
                                                            Proofs, Circuits, and Communication
                                                          S.F. de Rezende 1                  M. Göös 2           R. Robere 3
arXiv:2202.08909v1 [cs.CC] 17 Feb 2022




                                                                                           Abstract
                                                     We survey lower-bound results in complexity theory that have been obtained via new-
                                                 found interconnections between propositional proof complexity, boolean circuit complexity, and
                                                 query/communication complexity. We advocate for the theory of total search problems (TFNP)
                                                 as a unifying language for these connections and discuss how this perspective suggests a whole
                                                 programme for further research.


                                         1       Introduction
                                         In recent years there has been a large number of new results in both propositional proof complex-
                                         ity and boolean circuit complexity. These results include: optimal 2Ω(n) lower bounds on the size
                                         of monotone boolean formulas computing an explicit boolean function in NP [PR17], the refine-
                                         ment of the mon-ACi hierarchy from the mon-NCi hierarchy and new tradeoffs for cutting planes
                                         proofs [dRNV16], a new family of techniques for proving lower bounds on cutting planes proofs
                                         and monotone circuit size [GGKS20], and exponential lower bounds on the size of cutting planes
                                         proofs for random CNF formulas [FPPR17, HP17]. All of these new results have been enabled,
                                         either directly or indirectly, by two tools:

                                             1. The discovery of new connections between proof complexity and query complexity, as well
                                                as between boolean circuit complexity and communication complexity.

                                             2. The development of query-to-communication lifting theorems which show that, for cer-
                                                tain tasks, query complexity lower bounds can be “lifted” to communication lower bounds.

                                         Taken together, these tools reveal new connections between proof complexity and monotone circuit
                                         complexity. In particular, many standard propositional proof systems (e.g., resolution, cutting
                                         planes, Nullstellensatz) have been shown to have corresponding “partner” models of monotone
                                         computation (resp. boolean circuits, real circuits, span programs) such that the lower bounds
                                         on proof complexity in a proof system imply lower bounds on complexity of computation in the
                                         “partner” model.
                                             1
                                             Department of Computer Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. susanna.rezende@cs.lth.se. Supported by
                                         ELLIIT and Knut and Alice Wallenberg grant KAW 2021.0307.
                                           2
                                             School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. mika.goos@epfl.ch.
                                           3
                                             School of Computer Science, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. robere@cs.mcgill.ca. Supported by
                                         NSERC.
    A central theme in these results is the important role played by certain total search problems
in both proof complexity and boolean circuit complexity. On the one hand, for many proof systems
the complexity of refutations of an unsatisfiable CNF formula F is closely related to the complexity
of the so-called falsified clause search problem Search(F ), where we are given an assignment x to the
variables of F and need to find a clause in F that is false under x. Meanwhile, for boolean models
of computation, the right total search problem is the famous Karchmer–Wigderson game [KW90],
which was introduced to understand circuit complexity using communication complexity. It has
turned out to be fruitful to place these total search problems on center stage when trying to under-
stand proof systems and circuit models. In fact, recent research has shown that the classical (Turing
machine) theory of total search problems (TFNP) can serve as a general “organizing principle” for
proof systems and circuit classes in this way [GKRS18].

Outline. This survey explores the aforementioned themes starting from base principles. In Sec-
tion 2 we will give a gentle introduction to the classical connections between tree-like resolution
and decision trees, as well as boolean formulas and deterministic communication protocols. In Sec-
tion 3, we will extend the results from Section 2 to dag-like models. Then, in Section 4, we describe
applications of these ideas to the semi-algebraic cutting planes proof system. Finally, in Section 5,
we will discuss how these classical connections can be viewed as part of a more general framework,
in analogy to the theory of TFNP, and how this perspective suggests a programme for further
research.


2     Tree-like Resolution Proofs and Monotone Boolean Formulas
A boolean variable is a variable x taking values in {0, 1}, where we interpret 0 as “False” and 1
as “True”. A boolean literal is a boolean variable xi or its negation xi . A boolean formula (also
called a propositional formula or just a formula) is an expression composed out of boolean variables
and ∧, ∨ and ¬. A clause is a disjunction of boolean literals: for example, x1 ∨ x2 ∨ x3 is a clause, as
is x1 . The empty clause, denoted , has no literals in it, and is always false. A boolean formula F
is in conjunctive normal form (CNF) if it is a conjunction of clauses; for example,

                                   x1 ∧ (x1 ∨ x2 ) ∧ (x2 ∨ x3 ) ∧ x3 .

2.1   Resolution and decision trees
Our starting point is a well-known connection between tree-like resolution and decision trees.

Definition 2.1. Let A, B be clauses of boolean literals, and let ` be any boolean literal not occurring
in A. The resolution rule is the deduction rule

                                            A∨`  B∨` .
                                              A∨B
The weakening rule is the deduction rule

                                                  A .
                                                 A∨`
   Note that the resolution rule is sound : if x is an assignment that satisfies both A ∨ ` and B ∨ `
then x also satisfies A ∨ B.
    Let F = C1 ∧ ⋯ ∧ Cm be a boolean formula in CNF. A resolution proof of a clause C from F is
a sequence of clauses
                                        D1 , D 2 , . . . , D s ,
where Ds = C, and for each i either Di is a clause from F or is deduced from earlier clauses by the
resolution rule or the weakening rule. The width of the proof is the maximum number of literals
in any clause appearing in the proof. The proof is called a refutation of F if C = , the empty
clause. It is natural to associate a proof dag (directed acyclic graph) with a resolution refutation,
where the nodes of the dag are the clauses in the proof; the sources (no incoming edges) of the dag
are clauses in F and each internal node has incoming edges from the at most two clauses used to
deduce it. A resolution refutation is tree-like if every clause is used at most once as an input to the
resolution rule; it is easy to see that the proof dag of a tree-like proof is a tree.
    The main recurring theme that we will see in this survey is the use of total search problems
to understand problems in both proof and circuit complexity. We now define a central family of
total search problem that captures the complexity of proofs in many proof systems. Given a CNF
formula F = C1 ∧ ⋯ ∧ Cm on n variables, define the relation Search(F ) ⊆ {0, 1}n × [m] by

                                    (x, i) ∈ Search(F ) ⇐⇒ Ci (x) = 0 .

We think of this relation as defining a search problem: given x ∈ {0, 1}n as input, find an i ∈ [m]
such that (x, i) ∈ Search(F ). It is easy to see that this search problem is total (that is, ∀x∃i ∶
(x, i) ∈ Search(F )) if and only if the CNF formula F is unsatisfiable. Moreover, it turns out that
the complexity of the smallest decision tree solving Search(F ) captures exactly the complexity of
tree-like resolution. Indeed, it turns out that decision trees for Search(F ) and tree-like resolution
refutations of F are essentially the same object!

Theorem 2.2. Let F be an unsatisfiable CNF formula. There is a size-s, depth-d tree-like resolu-
tion refutation of F if and only if there is a size-s, depth-d decision tree solving Search(F ).

2.2    Boolean formulas and Karchmer–Wigderson games
Next we switch gears and recall a second famous result in complexity theory: the relationship
between boolean circuit complexity and communication complexity due to Karchmer and Wigder-
son [KW90] (independently discovered by Yannakakis [KPPY84]). We first define boolean circuits.

Definition 2.3. A boolean circuit on n input variables is given by a sequence of functions g1 , g2 , . . . , gs
such that, for each i ∈ [s], either

   • gi = zi or gi = z i for some input variable zi , or
   • gi = gj ○ gk where ○ ∈ {∧, ∨} and j, k < i.

The boolean circuit has a natural underlying dag; we say the circuit is a formula if the underlying
dag is a tree. The size of the circuit is s, the number of gates, and we say that the circuit computes
the boolean function f if gs = f . Finally, we say that the boolean circuit is monotone if the negated
input variables z i are not used.

    In this language, one should think of boolean circuits as being analogous to resolution proofs, and
boolean formulas as analogous to tree-like resolution proofs. Both are, in some sense, “deductive”
or “bottom-up”: we start from “atoms” (either input clauses of the formula F , or variables of the
underlying boolean function f ), and deduce new intermediate objects from old ones using some
predefined rules.
    Extending this analogy, then, what corresponds to decision trees in the world of boolean cir-
cuit complexity? Karchmer and Wigderson [KW90] supplied an answer: communication protocols
solving Karchmer–Wigderson games.
Definition 2.4. Let f ∶ {0, 1}n → {0, 1, ∗} be a (possibly partially defined) boolean function.
The Karchmer–Wigderson game of f is the relation KW(f ) ⊆ f −1 (1) × f −1 (0) × [n] defined by
(x, y, i) ∈ KW(f ) if and only if xi ≠ yi . If f is monotone (meaning that for all x, y ∈ {0, 1}n if
x ≤ y then f (x) ≤ f (y)), then define the monotone Karchmer–Wigderson game of f , denoted
mKW(f ) ⊆ f −1 (1) × f −1 (0) × [n], by (x, y, i) ∈ mKW(f ) if and only if xi = 1, yi = 0.
     As in the case of Search(F ) for unsatisfiable CNF formulas F , Karchmer–Wigderson games are
also total search problems, when we view the pair (x, y) as the input and i ∈ [n] as the output.
Indeed, one should think of KW(f ) as playing the same role as Search(F ) does in proof complexity:
it is a total search problem that in some sense captures the complexity of computing f .
     Karchmer and Wigderson proved that this is true for boolean formulas. Indeed, in the same
way that decision trees and tree-like resolution refutations are essentially identical objects, one can
show that boolean formulas and communication protocols for KW(f ) are also essentially identical.
Theorem 2.5 ([KW90]). Let f ∶ {0, 1}n → {0, 1, ∗} be a partial boolean function. There is a depth-d
boolean formula computing f if and only if there is a depth-d deterministic communication protocol
solving KW(f ). Moreover, if f is monotone, then there is a depth-d monotone boolean formula
computing f if and only if there is a depth-d communication protocol solving mKW(f ).
    The proof of the previous theorem is essentially identical to the proof of Theorem 2.2, with
objects in the world of resolution substituted for objects in the world of boolean circuits appro-
priately. In Figure 1, we record a dictionary of the related objects in this correspondence. This
analogy is the lynchpin underlying the connections between proof and circuit complexity.

      Resolution proofs     Decision trees     Boolean circuits            Communication protocols
      unsatisfiable CNF F   Search(F )         boolean functions f         mKW(f )
      clauses C             subtrees           intermediate functions gi   rectangles R
      deduction rules       variable queries   circuit gates               communicated bits

            Figure 1: The corresponding objects in resolution proofs and boolean circuits.


2.3     Feasible interpolation and lifting theorems
Next we show how to use the above analogy to systematically relate the two worlds (proof and
circuit complexity) together. In order to do this, we will show how to directly relate the falsified
clause search problem Search(F ) to the monotone Karchmer–Wigderson game mKW(F ).
    Let us first answer a simple question. Suppose F = C1 ∧ ⋯ ∧ Cm is an unsatisfiable CNF formula
on n variables Z = {z1 , z2 , . . . , zn }. How can we turn the search problem Search(F ) ⊆ {0, 1}n × [m]
into a two-party communication task? The obvious way is to take a partition of the variables
Z = X ∪ Y , and then give the assignment to the X-variables to Alice and the assignment to the
Y -variables to Bob. Let us call this two-party search problem Search(X,Y ) (F ), and observe that
an efficient decision tree for Search(F ) immediately implies an efficient communication protocol for
Search(X,Y ) (F ) simply by simulating the decision tree.
    This is progress, but while Search(X,Y ) (F ) is a total search problem it is not a Karchmer–
Wigderson game. It turns out, however, that we can interpret it as the monotone Karchmer–
Wigderson game for some partial boolean function. The idea for this goes back to Razborov [Raz90],
although it has been reintroduced in the recent works on lifting theorems [GP18, GPW18, FPPR17],
as well as independently by Hrubeš and Pudlák [HP17] as a generalisation of the classic theory of
feasible interpolation introduced by Krajı́ček [Kra97]. We will describe the definition introduced
by Hrubeš and Pudlák. If C is a clause and X is a subset of its variables we let C X denote the
subclause of C containing only literals over X.
Definition 2.6. Let F = C1 ∧ ⋯ ∧ Cm be an unsatisfiable CNF formula and let (X, Y ) be any
partition of its variables. The unsatisfiability certificate associated with F and (X, Y ) is the partial
                                ∶ {0, 1}m → {0, 1, ∗} defined as
                         (X,Y )
monotone function certF
                                               ⎧
                                               ⎪1 if ⋀ CiX is satisfiable,
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎪
                                                    i∶zi =0
                                        (z) ∶= ⎨0 if ⋀ CiY is satisfiable,
                                 (X,Y )
                             certF
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎪
                                                    i∶zi =1
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎩∗ otherwise.

We may suppress the partition (X, Y ) or the underlying CNF formula F in certF
                                                                                       (X,Y )
                                                                                                when it is
clear from context.
                                               ) is communication reducible to Search(X,Y ) (F ) and
                                           (X,Y )
    Indeed, one can show that mKW(certF
vice-versa. Using the unsatisfiability certificate, we can therefore prove the following “feasible
interpolation” theorem relating the boolean formula depth of the unsatisfiability certificate to the
resolution depth of the underlying CNF formula.
Theorem 2.7. Let F be an unsatisfiable CNF formula, let (X, Y ) be any partition of the variables
of F , and let certF denote the unsatisfiability certificate with respect to this variable partition. If
there is a resolution proof of depth d refuting F then there is a monotone boolean formula of depth d
computing certF .
    First note that the previous theorem implies that upper bounds on proofs imply upper bounds
on circuits; thus, conversely, lower bounds on monotone circuit complexity implies lower bounds
on proof complexity. Second, although we have stated the previous theorem in terms of depth, the
argument can be easily modified to capture the size of the two systems as well.
    Finally, it is natural to ask if a converse to the previous result can hold. That is, are there
unsatisfiable CNF formulas F such that the decision tree complexity of solving Search(F ) is a
lower bound on the communication complexity of solving mKW(certF )? The answer to this is
an emphatic yes, thanks to well-known query-to-communication lifting theorems, which have been
proved in a long line of work starting with Raz and McKenzie [RM99]. These powerful and general
results allow us to generate entire families of formulas F for which the decision tree complexity of
Search(F ) and the communication complexity of mKW(certF ) are tightly related.
    The basic idea of a lifting theorem is simple: we start with an unsatisfiable CNF formula F , and
replace each variable zi in F with a gadget function g(xi , yi ) on new “fresh” inputs xi , yi . In this
way, we obtain a new formula F ○g n = F (g(x, y)), which we can transform back into a CNF formula
using syntactic manipulations. Perhaps the most often used example of a gadget function g is the
index gadget Ind` ∶ [`] × {0, 1}` → {0, 1}, which takes in a string y ∈ {0, 1}` and a pointer x ∈ [`]
to a bit in the string and outputs Ind` (x, y) = yx . Raz and McKenzie [RM99] (further developed
by [GPW18, CKLM19]) proved the following lifting theorem that relates the query complexity of
Search(F ) to the communication complexity of mKW(certF ○Ind ).
Theorem 2.8. Let F be an unsatisfiable CNF formula on n variables, and let m = nC for a large
enough constant C ≥ 1. The size of any monotone boolean formula computing certF ○Indm is at least
nΩ(D(F )) , where D(F ) is the minimum depth of any (tree-like) resolution refutation of F .
     This result allows us to deduce lower bounds on monotone formula complexity (a difficult task)
automatically from resolution depth lower bounds (a relatively simple task). Moreover, by choosing
the underlying unsatisfiable CNF formulas F to be specially structured, we can obtain lower bounds
for many standard functions considered in circuit complexity, such as the st-connectivity, clique and
generation functions.
     The st-connectivity function stConnn takes as input an n-vertex directed graph with two
distinguished vertices s and t, and outputs 1 if there is a directed path from s to t and 0 otherwise.
Karchmer and Wigderson [KW90] proved, for the case of undirected graphs, that any monotone
boolean formula computing stConnn must have size nΘ(log n) , and alternative proofs were given
by [GS95, Pot17, Rob18] for the case of directed graphs. A similar lower bound follows from
Theorem 2.8 by considering F to be the induction principle of [BP98] (see [Rob18] for a proof).
     The clique function Cliquen,k takes as input an n-vertex graph and outputs 1 if it contains a
k-clique and 0 otherwise. It is not hard to see that there is a monotone boolean formula of size nO(k)
that computes Cliquen,k by checking all (nk) potential k-cliques. Razborov [Raz85a] proved the
first superpolynomial size lower bound for monotone√
                                                         circuits precisely for the clique function. This
was later improved in [AB87, Weg87] to an n      Ω( k)
                                                        lower bound for k ≤ n2/3−ε and more recently
to an n  Ω(k)
              lower bound for k ≤ n  1/3−ε
                                           [CKR20]. For monotone formulas, a weaker lower bound
but with a simpler proof was presented in [GH92] and this was improved to an exp(Ω(k)) lower
bound for k ≤ 32 n + 1 in [RW92]. Raz and McKenzie [RM99] obtained an nΩ(k) size lower bound for
monotone formulas for k ≤ nε by applying Theorem 2.8 with F being a certain formulation of the
pigeonhole principle.
     The generation function Genn was introduced by Raz and McKenzie [RM99] in order to separate
the monotone NC hierarchy. It is defined as follows. Given a set T ⊆ [n]3 , we say that T generates
a point w ∈ [n] if w = 1, or if there is a triplet (u, v, w) ∈ T such that T generates u and v. The
function Gen takes as an input a set T ⊆ [n]3 and outputs 1 if T generates n and 0 otherwise.
By applying Theorem 2.8 to the so-called pebbling formulas, Raz and McKenzie [RM99] proved
an exp(Ω(nε )) monotone formula size lower bound for Genn . Since Genn is computable by a
polynomial-size monotone circuit, this implies that mon-NC ≠ mon-P. By a similar argument, they
also showed that mon-NCi ≠ mon-NCi+1 . A later extension of this lifting theorem in [dRNV16],
building on [GPW18], completed the picture of the relation between the mon-AC and mon-NC
hierarchies, which looks like mon-NCi ⊊ mon-ACi ⊊ mon-NCi+1 .
     We summarise the main formula size lower bounds that follow from Theorem 2.8 as follows.

Corollary 2.9. Let ε be a small enough constant. The size of any monotone boolean formula
computing:

  1. stConnn is at least nΩ(log n) ;
  2. Cliquen,k for k ≤ nε is at least nΩ(k) ; and
  3. Genn is at least exp(nε ).

   Recent extensions of Theorem 2.8 [CKLM19, LMM+ 20] in particular improve the size of the
gadget and as a consequence the parameter ε above need not be very small. We also note that
the best known monotone formula lower bounds for these functions follow from another lifting
theorem [PR17, dRMN+ 20].
   Let us conclude with three main takeaway lessons from this section.

   • First, the structure of tree-like resolution proofs and boolean formulas are extremely similar,
     and this shared structure can be exploited in a nice way using the appropriate total search
     problems.
        • Second, by exploiting this analogy, we can easily deduce generic feasible interpolation results,
          which allow us to translate circuit lower bounds into proof lower bounds.
        • Third, by using composition, one can prove a lifting theorem that is essentially a converse to
          feasible interpolation. In concrete terms this means that, for certain tasks, lower bounds on
          proofs imply lower bounds on boolean circuits.
    In the remainder of this survey we will see several variations on this theme that have occurred
in the recent literature. Next, we will examine how to move from tree-like proofs and circuits to
more general dag-like models.


3        Dag-Like Resolution Proofs and Monotone Boolean Circuits
In order to capture dag-like models, we will need to introduce dag-like versions of decision trees
and communication protocols that capture resolution and boolean circuits, respectively. Both of
our dag-like models will share the following definition.4
Definition 3.1. Let S ⊆ I × O be a total search problem with input I and output O, and let F be
a family of functions from I → {0, 1}. An F-dag solving S is given by a directed acyclic graph of
fan-out at most 2 such that each node v in the graph is associated with a function fv ∈ F satisfying
the following:
        • Root. There is a unique root node r with fan-in 0 associated with the (trivial) function 1.
        • Internal Consistency. For each internal node v with children u, w we have that
                                               fv−1 (1) ⊆ fu−1 (1) ∪ fw−1 (1) .

        • Solutions. Each leaf node v is labelled with an o ∈ O such that for all x ∈ fv−1 (1), (x, o) ∈ S.
The size of an F-dag is the number of nodes in the graph.
   First we instantiate this model and consider a dag-like version of decision trees, which we call
conjunction-dags following [GGKS20]. This model and close variations on it have been studied in
the literature in a number of separate works prior to [GGKS20]; notably, by Pudlák [Pud00], and
then by Atserias and Dalmau [AD08], under the name Prover-Adversary games.
Definition 3.2. Let F be an unsatisfiable CNF formula. A conjunction-dag solving Search(F ) is
an F-dag solving Search(F ) where F is the family of all conjunctions over boolean literals in F .
     A few remarks on this definition are in order. First, it is not hard to interpret the model
as a dag-like version of a decision tree (indeed, a decision tree is a tree-like conjunction-dag!).
Given an input x ∈ {0, 1}n , the “search algorithm” starts by examining the root node, at which x
trivially satisfies the associated conjunction. By the internal consistency property, if x satisfies the
conjunction at a node v, then it also satisfies the conjunction at one of the children of v, and thus
the algorithm can proceed from v to the satisfied child. Finally, once the algorithm reaches a leaf
node, the final property guarantees that the leaf will be labelled with a solution to Search(F ).
     Second, it is also easy to see how this model corresponds to resolution. If we are given a
resolution proof Π, then we can simply replace each clause in Π with the negation of that clause
(i.e., a conjunction); it is easy to verify that the resulting dag satisfies the three properties of a
conjunction-dag. The converse direction is not much harder; we refer to [GGKS20] for a proof.
    4
    For those who are familiar, the next definition is closely related to the notion of a “semantic derivation”, intro-
duced by Krajı́cek [Kra97].
Theorem 3.3. Let F be an unsatisfiable CNF formula. There is a size-s resolution refutation of
F if and only if there is a size-s conjunction-dag solving Search(F ).

    Now, we can similarly define a dag-like model of two-party communication that corresponds to
boolean circuits. The model of dag-like communication was first introduced by Razborov [Raz95],
where it was shown that dag-like communication captures boolean circuit size in the same way that
deterministic communication captures boolean formula size. Razborov’s original definition used
the language of TFNP, particularly as a “communication version” of the complexity class PLS (see
Section 5 for more details on this). The model was subsequently studied by Krajı́ček [Kra97] and
simplified by Sokolov [Sok17], although we will use the following version from [GGKS20]. As we
will be primarily interested in monotone circuit complexity, we define it purely for the mKW game.

Definition 3.4. Let f ∶ {0, 1}n → {0, 1, ∗} be a (possibly partial) monotone boolean function. A
rectangle-dag solving mKW(f ) ⊆ f −1 (1) × f −1 (0) × [n] is an F-dag solving mKW(f ) where F is the
family of all indicator functions of combinatorial rectangles over f −1 (1) × f −1 (0).

    It is again easy to observe that standard deterministic communication protocols for mKW(f )
are rectangle-dags where the underlying graph is a tree, and furthermore that one can associate
these objects with a top-down “search algorithm” as we described for conjunction-dags above.
    Second, as we stated above, it is known that the size of rectangle-dags captures boolean circuit
size. While we will state it for monotone circuits, a similar result also holds for non-monotone
circuits.

Theorem 3.5 ([Raz95, Sok17]). Let f be a monotone boolean function. There is a size-s monotone
boolean circuit computing f if and only if there is a size-s rectangle-dag solving mKW(f ).

    Finally, just as in the previous section, one can use these models to prove a simple “feasible
interpolation”-style result for resolution proofs in terms of monotone boolean circuits. This feasible
interpolation result was originally observed for certain structured formulas by Krajı́ček [Kra97] and
Pudlák [Pud97] using direct arguments; one of the benefits of our abstract setup is that we get
a similar feasible interpolation result in terms of the unsatisfiability certificate immediately and
transparently from the definitions.

Theorem 3.6. Let F = C1 ∧ ⋯ ∧ Cm be an unsatisfiable CNF formula, let (X, Y ) be any partition
of the variables of F , and let certF denote the corresponding unsatisfiability certificate. If there is
a resolution refutation of F of size s then there is a monotone boolean circuit computing certF of
size O(s).

    As in the case of tree-like proofs and boolean formulas, it is natural to consider whether or not
a converse to the previous result is possible. If so, this would allow us to translate lower bounds for
resolution proofs (which is a very well-developed theory, e.g., [Hak85, BW01]) into lower bounds
for monotone boolean circuits, for which we essentially have only one technique, the method of
approximations with its variations [Raz85a, Juk97, HR00, BU99]. Indeed, such a result was proven
by Göös, Garg, Kamath and Sokolov [GGKS20], who crucially used the search viewpoint described
above in their proof.

Theorem 3.7 ([GGKS20]). Let F be an unsatisfiable CNF formula on n variables, and let m = nC
for a sufficiently large constant C. Then the size of any monotone boolean circuit computing
certF ○Indm is at least nΩ(w(F )) , where w(F ) is the minimum width of any resolution refutation
of F .
    Note that the measure being “lifted” here is resolution refutation width, in contrast to The-
orem 2.8 where it was depth. This difference is indeed necessary, since both stConn and Gen
have polynomial size monotone circuit. Given that there is a width lower bound for refuting the
pigeonhole principle, by applying Theorem 3.7 in the same way as done in [RM99], we get a mono-
tone circuit lower bound for Clique. This lower bound, as is the case for most other clique lower
bounds, actually holds for (any extension of) the partial function clique-colouring. The function
Clique-Coln,k receives as input an n-vertex graph and outputs 1 if it has a k-clique, 0 if it is
(k −1)-colourable and can output anything if neither is the case. Tardos [Tar88] proved that there is
an extension of Clique-Col that is monotone and is in P, and therefore this gives an exponential
separation between monotone and non-monotone circuits.
    Another interesting application of Theorem 3.7, observed in a follow-up work [GKRS18], is that
it improves this separation to an exponential separation between NC2 and mon-P. This is done by
considering the monotone function 3Xor-Satn , which receives as input an indicator vector for a
set of 3Xor constraints over n variables and outputs 1 if the set is unsatisfiable and 0 otherwise.
By lifting so-called Tseitin formulas, which are known to require large resolution width to be
refuted [Urq87], they obtain a monotone circuit lower bound for 3Xor-Sat. Since 3Xor-Sat is in
NC2 [Mul87], this improves on the exponential monotone vs. non-monotone separation.

Corollary 3.8. Let ε be a small enough constant. The size of any monotone boolean circuit
computing:

    1. Cliquen,k for k ≤ nε is at least nΩ(k) ; and
    2. 3Xor-Satn is at least exp(nε ).

    As we will discuss in the next section, Theorem 3.7 can also be extended to obtain lower bounds
for monotone real circuits, and therefore cutting planes proofs. With regards to monotone circuit
lower bounds, however, it is natural to wonder how the lower bounds that follow from the previous
theorem compare to the known results provable via the method of approximations. It seems that
the techniques are ultimately incomparable, but recent work of Lovett et al. [LMM+ 20] gave an
alternative proof of Theorem 3.7 using the sunflower lemma, which is the same central combinatorial
tool used in the method of approximations.


4     Cutting Planes and Real Monotone Circuits
Cutting planes is a proof system that captures integer programming reasoning, based on the cutting
planes method of Gomory [Gom63] and Chvátal [Chv73]. In the same way as the basic unit in
resolution are clauses, in cutting planes they are integer linear inequalities. Let I be a system of
unsatisfiable integer linear inequalities over variables x1 , . . . , xn . A cutting planes refutation of I is
a sequence of linear inequalities (L1 , . . . , L` ) such that L` is 0 ≥ 1 and each Li is either in I or can
be inferred from previous inequalities by one of the two following deduction rules:

                                 ∑i ai xi ≥ A     ∑i bi xi ≥ B                ∑i αai xi ≥ A
          linear combination                                   , or division                  ,
                                 ∑i (αai + βbi )xi ≥ αA + βB                 ∑i ai xi ≥ ⌈A/α⌉
where ai , bi , A, B, α, β are integers and α, β are positive. The length of the refutation is `. We say
that the refutation has bounded coefficients if all coefficients are bounded in absolute value by some
polynomial in n. As before, we say the refutation is tree-like if the underlying proof dag is a tree.
   For most of what we will discuss here, the exact rules of derivation are not particularly impor-
tant, as long as they are sound over integers and refutationally complete. It is convenient, therefore,
to define a semantic cutting planes refutation of I as a sequence of linear inequalities (L1 , . . . , L` )
such that L` is 0 ≥ 1 and each Li is either in I or is semantically implied (over boolean variables)
by two previous inequalities Lj and Lk where j, k < i, i.e., all boolean points that satisfy both Lj
and Lk also satisfy Li .
     In order to use cutting planes to refute unsatisfiable CNF formulas, we must consider the
translation of clauses into linear inequalities. A clause ⋁i∈P xi ∨ ⋁i∈N xi is translated to ∑i∈P xi +
∑i∈N (1 − xi ) ≥ 1, where we interpret 0 as false and 1 as true, and a CNF formula F over variables
x1 , . . . , xn is translated into a system of linear inequalities consisting of the translation of each
clause in F and the inequalities xi ≥ 0 and xi ≤ 1 for i ∈ {1, . . . , n} to guarantee variables take
boolean values. We often identify F with this system of linear inequalities.
     As was the case in resolution, we can view a semantic cutting planes refutation in a top-down
manner, as an analogue of decision trees. The difference is that, in order to capture cutting-planes,
we need dags where nodes are associated to halfspaces.

Definition 4.1. Let F be an unsatisfiable CNF formula. A halfspace-dag solving Search(F ) is an
F-dag solving Search(F ) where F is the family of all halfspaces over the boolean variables in F .

   Following precisely the same argument that was sketched in Section 3 for resolution and
conjunction-dags, it is possible to prove an equivalence between cutting planes refutations of F
and halfspace-dags solving Search(F ).

Theorem 4.2. Let F be an unsatisfiable CNF formula. There is a size-s semantic cutting planes
refutation of F if and only if there is a size-s halfspace-dag solving Search(F ).

4.1      Monotone real circuits and triangle-dags
In order to extend Krajı́ček’s interpolation technique [Kra97] to cutting planes, Pudlák [Pud97]
defined monotone real circuits as a generalisation of monotone boolean circuits where each gate is
allowed to compute any non-decreasing real function of its inputs, but the inputs and the output
of the circuit are boolean.
    Soon after, Krajı́ček [Kra98] defined monotone protocols with the goal of extending the inter-
polation technique to a wider class of proof systems. Here we define a subclass of these monotone
protocols that we will refer to as triangle-dags 5 as coined in [GGKS20].
    We say T ⊆ X × Y is a combinatorial triangle if for all (x, y) ∈ T and (x′ , y ′ ) ∈ T it holds that
either (x, y ′ ) ∈ T or (x′ , y) ∈ T (or both). In other words, there is some labelling of the rows
aT ∶ X → R and of the columns bT ∶ Y → R such that T = {(x, y) ∶ aT (x) < bT (y)}. In particular,
note that every combinatorial rectangle is a triangle.

Definition 4.3. Let f ∶ {0, 1}n → {0, 1, ∗} be a (possibly partial) monotone boolean function. A
triangle-dag solving mKW(f ) ⊆ f −1 (1) × f −1 (0) × [n] is an F-dag solving mKW(f ) where F is the
family of all indicator functions of combinatorial triangles over f −1 (1) × f −1 (0).

       We once again have a tight relation between a circuit model and an F-dag.

Theorem 4.4 ([HP18]). Let f be a monotone boolean function. There is a monotone real circuit
of size s computing f if and only if there is a triangle-dag of size s solving mKW(f ).
   5
   In [Kra98] this subclass is called monotone protocols whose real communication complexity is 1; in [Sok17] real
communication games and in [HP18] real protocols.
    Indeed, just as we thought of rectangles as the communication “analogue” of clauses, we think
of triangles as the communication “analogue” of linear inequalities. The fact that small mono-
tone real circuits for f give small triangle-dags for the mKW-game on f was already observed by
Krajı́ček [Kra98]. The other direction is less obvious and was shown more recently by Hrubeš and
Pudlák [HP18].
    Some of the known lower bounds for monotone boolean circuits were generalised to monotone
real circuits: clique-colouring [Pud97], broken mosquito screen [HC99], perfect matching [Fu97],
st-connectivity [Joh98], generation [BEGJ00]. Jukna [Juk99] gave a general lower bound criterion
for monotone boolean circuits and then showed that the same criterion also holds for monotone
real circuits.
    These results might suggest that monotone real circuits cannot be much more powerful than
monotone boolean circuits. Rosenbloom [Ros97], however, proved the contrary. He showed that
monotone real circuits can be exponentially stronger than even non-monotone boolean circuits.
The proof is simple: by a counting argument, most slice functions cannot be computed by boolean
circuits of subexponential size, whereas any slice function can be computed by a linear-size,
logarithmic-depth monotone real formula. This implies, together with the clique-colouring lower
bound [Pud97] and the fact that there is a monotone function in P/poly that extends clique-
colouring [Tar88], that monotone real circuits and non-monotone boolean circuits are incomparable.

4.2   Feasible interpolation and lifting theorems
Krajı́ček’s interpolation technique [Kra97] gives a method of obtaining resolution lower bounds
from monotone circuit lower bounds. The technique is actually more general and implies lower
bounds also for cutting planes with bounded coefficients. Pudlák [Pud97] was able to extend these
results to unrestricted cutting planes by showing that cutting planes refutations can be interpolated
by monotone real circuits. The classical method of interpolation only applies to certain structured
formulas but, as we have discussed in Section 2, they can be generalised to other formulas by
considering unsatisfiability certificates [HP17, FPPR17].
Theorem 4.5. Let F be an unsatisfiable CNF formula with m clause, let (X, Y ) be any partition
of the variables of F , and let certF denote the corresponding unsatisfiability certificate. If there is
a cutting planes refutation of F of length s then there is a monotone real circuit computing certF
of size O(s + m2 ).
     Pudlák’s interpolation theorem [Pud97] implied the first superpolynomial lower bound for unre-
stricted cutting planes and for two decades monotone interpolation was the only known method for
proving cutting planes lower bounds. Some of the formulas for which we can obtain cutting planes
lower bound via this monotone interpolation theorem include clique-colouring [Pud97], random
k-CNF formulas for k = Θ(log n) [HP17, FPPR17], and weak bit pigeonhole principle [HP17].
     Again we can consider if a converse of this theorem holds. Can we obtain monotone real circuit
lower bounds from proof complexity lower bounds? The answer is once again yes. The dag-like
lifting theorem by Göös et al. [GGKS20] holds also for triangle-dags and therefore for monotone
real circuits. Note that the proof complexity measure that is being lifted is still resolution width.
Theorem 4.6 ([GGKS20]). Let F be an unsatisfiable CNF formula on n variables, and let m = nC
for a sufficiently large constant C. Then the size of any monotone real circuit computing certF ○Indm
is at least nΩ(w(F )) , where w(F ) is the minimum width of any resolution refutation of F .
    This implies that the lower bounds for monotone boolean circuits that can be obtained via
this lifting theorem also hold for monotone real circuits. The main motivation for proving this
lifting theorem was not, however, to obtain monotone real circuit lower bounds, but to obtain
cutting planes lower bounds. The lifting theorem, as stated in [GGKS20], gives a lower bound for
triangle-dags. It is straightforward to see that every halfspace-dag is, in particular, a triangle-dag.
Therefore, in order to obtain a cutting planes lower bound it is sufficient to reduce the mKW game
on certF ○Indm to Search(F ′ ) for some formula F ′ . This can be done via syntactic manipulations,
giving rise to the so-called lifted formulas, or with some more clever reductions, which can give
lower bounds for more natural formulas such as the clique-colouring formula. Lifting theorems
significantly increase the families of formulas for which we have cutting planes lower bounds: any
formula for which we can prove a strong-enough resolution width lower bound can be transformed
into a formula that is hard for cutting planes.

Corollary 4.7 ([GGKS20]). Given any unsatisfiable k-CNF formula F on n variables, there is
a polynomial-time constructible unsatisfiable 2k-CNF formula F ′ on nO(1) variables such that any
cutting planes refutation of F ′ must have length at least nΩ(w(F )) , where w(F ) is the minimum
width of any resolution refutation of F .

    Prior to [GGKS20], lifting theorems were proven for a related model called real communication
protocols [Kra98, BEGJ00]. In this setting, in order to solve a relation or search problem S ⊆
X × Y × O, Alice and Bob communicate via a referee that acts as a greater-than oracle: at each
round, Alice and Bob each send a real number to the referee and the referee replies to both player
with a bit indicating whether Alice’s number is greater than Bob’s number.
    Such a protocol can be viewed as a binary tree where every non-leaf node v is labelled by two
functions fvA ∶ X → R and fvB ∶ Y → R, and every leaf node u is labelled by some output ou ∈ O.
For an input (x, y) ∈ X × Y, the output of the protocol is defined by constructing a path from the
root to a leaf according to the following rule: at node v if fvA (x) > fvB (y) then the path continues
to the left child of v, otherwise the path continues to the right child of v. When the path reaches a
leaf u of the tree, then the output is ou . We say the protocol computes S if for every (x, y) ∈ X × Y
the output o of the protocol is such that (x, y, o) ∈ S. The depth of the protocol is the length of
the longest root-to-leaf path and the size is the number of nodes in the tree.
    It is not hard to see that this model can be quite powerful: the equality function—which
can only be solved by exponential-size triangle-dags—can be trivially solved by constant-size real
communication protocols. Nevertheless, Bonet et al. [BEGJ00] showed that it is possible to prove
lower bounds for this model by extending [RM99]. Note that this in particular implies a tree-like
version of the lifting theorem in [GGKS20].

Theorem 4.8 ([BEGJ00]). Let F be an unsatisfiable CNF formula on n variables, and let m ≥ nC
for a sufficiently large constant C. Any real communication protocol that solves Search(F ) ○ Indm
must have depth at least Ω(D(F ) ⋅ log m), where D(F ) is the minimum depth of any resolution
refutation of F .

    We note that Search(F ) ○ Indm is communication reducible to the mKW game for certF ○Indm .
Thus, following Raz and McKenzie [RM99], this lifting theorem implies that the mKW game for the
generation function—which can be solved by polynomial-size rectangle-dags—requires exponential-
size real communication protocols. From this result, Bonet et al. [BEGJ00] use the fact [Kra98,
Joh98] that a lower bound for real communication protocols of the mKW game of a function f
implies a lower bound for monotone real formulas of f to show that monotone boolean circuits can be
exponentially stronger than monotone real formulas (the opposite separation follows from [Ros97]).
    Bonet et al. [BEGJ00] then use this result to show that resolution can be exponentially stronger
than tree-like cutting planes (the opposite separation is witnessed by the pigeonhole principle).
Their proof uses their circuit separation and Pudlák’s interpolation theorem [Pud97], but it is pos-
sible to obtain the cutting planes lower bound directly from the lower bound for real communication
protocols.
    In the wake of Göös et al. [GPW18], de Rezende et al. [dRNV16] extended this lifting the-
orem to a round-preserving setting. This was used to obtain length-space trade-offs for cutting
planes. We note that, in contrast to [BEGJ00], for this application it is indeed important that the
communication model of the lifting theorem is real communication protocols and not triangle-dags.


5     Perspectives and Open Problems
In this final section, we discuss directions for further research inspired by the themes of this survey.
Our main conceptual message is this: We advocate to foster the interplay between the different
subfields of complexity theory—circuit complexity, proof complexity, query/communication com-
plexity, and the theory of total search problems. Firstly, can we find more connections between
these theories? To discover such interconnections, we adhere to the following philosophy.
        Guiding philosophy:          A natural concept introduced in one theory should have
                                     a natural counterpart in another theory.
Secondly, given such connections, can we bring the techniques of one field to bear on the open
questions of another field?

5.1   Query/communication TFNP
In the context of classical (Turing machine) complexity theory, the study of total NP search prob-
lems (TFNP) was initiated by Megiddo and Papadimitriou [MP91, Pap94]. This theory aims to
characterise the complexities of search problems that have a solution for every input and where a
given solution can be efficiently checked for validity. By now, this theory has flowered into a sprawl-
ing jungle of widely-studied complexity classes (such as PLS [JPY88], PPA/PPAD/PPP [Pap94],
CLS [DP11]) that serve to classify the complexities of many important search problems. For in-
stance, one of the most celebrated results in the field is that computing a Nash equilibrium (every
game must have one) is complete for PPAD [DGP09, CDT09].

Example. As a running example, we recall the class PLS (Polynomial Local Search) which embod-
ies the combinatorial principle “every dag has a sink”. Namely, PLS consists of all search problems
that can be reduced (in polynomial-time) to the Iteration problem, defined as follows. The input
to Iteration consists of two circuits S, P ∶ {0, 1}n → {0, 1}n (here S is the successor circuit and P
the potential circuit) that implicitly define a dag G = (V, E), V = {0, 1}n , where (u, v) ∈ E iff the
successor of u is v (i.e., S(u) = v) and the potential decreases from u to v (i.e., P (v) < P (u) where
P ’s output is interpreted as an n-bit number). The goal is to output the name of any node in G
that is a sink (no successor).

    In this survey, we have discussed total search problems in the context of more restricted models
of computation: proof systems can be viewed as a model of computation solving Search(F ), and
communication protocols can solve KW(f ) games. How are these connected to the classical TFNP
theory?
    A couple of connections have already been made formal. Given any subclass of TFNP—take PLS
for instance—one may naturally define its query (decision tree) analogue PLSdt and its communica-
tion analogue PLScc . For instance, to define PLSdt we start with the query analogue of the Iteration
 problem, namely, Search(F ) where F is any natural low-width encoding of the contradiction stating
 that a dag has no sink; for example, one can take as F the famous pebbling formulas. Then PLSdt
 is defined as consisting of all query search problems that can be reduced, via shallow decision-tree
 reductions, to the query-Iteration problem. (See [GKRS18] for a more formal definition.) What
 is striking is that in some cases the query analogue of a TFNP class can be captured by a natural
 propositional proof system, and the communication analogue can be captured by a natural circuit
 model (via the KW game). In particular, we have the following classical characterisations discussed
 in this survey:

 (FP) The class FP consists of all search problems soluble in polynomial time on a deterministic
      Turing machine. By analogy, Karchmer–Wigderson games involve deterministic communi-
      cation protocols, that is, the communication analogue FPcc of FP. We may summarise the
      Karchmer–Wigderson theorem (Theorem 2.5) by saying that FPcc captures formulas. More-
      over, the deterministic lifting theorem (Theorem 2.8) can be viewed as showing lower bounds
      for FPcc from its query analogue FPdt , which in turn corresponds to the depth of tree-like
      resolution proofs.

(PLS) Razborov [Raz95] showed that the circuit complexity of a function f is captured by the
      least cost of a “PLS-protocol” solving the KW(f ) game. Here a PLS-protocol is a natural
      communication analogue of PLS, which turns out to be equivalent to rectangle-dags, which
      we discussed in Section 3. We may summarise Razborov’s result by saying that PLScc captures
      circuits. The dag-like lifting theorem Section 3 can then be viewed as showing lower bounds
      for PLScc from its query analogue PLSdt , which turns out to correspond to the width of
      resolution proofs.

     Both of these connections were found in the 90s. A more recent work has identified a third
 connection of the above type: PPAcc captures F2 -span programs, and PPAdt captures the F2 -
 Nullstellensatz proof system [GKRS18]. These characterisations, too, could have been discovered
 in the 90s: The class PPA (embodying the principle “every graph with an odd degree vertex has
 another”) is one of the original TFNP subclasses defined by Papadimitriou [Pap94]. Similarly, span
 programs are a well-studied circuit model introduced in 1993 [KW93] with fundamental connections
 to quantum computing and secret sharing in cryptography.
     Currently, around a dozen interesting subclasses of TFNP have been identified. A natural
 research question, following our philosophy, is to systematically study the interconnections that arise
 out of the Turing-machine/query/communication variants of TFNP subclasses. Figure 2 summarises
 our current understanding of the landscape for communication search problem classes.

 Open problem 1. Complete the picture in Figure 2.

    In particular, the following questions remain open.

 (Q1) Find circuit models captured by classic classes such as PPADcc , PPADScc , PPPcc . What
      complexity class captures comparator circuits (only an upper bound of SOMLcc is known)?

 (Q2) Find proof systems captured by PPADdt , PPADSdt , PPPdt .

 (Q3) In query complexity, the relative complexities of classical TFNP subclasses are nearly com-
      pletely understood [BCE+ 98, BM04, Mor05]. In communication complexity, by contrast,
      there are huge gaps in our understanding. For example, there are no lower bounds against
      classes PPADScc and PPPcc for an explicit search problem.
                                                TFNP

                 Circuits                                                F2 -Span programs
                              = PLS              PPP            PPA =
             Resolution width                                            F2 -Nullstellensatz

                                               PPADS


         Comparator circuits ≤ SOML                            PPAD


                                                EOML

                                                              Formulas
                                                  FP =
                                                         Tree-like Resolution

Figure 2: The landscape of TFNP search problem classes in communication complexity (uncluttered
by the usual ‘cc’ superscripts) [GKRS18]. A solid arrow M1 → M2 denotes M1 ⊆ M2 , and a dashed
arrow M1 ⇢ M2 denotes M1 ⊈ M2 . Some classes can characterise other models of computation
(printed in blue) while the query complexity analogues are captured by different propositional
proof systems (printed in yellow).


(Q4) Prove more class separations. If we have two classes, which both admit an associated circuit
     model, then separating the two classes is often equivalent to separating the two circuit models
     in the monotone setting. For example, can we show SOMLcc ⊈ PPAcc ? This is closely related
     to whether monotone comparator circuits can be more powerful than monotone F2 -span
     programs (no separation is currently known).

(Q5) Query-to-communication lifting theorems are known for FP [RM99], PLS [GGKS20], and
     PPA [PR18]. Prove more. (This is one way to attack (Q3) if proved for PPADS or PPP.)

    Building a theory of the intricate relationships between communication search problem classes
would further elucidate the relative power of the underlying combinatorial principles and (if avail-
able) of the associated circuit models. Moreover, such a theory would likely have applications to all
three involved subfields, which is exactly what already happened in the case of the best-understood
classes FP, PLS, PPA.

5.2   Cross-fertilisation of lower-bound methods
Besides building interconnections between theories, another research direction is to put these con-
nections to use and prove concrete lower-bound results. We propose several problems that can
benefit from such cross-fertilisation.

Proof complexity. The progress on the central project of proof complexity—proving lower
bounds against increasingly powerful proof systems—has been slow. While the limitations of
resolution are well understood after decades worth of research, we still lack lower bounds even
for mild generalisations of resolution. Two of the simplest such generalisations are resolution
over cutting planes, denoted R(CP) [Kra98], and resolution over F2 -linear equations, denoted
R(LIN2 ) [RT08, IS14]. These are dag-like proof systems that reason using disjunctions of linear
inequalities in case of R(CP) or disjunctions of linear equations in case of R(LIN2 ).
Open problem 2. Show that R(CP) and R(LIN2 ) are not polynomially bounded (i.e., there are
unsatisfiable formulas that the systems cannot refute with a polynomial-size proof ).
   We believe the time is ripe for a breakthrough here. Krajı́ček, in his new textbook on proof
complexity, writes [Kra19, §22.2]:
      In my view the most pressing open problem is to extend some of the lower bound methods from
      the A-level to systems like R(CP) or R(LIN). Feasible interpolation seems to be best positioned
      for that.

Lifting theorems discussed in this survey have deepened our understanding of the interpolation tech-
nique and present a new avenue of attack towards Open problem 2. In fact, these techniques come
frustratingly close to resolving it: Both R(CP) and R(LIN2 ) involve lines that can be evaluated
using a randomized communication protocol. Recent work has already produced lifting theorems
both for dag-like proofs whose lines are computed by deterministic protocols [GGKS20] and for
tree-like proofs whose lines are computed by randomized protocols [GPW20]. Seemingly, one only
needs to find a way to combine the techniques of these two papers! See also [Fol22] for a discussion
of this problem.
    Another foremost open problem in proof complexity (highlighted in Razborov’s survey [Raz16])
concerns semi-algebraic proof systems that manipulate low-degree polynomials, e.g., the ubiquitous
Sum-of-Squares system. Can we prove lower bounds on their dag-like proof size? Since degree-d
polynomials can be efficiently computed by multi-party number-on-forehead (NOF) protocols, one
might hope to approach this question by developing a lifting theory for NOF protocols. However,
our understanding of NOF protocols is lacking even in the tree-like setting.

Circuit complexity. An outstanding open problem in circuit complexity concerns matchings:
Open problem 3. Show that perfect matching requires exponential-size monotone circuits.
    The best lower bound so far is quasi-polynomial as shown by Razborov [Raz85b]. Matching
principles have been studied extensively in proof complexity [DR01, Urq03, Ale04] and one could
hope that these results could be lifted to monotone circuit complexity. There has been an analogous
challenge in the study of linear programming formulations of the matching polytope. While there
are lifting theorems to prove LP formulation lower bounds [CLRS16, KMR21], there is no lifting-
based proof for Rothvoß’s [Rot14] exponential lower bound for the matching polytope. This is one
reason why it is still open to show an SDP formulation lower bound for matching: the only lower-
bound technique known is a lifting theorem [LRS15]. There also remains the lurking prospect that
Razborov’s lower bound is, in fact, tight! There is a recent cautionary tale this effect: In a surprising
breakthrough Dadush and Tiwari [DT20] showed that Tseitin formulas can be refuted in quasi-
polynomial size by the cutting planes proof system, contradicting a conjecture of an exponential
lower bound widely believed since the introduction of cutting planes in 1987 [CCT87].

Total search problems. Finally, in the theory of TFNP, a timely opportunity is to use proof
complexity to understand the power of some of the newly introduced TFNP subclasses; examples
include the “continuous local search” class CLS [DP11], “end of metered line” class EOML [HY17]
and the “unique end of potential line” class UEOPL [FGMS20]. Last year saw a surprising break-
through result by Fearnley et al. [FGHS21] who showed that CLS, which was introduced as a
natural subclass of the not-so-natural PLS ∩ PPAD, in fact coincides with PLS ∩ PPAD! That such
a class collapse was missed for a decade gives an impetus for finding black-box separations (aka
relativised oracle separations) for the newly introduced classes. Can one show CLSdt ≠ UEOPLdt ,
that is, CLS ≠ UEOPL relative to an oracle? Capturing CLSdt and UEOPLdt in the language of proof
complexity is a first step.


References
[AB87]      Noga Alon and Ravi B. Boppana. The monotone circuit complexity of Boolean func-
            tions. Combinatorica, 7(1):1–22, March 1987. doi:10.1007/bf02579196.
[AD08]      Albert Atserias and Vı́ctor Dalmau. A combinatorial characterization of resolution
            width. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 74(3):323–334, May 2008. doi:
            10.1016/j.jcss.2007.06.025.

[Ale04]     Michael Alekhnovich. Mutilated chessboard problem is exponentially hard for reso-
            lution. Theoretical Computer Science, 310(1-3):513–525, January 2004. doi:10.1016/
            s0304-3975(03)00395-5.

[BCE+ 98]   Paul Beame, Stephen Cook, Jeff Edmonds, Russell Impagliazzo, and Toniann Pitassi.
            The relative complexity of NP search problems. Journal of Computer and System
            Sciences, 57(1):3–19, August 1998. doi:10.1006/jcss.1998.1575.
[BEGJ00]    Maria Luisa Bonet, Juan Luis Esteban, Nicola Galesi, and Jan Johannsen. On the rela-
            tive complexity of resolution refinements and cutting planes proof systems. SIAM Jour-
            nal on Computing, 30(5):1462–1484, January 2000. Preliminary version in FOCS ’98.
            doi:10.1137/s0097539799352474.

[BM04]      Joshua Buresh-Oppenheim and Tsuyoshi Morioka. Relativized NP search problems and
            propositional proof systems. In Proceedings of the 19th Conference on Computational
            Complexity (CCC ’04), pages 54–67, 2004. doi:10.1109/CCC.2004.1313795.
[BP98]      Samuel R. Buss and Toniann Pitassi. Good degree bounds on Nullstellensatz refuta-
            tions of the induction principle. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 57(2):162–
            171, October 1998. Preliminary version in CCC ’96. doi:10.1006/jcss.1998.1585.
[BU99]      Christer Berg and Staffan Ulfberg. Symmetric approximation arguments for monotone
            lower bounds without sunflowers. Computational Complexity, 8(1):1–20, June 1999.
            doi:10.1007/s000370050017.

[BW01]      Eli Ben-Sasson and Avi Wigderson. Short proofs are narrow—resolution made simple.
            Journal of the ACM, 48(2):149–169, March 2001. Preliminary version in STOC ’99.
            doi:10.1145/375827.375835.

[CCT87]     William Cook, Collette Coullard, and György Turán. On the complexity of cutting-
            plane proofs. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 18(1):25–38, September 1987. doi:10.1016/
            0166-218X(87)90039-4.

[CDT09]     Xi Chen, Xiaotie Deng, and Shang-Hua Teng. Settling the complexity of computing
            two-player Nash equilibria. Journal of the ACM, 56(3):1–57, May 2009. doi:10.1145/
            1516512.1516516.
[Chv73]     Vasek Chvátal. Edmonds polytopes and a hierarchy of combinatorial problems. Dis-
            crete Mathematics, 4(4):305–337, 1973. doi:10.1016/0012-365X(73)90167-2.
[CKLM19] Arkadev Chattopadhyay, Michal Koucký, Bruno Loff, and Sagnik Mukhopadhyay.
         Simulation theorems via pseudo-random properties. Computational Complexity,
         28(4):617–659, July 2019. doi:10.1007/s00037-019-00190-7.
[CKR20]     Bruno Pasqualotto Cavalar, Mrinal Kumar, and Benjamin Rossman. Monotone cir-
            cuit lower bounds from robust sunflowers. In Proceedings of the 14th Latin American
            Symposium on Theoretical Informatics (LATIN ’20), volume 12118 of Lecture Notes
            in Mathematics, pages 311–322. Springer, 2020. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-61792-9 25.
[CLRS16]    Siu On Chan, James Lee, Prasad Raghavendra, and David Steurer. Approximate
            constraint satisfaction requires large LP relaxations. Journal of the ACM, 63(4):1–22,
            November 2016. doi:10.1145/2811255.
[DGP09]     Constantinos Daskalakis, Paul W. Goldberg, and Christos H. Papadimitriou. The
            complexity of computing a Nash equilibrium. SIAM Journal on Computing, 39(1):195–
            259, January 2009. doi:10.1137/070699652.
[DP11]      Constantinos Daskalakis and Christos Papadimitriou. Continuous local search. In
            Proceedings of the 22nd Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA ’11), January 2011.
            doi:10.1137/1.9781611973082.62.

[DR01]      Stefan Dantchev and Søren Riis. “Planar” tautologies hard for resolution. In Proceed-
            ings 42nd IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS ’01),
            pages 220–229, October 2001. doi:10.1109/sfcs.2001.959896.
[dRMN+ 20] Susanna F. de Rezende, Or Meir, Jakob Nordstrom, Toniann Pitassi, Robert Robere,
           and Marc Vinyals. Lifting with simple gadgets and applications to circuit and proof
           complexity. In Proceedings of the 61st IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of
           Computer Science (FOCS ’20), November 2020. doi:10.1109/focs46700.2020.00011.
[dRNV16]    Susanna F. de Rezende, Jakob Nordström, and Marc Vinyals. How limited interaction
            hinders real communication (and what it means for proof and circuit complexity). In
            Proceedings of the 57th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
            (FOCS ’16), October 2016. doi:10.1109/focs.2016.40.
[DT20]      Daniel Dadush and Samarth Tiwari. On the complexity of branching proofs. In
            Proceedings of the 35th Computational Complexity Conference (CCC ’20), Leibniz
            International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), July 2020. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.CCC.
            2020.34.

[FGHS21]    John Fearnley, Paul W. Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani. The
            complexity of gradient descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS. In Proceedings of the 53rd
            Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC ’21), June 2021.
            doi:10.1145/3406325.3451052.

[FGMS20]    John Fearnley, Spencer Gordon, Ruta Mehta, and Rahul Savani. Unique end of po-
            tential line. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 114:1–35, December 2020.
            doi:10.1016/j.jcss.2020.05.007.

[Fol22]     Lukáš Folwarczný. On protocols for monotone feasible interpolation. Technical Report
           2201.05662, arXiv.org, January 2022. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.05662.
[FPPR17]   Noah Fleming, Denis Pankratov, Toniann Pitassi, and Robert Robere. Random
           Θ(log n)-CNFs are hard for cutting planes. In Proceedings of the 58th IEEE An-
           nual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS ’17), October 2017.
           doi:10.1109/focs.2017.19.

[Fu97]     Xudong Fu. Lower bounds on sizes of cutting plane proofs for modular coloring princi-
           ples. In DIMACS Series in Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science,
           pages 135–148. American Mathematical Society, November 1997. Preliminary version
           in STOC ’96. doi:10.1090/dimacs/039/08.
[GGKS20]   Ankit Garg, Mika Göös, Pritish Kamath, and Dmitry Sokolov. Monotone circuit lower
           bounds from resolution. Theory of Computing, 16(1):1–30, 2020. Preliminary version
           in STOC ’18. doi:10.4086/toc.2020.v016a013.
[GH92]     Mikael Goldmann and Johan Håstad. A simple lower bound for monotone clique using
           a communication game. Information Processing Letters, 41(4):221–226, March 1992.
           doi:10.1016/0020-0190(92)90184-w.

[GKRS18]   Mika Göös, Pritish Kamath, Robert Robere, and Dmitry Sokolov. Adventures in
           monotone complexity and TFNP. In Proceedings of the 10th Innovations in The-
           oretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS ’19), volume 124 of Leibniz Interna-
           tional Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 38:1–38:19, January 2018. doi:
           10.4230/LIPIcs.ITCS.2019.38.

[Gom63]    Ralph E. Gomory. An algorithm for integer solutions to linear programs. Recent
           advances in mathematical programming, 64(260-302):14, 1963.
[GP18]     Mika Göös and Toniann Pitassi. Communication lower bounds via critical block
           sensitivity. SIAM Journal on Computing, 47(5):1778–1806, January 2018. doi:
           10.1137/16M1082007.

[GPW18]    Mika Göös, Toniann Pitassi, and Thomas Watson. Deterministic communication vs.
           partition number. SIAM Journal on Computing, 47(6):2435–2450, January 2018. Pre-
           liminary version in FOCS ’15. doi:10.1137/16m1059369.
[GPW20]    Mika Göös, Toniann Pitassi, and Thomas Watson. Query-to-communication lifting for
           BPP. SIAM Journal on Computing, 49(4):FOCS17–441–FOCS17–461, January 2020.
           Preliminary version in FOCS ’17. doi:10.1137/17m115339x.
[GS95]     Michelangelo Grigni and Michael Sipser. Monotone separation of logarithmic space
           from logarithmic depth. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 50(3):433–437,
           June 1995. Preliminary version in SCT ’91. doi:10.1006/jcss.1995.1033.
[Hak85]    Armin Haken. The intractability of resolution. Theoretical Computer Science, 39:297–
           308, 1985. doi:10.1016/0304-3975(85)90144-6.
[HC99]     Armin Haken and Stephen A. Cook. An exponential lower bound for the size of
           monotone real circuits. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 58(2):326–335,
           April 1999. doi:10.1006/jcss.1998.1617.
[HP17]     Pavel Hrubeš and Pavel Pudlák. Random formulas, monotone circuits, and interpola-
           tion. In Proceedings of the 58th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
           Science (FOCS ’17), October 2017. doi:10.1109/focs.2017.20.
[HP18]     Pavel Hrubeš and Pavel Pudlák. A note on monotone real circuits. Information
           Processing Letters, 131:15–19, March 2018. doi:10.1016/j.ipl.2017.11.002.
[HR00]     Danny Harnik and Ran Raz. Higher lower bounds on monotone size. In Proceedings
           of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC ’00), pages
           378–387, 2000. doi:10.1145/335305.335349.
[HY17]     Pavel Hubáček and Eylon Yogev. Hardness of continuous local search: Query com-
           plexity and cryptographic lower bounds. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM-
           SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA ’17), pages 1352–1371, January
           2017. doi:10.1137/1.9781611974782.88.
[IS14]     Dmitry Itsykson and Dmitry Sokolov. Lower bounds for splittings by linear com-
           binations. In Proceedings of the 39th Mathematical Foundations of Computer Sci-
           ence (MFCS ’14), volume 8635 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 372–383.
           Springer, 2014. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-44465-8 32.
[Joh98]    Jan Johannsen. Lower bounds for monotone real circuit depth and formula size and
           tree-like cutting planes. Information Processing Letters, 67(1):37–41, July 1998. doi:
           10.1016/s0020-0190(98)00079-9.

[JPY88]    David S. Johnson, Christos H. Papadimitriou, and Mihalis Yannakakis. How easy is
           local search? Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 37(1):79–100, August 1988.
           doi:10.1016/0022-0000(88)90046-3.

[Juk97]    Stasys Jukna. Finite limits and monotone computations: The lower bounds criterion.
           In Proceedings of the 12th Annual IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity
           (CCC ’97), pages 302–313, June 1997. doi:10.1109/CCC.1997.612325.
[Juk99]    Stasys Jukna. Combinatorics of monotone computations. Combinatorica, 19(1):65–85,
           January 1999. doi:10.1007/s004930050046.
[KMR21]    Pravesh K. Kothari, Raghu Meka, and Prasad Raghavendra. Approximating rectangles
           by juntas and weakly exponential lower bounds for LP relaxations of CSPs. SIAM
           Journal on Computing, pages STOC17–305–STOC17–332, May 2021. Preliminary
           version in STOC ’17. doi:10.1137/17m1152966.
[KPPY84]   Maria Klawe, Wolfgang J. Paul, Nicholas Pippenger, and Mihalis Yannakakis. On
           monotone formulae with restricted depth. In Proceedings of the 16th Annual ACM
           Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC ’84), pages 480–487, December 1984.
           doi:10.1145/800057.808717.

[Kra97]    Jan Krajı́ček. Interpolation theorems, lower bounds for proof systems, and indepen-
           dence results for bounded arithmetic. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 62(2):457–486, June
           1997. doi:10.2307/2275541.
[Kra98]    Jan Krajı́ček. Interpolation by a game. Mathematical Logic Quarterly, 44(4):450–458,
           1998. doi:10.1002/malq.19980440403.
[Kra19]    Jan Krajı́ček. Proof Complexity. Cambridge University Press, 2019.
[KW90]     Mauricio Karchmer and Avi Wigderson. Monotone circuits for connectivity require
            super-logarithmic depth. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 3(2):255–265, May
            1990. doi:10.1137/0403021.
[KW93]      Mauricio Karchmer and Avi Wigderson. On span programs. In Proceedings of the
            8th Structure in Complexity Theory Conference (SCT ’93), pages 102–111, May 1993.
            doi:10.1109/SCT.1993.336536.

[LMM+ 20]   Shachar Lovett, Raghu Meka, Ian Mertz, Toniann Pitassi, and Jiapeng Zhang. Lifting
            with sunflowers. Technical Report TR20-111, Electronic Colloquium on Computational
            Complexity (ECCC), 2020. URL: https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2020/111/.
[LRS15]     James Lee, Prasad Raghavendra, and David Steurer. Lower bounds on the size of
            semidefinite programming relaxations. In Proceedings of the 47th Annual Symposium
            on Theory of Computing (STOC ’15), pages 567–576, 2015. doi:10.1145/2746539.2746599.
[Mor05]     Tsuyoshi Morioka. Logical Approaches to the Complexity of Search Problems: Proof
            Complexity, Quantified Propositional Calculus, and Bounded Arithmetic. PhD thesis,
            University of Toronto, 2005. URL: https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/resources/pdf/morioka.pdf .
[MP91]      Nimrod Megiddo and Christos H. Papadimitriou. On total functions, existence the-
            orems and computational complexity. Theoretical Computer Science, 81(2):317–324,
            April 1991. doi:10.1016/0304-3975(91)90200-L.
[Mul87]     Ketan Mulmuley. A fast parallel algorithm to compute the rank of a matrix over an
            arbitrary field. Combinatorica, 7(1):101–104, March 1987. doi:10.1007/bf02579205.
[Pap94]     Christos H. Papadimitriou. On the complexity of the parity argument and other
            inefficient proofs of existence. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 48(3):498–
            532, June 1994. doi:10.1016/s0022-0000(05)80063-7.
[Pot17]     Aaron Potechin. Bounds on monotone switching networks for directed connectivity.
            Journal of the ACM, 64(4):1–48, September 2017. doi:10.1145/3080520.
[PR17]      Toniann Pitassi and Robert Robere. Strongly exponential lower bounds for mono-
            tone computation. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
            Computing (STOC ’17), June 2017. doi:10.1145/3055399.3055478.
[PR18]      Toniann Pitassi and Robert Robere. Lifting Nullstellensatz to monotone span programs
            over any field. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
            Computing (STOC ’18), pages 1207–1219, 2018. doi:10.1145/3188745.3188914.
[Pud97]     Pavel Pudlák. Lower bounds for resolution and cutting plane proofs and monotone
            computations. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 62(3):981–998, September 1997. doi:10.2307/
            2275583.

[Pud00]     Pavel Pudlák. Proofs as games. The American Mathematical Monthly, 107(6):541–550,
            June 2000. doi:10.1080/00029890.2000.12005233.
[Raz85a]    Alexander A. Razborov. Lower bounds for the monotone complexity of some Boolean
            functions. Soviet Mathematics Doklady, 31(2):354–357, 1985. English translation of a
            paper in Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR.
[Raz85b]    Alexander A. Razborov. Lower bounds on monotone complexity of the logical per-
            manent. Mathematical notes of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR, 37(6):485–493,
          June 1985. doi:10.1007/BF01157687.
[Raz90]   Alexander A. Razborov. Applications of matrix methods to the theory of lower bounds
          in computational complexity. Combinatorica, 10(1):81–93, March 1990. doi:10.1007/
          bf02122698.

[Raz95]   Alexander A. Razborov. Unprovability of lower bounds on circuit size in certain frag-
          ments of bounded arithmetic. Izvestiya: Mathematics, pages 201–224, February 1995.
          doi:10.1070/im1995v059n01abeh000009.

[Raz16]   Alexander A. Razborov. Proof complexity and beyond. SIGACT News, 47(2):66–86,
          June 2016. doi:10.1145/2951860.2951875.
[RM99]    Ran Raz and Pierre McKenzie. Separation of the monotone NC hierarchy. Com-
          binatorica, 19(3):403–435, March 1999. Preliminary version in FOCS ’97. doi:
          10.1007/s004930050062.

[Rob18]   Robert Robere. Unified lower bounds for monotone computation. PhD thesis, Univer-
          sity of Toronto (Canada), 2018. URL: https://hdl.handle.net/1807/92007.
[Ros97]   Arnold Rosenbloom. Monotone real circuits are more powerful than monotone Boolean
          circuits. Information Processing Letters, 61(3):161–164, February 1997. doi:10.1016/
          s0020-0190(97)00007-0.

[Rot14]   Thomas Rothvoß. The matching polytope has exponential extension complexity. In
          Proceedings of the 46th Annual Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC ’14),
          pages 263–272, 2014. doi:10.1145/2591796.2591834.
[RT08]    Ran Raz and Iddo Tzameret. Resolution over linear equations and multilinear proofs.
          Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 155(3):194–224, October 2008. doi:10.1016/j.apal.
          2008.04.001.

[RW92]    Ran Raz and Avi Wigderson. Monotone circuits for matching require linear depth.
          Journal of the ACM, 39(3):736–744, July 1992. doi:10.1145/146637.146684.
[Sok17]   Dmitry Sokolov. Dag-like communication and its applications. In Proceedings of the
          12th International Computer Science Symposium in Russia (CSR ’17), volume 10304
          of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 294–307. Springer, June 2017. doi:10.
          1007/978-3-319-58747-9 26.

[Tar88]   Éva Tardos. The gap between monotone and non-monotone circuit complexity is
          exponential. Combinatorica, 8(1):141–142, March 1988. doi:10.1007/bf02122563.
[Urq87]   Alasdair Urquhart. Hard examples for resolution. Journal of the ACM, 34(1):209–219,
          January 1987. doi:10.1145/7531.8928.
[Urq03]   Alasdair Urquhart. Resolution proofs of matching principles. Annals of Mathematics
          and Artificial Intelligence, 37(3):241–250, March 2003. doi:10.1023/a:1021231610627.
[Weg87]   Ingo Wegener. The complexity of Boolean functions. Wiley-Teubner, 1987.
