                                                     The Algorithmic Phase Transition of Random k-SAT
                                                                 for Low Degree Polynomials
                                                                             Guy Bresler∗                 Brice Huang†
                                                                                         October 29, 2021
arXiv:2106.02129v3 [cs.CC] 29 Oct 2021




                                                                                               Abstract
                                                   Let Φ be a uniformly random k-SAT formula with n variables and m clauses. We study the algorithmic
                                               task of finding a satisfying assignment of Φ. It is known that satisfying assignments exist with high
                                               probability up to clause density m/n = 2k log 2 − 21 (log 2 + 1) + ok (1), while the best polynomial-time
                                               algorithm known, the Fix algorithm of Coja-Oghlan [CO10], finds a satisfying assignment at the much
                                               lower clause density (1 − ok (1))2k log k/k. This prompts the question: is it possible to efficiently find a
                                               satisfying assignment at higher clause densities?
                                                   We prove that the class of low degree polynomial algorithms cannot find a satisfying assignment at
                                               clause density (1 + ok (1))κ∗ 2k log k/k for a universal constant κ∗ ≈ 4.911. This class encompasses Fix,
                                               message passing algorithms including Belief and Survey Propagation guided decimation (with bounded
                                               or mildly growing number of rounds), and local algorithms on the factor graph. This is the first hardness
                                               result for any class of algorithms at clause density within a constant factor of that achieved by Fix. Our
                                               proof establishes and leverages a new many-way overlap gap property tailored to random k-SAT.


                                         Contents
                                         1 Introduction                                                                                                       2

                                         2 Results                                                                                                            5

                                         3 The Overlap Gap Program and Sketch of Main Ideas                                                                   9

                                         4 Proof of Impossibility for Low Degree Polynomials                                                                  13

                                         5 Proof of Presence of Ensemble Multi-OGP                                                                            19

                                         6 Stability of Low Degree Polynomials                                                                                26

                                         7 Proof of Impossibility for Local Algorithms                                                                        30

                                         8 Simulation of Local Memory Algorithms                                                                              35

                                         9 Proof of Achievability                                                                                             45

                                         10 Discussion                                                                                                        49

                                         A On Improving the Constant κ∗                                                                                       56
                                            ∗ Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of EECS. Email: guy@mit.edu. Supported by MIT-IBM Watson AI

                                         Lab and NSF CAREER award CCF-1940205.
                                            † Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of EECS. Email: bmhuang@mit.edu. Supported by NSF Graduate

                                         Research Scholarship 1745302, a Siebel Scholarship, and NSF TRIPODS award 1740751.
                                              Key words and phrases. Random k-SAT; average-case complexity; algorithmic phase transition; low degree polynomial
                                         hardness; overlap gap property.


                                                                                                    1
1      Introduction
The k-SAT problem occupies a central role in complexity theory as the first and canonical NP-complete
problem [Coo71]. Its average-case analogue, random k-SAT, likewise has a central role in average-case
computational complexity. In this problem, we are given a k-CNF formula with m clauses and n variables
whose km literals are sampled uniformly and i.i.d. from the 2n possible literals;1 see [Ach09] for a survey.
There are two natural fundamental questions for random k-SAT. First, at what scalings of (n, k, m) are there
satisfying assignments? Second, when can they be found by efficient algorithms?
    Early work showed that for fixed k the interesting regime of random k-SAT is when m = Θ(n), and that
the problem’s qualitative behavior in the large-n limit depends on the clause density α = m/n. Namely,
[FP83] showed that if α ≥ 2k log 2, random k-SAT is unsatisfiable with high probability; on the positive
side, [MTF90] showed that if α < 2k /k, a simple algorithm finds a satisfying assignment with nontrivial
probability, and [CR92] improved the guarantee to with high probability.
    As we tune α, we encounter phase transitions separating one qualitative behavior from another. Two
phase transitions are of primary interest to us: the satisfiability threshold, below which random k-SAT admits
a satisfying assignment with high probability, and the algorithmic threshold, below which a polynomial-time
algorithm produces a satisfying assignment with high probability.
    The satisfiability threshold is well understood. [KKKS98] showed that random k-SAT is unsatisfiable
with high probability at clause density 2k log 2 − 12 (log 2 + 1) + ok (1), where ok (1) denotes a term limiting
to 0 as k → ∞. [COP16] showed that for a different ok (1) term, random k-SAT is satisfiable with high
probability at clause density 2k log 2 − 12 (log 2 + 1) + ok (1). For large k, the landmark result of Ding, Sly,
and Sun [DSS15] precisely identified the satisfiability threshold αs (k) within this ok (1) range, proving that
with high probability, random k-SAT is satisfiable when α < αs (k) and unsatisfiable when α > αs (k).
    In the present paper we study the algorithmic threshold, which is much less understood. The best
polynomial-time algorithm known, the Fix algorithm of Coja-Oghlan [CO10], finds a satisfying assignment
with high probability at clause density (1 − ok (1))2k log k/k, nearly a factor of k below the satisfiability
threshold. A body of evidence has emerged to suggest that this is the correct threshold, but rigorous results
that efficient algorithms fail beyond this threshold have been scarce.
    In the early 2000s, statistical physicists developed a rich but non-rigorous theory describing the solution
geometry of random k-SAT, among other random constraint satisfaction problems [KMRT+ 07]. This theory
predicts several phase transitions in random k-SAT’s solution geometry, which we now summarize; see
[KMRT+ 07, Figure 2] for an illustration. At low clause density, the space of satisfying assignments is one
large cluster. When the clause density reaches the uniqueness threshold, disconnected solution clusters appear
but the main cluster contains all but an exponentially small fraction of solutions. At the clustering threshold,
the solution space shatters into an exponentially large number of clusters, each with an exponentially small
fraction of solutions. Additional clauses cause these clusters to shrink until at the condensation threshold,
the solution space is dominated by a few clusters of strongly varying sizes. Finally, beyond the satisfiability
threshold there are no satisfying assignments. Many of these predictions have since been proven rigorously:
the prediction of the satisfiability threshold was confirmed in [DSS15], and the physics prediction of the
random regular NAE-k-SAT condensation threshold was recently confirmed in [NSS20].
    [KMRT+ 07] predicted that Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms succeed up to the cluster-
ing threshold and no more. Since then, this threshold has emerged as the predicted limit of all efficient
algorithms, and structural phenomena in the clustered regime have been rigorously established that (still
non-rigorously) suggest algorithmic hardness. [ACO08] showed that clustering occurs at clause density
(1 + ok (1))2k log k/k, confirming the prediction of [KMRT+ 07]. They showed that at this clause density,
long-range correlations appear in random k-SAT’s solution space, in the following sense. Say variable xi
of a satisfying assignment x ∈ {T, F}n is frozen if any satisfying assignment y with xi 6= yi is at Hamming
distance Ω(n) from x. Then, in all but an o(1) fraction of satisfying assignments, all but an ok (1) fraction
of bits are frozen with high probability. This suggests that above this clause density, local search is unlikely
to succeed, and any algorithmic solution to random k-SAT must use a qualitatively different approach.
    The rigorous evidence for the algorithmic threshold consists of exhibiting algorithms on one side and
    1 In a variant of this definition, the m clauses are chosen uniformly and without replacement among all 2k n clauses with
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                               k
k distinct, non-complementary literals. This definition behaves identically to ours in the large-n limit, and all properties of
random k-SAT we show in this paper apply equally to this model.



                                                              2
         Reference                Algorithm or algorithm class                      Clause density

         [ABM04]                        DPLL algorithms                                Ok (2k /k)
          [GS17]      Balanced sequential local algorithms (NAE-k-SAT)         (1 + ok (1))2k−1 log2 k/k
          [Het16]            Survey Propagation guided decimation                (1 + ok (1))2k log k/k
        [COHH17]                             Walksat                                Ok (2k log2 k/k)

        This work                    Low degree polynomials                     (1 + ok (1))κ∗ 2k log k/k

Table 1: Algorithmic hardness results for random k-SAT with large k. The conjectured algorithmic threshold
is (1 + ok (1))2k log k/k.


producing bounds against specific algorithms or restricted computational models on the other side. There
is a long history of work on heuristic algorithms for k-SAT. The oldest heuristic is the Davis-Putnam-
Logemann-Loveland (DPLL) algorithm [DP60, DLL61], a backtracking based search algorithm which still
forms the basis for many modern SAT solvers. Other heuristics that have emerged include the pure literal
rule [GPB82]; unit clause propagation [MTF90]; shortest clause [CR92, FS96]; walksat [Pap91, COFF+ 09];
and Belief and Survey Propagation guided decimation [MRTS07, BMZ05]. However, there is no evidence,
rigorous or non-rigorous, that any of these algorithms succeed beyond clause density Ok (2k /k). (See [CO10,
Table 1] for a review of these algorithms’ performances.) The breakthrough result [CO10] produced the
algorithm Fix, which provably finds a satisfying assignment with high probability up to clause density
(1 − ok (1))2k log k/k. This is the best algorithm to date, and the above physics evidence suggests that this
clause density is optimal up to lower order terms.
    The earliest rigorous hardness result is [LMS98], which proved that the pure literal rule does not solve
random 3-SAT above clause density approximately 1.63. [AS00] generalized this result, showing that so-called
myopic algorithms cannot solve random 3-SAT above clause density approximately 3.26. (The random 3-SAT
satisfiability threshold is conjectured to be about 4.26 [MPZ02].)
    For large k, the earliest hardness result is [ABM04], which showed that DPLL type algorithms require
exponential running time beyond clause density Ok (2k /k). Note that this threshold is smaller than the
clause density (1 − ok (1))2k log k/k where Fix succeeds; thus DPLL algorithms are provably suboptimal.
Gamarnik and Sudan [GS17] showed that balanced sequential local algorithms, which include Belief and
Survey Propagation guided decimation (with constant or mildly growing number of message passing rounds)
cannot solve random NAE-k-SAT at clause density (1 + ok (1))2k−1 log2 k/k. The quantity 2k−1 is the NAE-
k-SAT analogue of 2k for k-SAT. Remaining negative results are bounds against specific algorithms. [Het16]
proved that Survey Propagation guided decimation (without restriction on the number of rounds) fails at
clause density (1+ok (1))2k log k/k, and [COHH17] proved that walksat fails at clause density Ok (2k log2 k/k).
Table 1 summarizes these results. To date, all negative results either differ from the conjectured threshold
(1 + ok (1))2k log k/k by a factor growing in k or are tailored to a specific algorithm.
    In this paper, we show that low degree polynomial algorithms do not solve random k-SAT above clause
density (1 + ok (1))κ∗ 2k log k/k for a universal constant κ∗ ≈ 4.911. Low degree polynomials encompass
many of the above algorithms, including Fix, Belief and Survey Propagation guided decimation, and local
and sequential local algorithms on the factor graph. This is the first hardness result for any class of algorithms
within a constant factor of the conjectured algorithmic threshold.
    Our result gives strong evidence that the algorithmic threshold is within a constant factor of 2k log k/k.
Because our techniques link clustering to hardness, we believe the true algorithmic threshold is (1 +
ok (1))2k log k/k, matching Fix and the onset of clustering; we leave the question of closing this constant
factor gap as an important open problem.

1.1    Algorithmic Hardness from the Overlap Gap Property
The proof of our result is based on making rigorous an appropriate understanding of random k-SAT’s solution
geometry. This proof extends a line of work on the overlap gap property (OGP) and develops techniques


                                                        3
to overcome obstacles limiting the reach of prior OGP methodology. We now summarize the OGP program
and our contribution to it; a more detailed discussion can be found in Section 3.
    The recent line of work on the OGP [GS14, RV17, GS17, GL18, CGPR19, GJ21, GJW20, Wei20, GK21a,
GJW21, HS21], see [Gam21] for a survey, is the first to link physics intuitions about solution geometry to
rigorous algorithmic hardness results. Initiated by Gamarnik and Sudan in [GS14], the OGP program links
algorithmic hardness to an “overlap gap,” a formalization of clustering defined as the absence of a pair of
solutions a medium distance apart. In its original form, an OGP argument shows that in (part of) the
clustered regime, the problem’s solution space exhibits an overlap gap with high probability. It then shows
that any stable algorithm solving the problem can be used to construct a forbidden pair of solutions, and
thus such an algorithm cannot exist.
    In many problems, the classic OGP shows stable algorithms fail well below the point where solutions
exist, but not to the believed algorithmic threshold. This is because the overlap gap is a “worst case” notion
of clustering requiring there to be zero solution pairs at medium distance, while the notion of clustering
that appears to coincide with hardness is “average case,” allowing a small minority of medium distance
solution pairs. To improve the threshold where hardness for stable algorithms is shown, later work has
considered forbidden structures consisting of several solutions, which we term multi-OGPs. Building on the
line of work [GS14, RV17, GJW20], the paper of Wein [Wei20] showed using a multi-OGP that low degree
polynomials cannot solve maximum independent set at any objective larger than the believed algorithmic
threshold. Multi-OGPs have also been used to rule out stable algorithms for random NAE-k-SAT [GS17]
and the Number Partitioning Problem [GK21a] well below the existential threshold (and the reach of the
classic OGP), and for spin glass optimization [HS21] at the algorithmic threshold.
    For random k-SAT, early work [DMMZ08] showed that the classic OGP occurs at clause density (1 +
ok (1)) 21 2k log 2. This clause density is below the satisfiability threshold, confirming the clustering picture at
this clause density. However, it remains well above the conjectured algorithmic threshold. Establishing a
multi-OGP for random k-SAT within a constant factor of the algorithmic limit presents unique challenges.
Our approach is most similar to that of [Wei20]: we express the log first moment of an overlap structure
as a free entropy, and our goal is to find an overlap structure making this quantity negative. However, in
contrast to the maximum independent set problem considered in [Wei20], where the independence of the
Erdős-Rényi graph’s edges makes the free entropy analysis tractable by the principle of deferred decisions,
the free entropy for random k-SAT has complex dependencies which make a tight analysis difficult. It is a
priori unclear how to even define the forbidden structure in the multi-OGP.
    We identify the correct forbidden structure and prove that it does not occur with high probability. To
achieve this, we make three conceptual contributions. First, we define notions of overlap profile and overlap
entropy. Second, we define the multi-OGP in terms of this formalism; this is itself a key innovation, as all
(multi-)OGPs in the literature have not required the overlap profile’s full power. Third, we perform a novel
free entropy analysis to show the multi-OGP occurs. We are optimistic that many problems, including those
with similarly complex energy landscapes, may be amenable to the techniques developed in this paper.

1.2    Hardness for Restricted Classes of Computation
Reasoning about the power of restricted classes of algorithms is at the heart of theoretical computer science.
As discussed above, there is a long line of work showing hardness of random k-SAT for various computational
models and algorithms [LMS98, AS00, ABM04, GS17, Het16, COHH17]. More generally, for other problems,
the limits of various computational models have been studied, including circuits [Ajt83, FSS84, Hås86,
CSS18], the convex hierarchies of Sherali-Adams and Lóvász-Schrijver (see [CMM09] and references therein),
the sum of squares hierarchy [Gri01, KMOW17, BHK+ 19], and local algorithms on graphs [GS14, RV17].
   Recently, low degree polynomial algorithms have emerged as a prominent class in average case complexity
and statistical inference. As outlined in [GJW20, Appendix A], this class contains many popular and powerful
frameworks, including spectral methods, local algorithms on graphs, and (approximate) message passing
[DMM09, BM11, JM13, Mon19, AMS20, Sel21]. In addition, a recent flurry of work has shown that for
many problems in high-dimensional statistics, including planted clique, sparse PCA, community detection,
and tensor PCA, low degree polynomials are as powerful as the best polynomial-time algorithms known
[HS17, HKP+ 17, Hop18, BKW20, KWB19, DKWB20, CHK+ 20, BB20, LZ20, SW20, BBK+ 21, BBH+ 21].
Thus, showing that low degree polynomial algorithms fail at some threshold provides evidence that all


                                                         4
polynomial-time algorithms fail at that threshold.

1.3     Notation
For all positive integers n, [n] denotes the set {1, . . . , n}. For two assignments x, y ∈ {T, F}n, let ∆(x, y) =
 1
n |{i ∈ [n] : xi 6= yi }| denote the normalized Hamming distance. We occasionally consider assignments
x, y ∈ {T, F, err}n which allow an error symbol; for such assignments the definition of ∆ extends verbatim.
    Throughout, log denotes the natural logarithm. The binary entropy function H : [0, 1] → [0, log 2] is
H(x) = −x log x − (1 − x) log(1 − x). We often use the basic inequality H(x) ≤ x log xe . We also overload
notation and denote by H(·) the entropy of certain distributions. These will be defined where first used.
    All our results are in the double limit as n → ∞, and then k → ∞. Thus, the notations O(·), Ω(·), o(·), ω(·)
indicate asymptotic behavior in n, suppressing any dependence on k. With a tilde (e.g. O(·)) e     these notations
also suppress polylog(n) factors. When subscripted with k, these notations indicate asymptotic behavior in
k of a quantity independent of n.

Organization. The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we state our main results. Sec-
tion 3 summarizes the progress of the OGP program and places our contributions in this context. Sections 4
through 6 are devoted to the proof of Theorem 2.6, our hardness result for low degree polynomials. Section 4
develops the formalism needed to define our central multi-OGP. This section proves Theorem 2.6 assuming
Proposition 4.7(a), that outputs of the low degree polynomial are stable with nontrivial probability, and
Proposition 4.7(c), that the main multi-OGP occurs with high probability. Sections 5 and 6 prove these
propositions. Section 7 proves Theorem 2.13, which shows that at clause density (1 + ok (1))κ∗ 2k log k/k,
local algorithms cannot solve random k-SAT with even very small probability. Section 8 shows that a class
of algorithms we call local memory algorithms, which include Fix and sequential local algorithms, can be
simulated by local algorithms and low degree polynomials. Using these simulation results, Section 9 proves
Theorem 2.14, our converse achievability result that local algorithms and low degree polynomials both solve
random k-SAT at clause density (1 − ok (1))2k log k/k. Section 10 gives concluding remarks.

Acknowledgements. We are grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their comments and suggestions,
which have improved this paper. We thank David Gamarnik, Mehtaab Sawhney, Mark Sellke, and Alex
Wein for helpful conversations. This work was done in part while the authors were participating in the
Simons Institute programs in Probability, Geometry, and Computation in High Dimensions (Fall 2020) and
Computational Complexity of Statistical Inference (Fall 2021).


2     Results
Throughout this paper, V = {x1 , . . . , xn } denotes a set of propositional variables. The set of corresponding
literals, consisting of the variables in V and their negations, is L = {x1 , . . . , xn , x̄1 , . . . , x̄n }. Let Ωk (n, m)
denote the set of all k-CNF formulas over V with m clauses. We allow literals to appear multiple times in a
clause and clauses to appear multiple times in a formula. We treat each Φ ∈ Ωk (n, m) as an ordered m-tuple
of clauses, each of which is an ordered k-tuple of literals. Let Φi (i ∈ [m]) denote the ith clause of Φ and
Φi,j (j ∈ [k]) denote the jth literal of Φi . The central object of this paper is the following distribution.
Definition 2.1 (Random k-SAT). The random k-SAT distribution Φk (n, m) is the law of a uniformly
random sample from Ωk (n, m). Equivalently, we can sample Φ ∼ Φk (n, m) by sampling the literals Φi,j i.i.d.
from unif(L).

    We now define the constant κ∗ in our hardness results. Define the function ι : (1, +∞) → R by

                                                               β
                                                 ι(β) =                .
                                                          1 − βe−(β−1)

One easily checks that ι is strictly convex, with ι(β) → +∞ when β → 1+ or β → +∞. Let κ∗ = min ι(β) ≈
4.911. The minimum is attained at β ∗ ≈ 3.513, the unique solution to β 2 e−(β−1) = 1 in (1, +∞).


                                                             5
2.1    Computational Hardness for Low Degree Polynomials
We study the class of low degree polynomial algorithms, defined as follows. This is the same computational
model considered in [GJW20, Wei20].
Definition 2.2 (Low degree polynomial). A degree-D polynomial is a function f : RN → Rn of the form

                                           f (x) = (f1 (x), . . . , fn (x)) ,

where each fi : RN → R is a multivariate polynomial (in the ordinary sense) with real coefficients of
degree at most D. A random degree-D polynomial is defined similarly, except the coefficients are random
(but independent of the input x). Formally, for an arbitrary probability space (Ω, Pω ), a random degree-D
polynomial is a function f : RN × Ω → Rn such that for each ω ∈ Ω, f (·, ω) is a degree-D polynomial.
Remark 2.3. We will see in Lemma 4.1 that randomness does not increase the power of the class of low
degree polynomials.
    We now define how to encode a k-SAT formula as an input to a low degree polynomial. Define an
arbitrary total order on L. We encode each Φ ∈ Ωk (n, m) as a “one-hot” vector of indicators Φi,j,s (i ∈
[m], j ∈ [k], s ∈ [2n]) that Φi,j is the sth element of L. This encoding is an element of {0, 1}N , where
N = m · k · 2n. Slightly abusing notation, we identify Φ with this encoding.
    Next, we define how to interpret the output of a low degree polynomial as a Boolean assignment. We
introduce the symbol err and define the function round : R → {T, F, err} by
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   T      x ≥ 1,
                                        round(x) = F       x ≤ −1,
                                                   
                                                   
                                                     err otherwise.

When applied to a real-valued vector, round is applied coordinate-wise. Thus, outputs of the polynomial
that are at least 1 represent true, outputs that are at most −1 represent false, and outputs in the interval
(−1, 1) are errors. It is important to exclude (−1, 1) so that a small change in the polynomial output cannot
induce a large change in (the valid outputs of) the assignment.
   In the following definition, we relax the notion of satisfying assignment in two ways: we allow the
algorithm to make mistakes in a small fraction η of positions (including all err outputs and possibly others),
and after repairing these mistakes we allow a small fraction ν of clauses to not be satisfied.
Definition 2.4 ((η, ν)-satisfy). Let η, ν ∈ [0, 1]. An assignment x ∈ {T, F}n ν-satisfies Φ ∈ Ωk (n, m) if it
satisfies at least (1 − ν)m clauses of Φ. Moreover, x ∈ {T, F, err}n (η, ν)-satisfies Φ if there exists y ∈ {T, F}n
such that ∆(x, y) ≤ η and y ν-satisfies Φ.
   We remark that any x with more than ηn entries equal to err does not (η, ν)-satisfy Φ. We will show
that for small η, ν independent of n, a low degree polynomial cannot produce a satisfying assignment for
random k-SAT even in this relaxed sense. Formally, we will show hardness for the following notion of solve.
Definition 2.5 ((δ, γ, η, ν)-solve). Let δ, η, ν ∈ [0, 1] and γ ≥ 1. A random polynomial f : RN × Ω → Rn
(δ, γ, η, ν)-solves Φk (n, m) if the following conditions hold.

 (a) PΦ,ω [(round ◦ f )(Φ, ω) (η, ν)-satisfies Φ] ≥ 1 − δ.
          h            i
 (b) EΦ,ω kf (Φ, ω)k22 ≤ γn.

    Here, δ is the algorithm’s failure probability and γ is a normalization parameter. We think of γ as a
large constant; condition (b) is necessary because otherwise we can scale f to make the condition that valid
outputs of f are outside the interval (−1, 1) meaningless.
    The following theorem is our main result, that no low degree polynomial can solve random k-SAT at
clause density κ2k log k/k for any κ > κ∗ .




                                                           6
Theorem 2.6 (Hardness for low degree polynomials). Fix κ > κ∗ . Let α = κ2k log k/k and m = ⌊αn⌋.
There exists k ∗ = k ∗ (κ) > 0 such that for any k ≥ k ∗ , there exists n∗ > 0, η = Ωk (k −1 ), ν = k212k , and
C1 , C2 > 0 (depending on κ, k) such that the following holds. If n ≥ n∗ , γ ≥ 1, 1 ≤ D ≤ γClog
                                                                                              1n
                                                                                                n and

                                            δ ≤ exp (−C2 γD log n) ,

then there is no random degree-D polynomial that (δ, γ, η, ν)-solves Φk (n, m).
     The only property of low degree polynomials we use is their smoothness, in the sense of Proposition 6.2.
Thus Theorem 2.6 applies to any algorithm satisfying the conclusion of this proposition.
     Note that Theorem 2.6 only rules out algorithms succeeding with quite large probability. This is a
limitation of our methods, shared by all results leveraging OGP to show hardness for low degree polynomials
[GJW20, Wei20]. Our converse achievability result, Theorem 2.14, will show that at clause densities where
efficient algorithms solving random k-SAT exist, they can be simulated by low degree polynomials and
succeed with probability larger than that forbidden by Theorem 2.6. We will also see in Theorem 2.13 that
local algorithms, a more restricted computation class that nonetheless simulates Fix, as well as Belief and
Survey Propagation Guided Decimation, cannot solve random k-SAT with even very small probability.
     The constant κ∗ can likely be optimized further. However, without further conceptual insights our
methods stall at a value of κ∗ strictly larger than 1, lower bounded by approximately 1.716. Thus further
ideas are needed to close the constant factor gap between our hardness results and the best algorithms. See
Appendix A for a discussion of these points. Despite this barrier, we believe the algorithmic phase transition
for low degree polynomials does occur at clause density (1+ok (1))2k log k/k, matching the physics prediction
and positive results. This is formalized in the following conjecture, which we leave as an open problem.
Conjecture 2.7. Theorem 2.6 (and Theorem 2.13) holds for all κ > 1.

2.2    Computational Hardness for Local Algorithms
We now consider local algorithms on the factor graph. We first define the factor graph of a k-SAT instance.
Definition 2.8 (Factor graph). The factor graph of Φ ∈ Ωk (n, m) is a signed bipartite graph (G, ρ), where
G = (VaG , ClG , EG ) is a bipartite graph with left-vertices VaG , right-vertices ClG , and edges EG , and
ρ : EG → {T, F} associates each edge with a polarity. Here, VaG = {v1 , . . . , vn } and ClG = {c1 , . . . , cm }
represent the variables and clauses of Φ. Every literal xj or x̄j in clause Φi corresponds to an edge e =
(vj , ci ) ∈ EG . Edge e has polarity ρG (e) = T if the literal is xj and ρG (e) = F if the literal is x̄j .
   To define local algorithms, we first introduce formalism for rooted graphs. Let (Ω, Pω ) be an arbitrary
probability space.
Definition 2.9 (Rooted decorated bipartite graph). A decorated bipartite graph is a tuple (G, ρ, ϕ). Here
G = (VaG , ClG , EG ) is a bipartite graph and VG = VaG ∪ ClG . Moreover, ρ, ϕ are maps ρ : EG → {T, F} and
ϕ : VG ∪ EG → Ω. A rooted decorated bipartite graph is a tuple (v, G, ρ, ϕ), where (G, ρ, ϕ) is a decorated
bipartite graph and v ∈ VG .
   Let Λ denote the set of rooted decorated bipartite graphs. Two such graphs are isomorphic of there exists
a bijection between them preserving v, VaG , ClG , EG , ρ, ϕ.
Definition 2.10 (r-neighborhood). Let (v, G, ρ, ϕ) ∈ Λ and r ∈ N. Define the r-neighborhood Nr (v, G) =
(v, G′ ), where VaG′ ⊆ VaG , ClG′ ⊆ ClG are the sets of vertices reachable from v by a path of length at
most r and EG′ is the set of edges on those paths. Further, define Nr (v, G, ρ, ϕ) = (v, G′ , ρ′ , ϕ′ ) ∈ Λ, where
(v, G′ ) = Nr (v, G) and ρ′ = ρ G′ , ϕ′ = ϕ G′ are the restrictions of ρ, ϕ to G′ .
Definition 2.11 (r-local function). A function f with domain Λ is r-local if the value of f (v, G, ρ, ϕ) depends
only on the isomorphism class of Nr (v, G, ρ, ϕ).
   In other words, a local function has access to the topology of the r-neighborhood, the vertex and edge
decorations, and the location of the root, but not the identities of the vertices and edges.


                                                        7
Definition 2.12 (r-local algorithm). Let f be an r-local function with codomain {T, F}. The r-local algo-
rithm based on f , denoted Af , runs as follows on input Φ ∈ Ωk (n, m) with factor graph (G, ρ).
 (1) Sample ϕ ∼ (Ω, Pω )⊗(VG ∪EG ) (i.e. each output of ϕ : VG ∪ EG → Ω is sampled i.i.d. from (Ω, Pω ))
     independently of Φ.
 (2) For each v = vi ∈ VaG , set xi = f (v, G, ρ, ϕ).
 (3) Output (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ {T, F}n.
   We now state our hardness result for local algorithms.
Theorem 2.13 (Hardness for local algorithms). Fix κ > κ∗ . Let α = κ2k log k/k and m = ⌊αn⌋. There
exists k ∗ = k ∗ (κ) > 0 such that for any k ≥ k ∗ , there exists η = Ωk (k −2 ) (depending on κ, k) and ν = k212k
such that the following holds. For all r ∈ N, there exists n∗ > 0 (depending on κ, k, r) such that if n ≥ n∗ ,
then for any r-local algorithm A with output in {T, F}n,
                                                                       e 1/3 )).
                                    P [A(Φ) (η, ν)-satisfies Φ] ≤ exp(−Ω(n

The probability is over the randomness of Φ ∼ Φk (n, m) and the (independent) internal randomness of A.
    This theorem rules out a much smaller success probability than Theorem 2.6 because our OGP argument
in this setting can leverage concentration properties of local algorithms, which are considerably stronger
than stability properties of low degree polynomials.

2.3    Achievability Results
The following result shows that local algorithms and constant degree polynomials solve random k-SAT at
clause density (1 − ε)2k log k/k for any ε > 0. This gives a lower bound on the algorithmic phase transition
within a constant factor and provides a converse to Theorems 2.6 and 2.13.
Theorem 2.14. Fix ε > 0. Let α = (1 − ε)2k log k/k and m = ⌊αn⌋. There exists k ∗ = k ∗ (ε) > 0 such that
for any k ≥ k ∗ and η > k −12 , there exist n∗ , r, D, γ > 0 and a sequence δ(n) = o(1) (dependent on ε, k, η)
such that the following holds for all n ≥ n∗ .
 (a) There exists an r-local algorithm A such that

                                            P [A(Φ) (η, 0)-satisfies Φ] ≥ 1 − δ(n).

 (b) There exists a (deterministic) degree-D polynomial that (δ(n), γ, η, 0)-solves Φk (n, m).
There also exists a sequence ν(n) = o(1) (dependent on ε, k, η) such that the following holds for all n ≥ n∗ .
 (c) There exists an r-local algorithm A such that
                                                                             e 1/3 )).
                                   P [A(Φ) (η, ν(n))-satisfies Φ] ≥ 1 − exp(−Ω(n

                                                                   e 1/5 )), γ, η, ν(n))-solves Φk (n, m).
 (d) There exists a (deterministic) degree-D polynomial that (exp(−Ω(n
    We prove this theorem by simulating the first phase of Fix by a local algorithm and any local algorithm
by a constant degree polynomial. We can arrange both simulations to be accurate within an arbitrarily
small constant (i.e. independent of n, arbitrarily small in k) normalized Hamming distance, with failure
probability exp(−Ω(n1/3 )). The requirement η > k −12 arises because the first phase of Fix produces an
assignment within normalized Hamming distance k −12 of a satisfying assignment, which is repaired by the
rest of Fix. We believe that it is possible to simulate the rest of Fix by a local algorithm, which would show
Theorem 2.14 for any η > 0; we do not attempt this improvement. Note that k −12 is well within the range
of η ruled out by our hardness results.
    In fact, we will show that local algorithms simulate any local memory algorithm. In this generalization
of local algorithms, the algorithm makes its local decisions in series (in a random vertex order), and each

                                                           8
decision can leave information on the vertices it accesses, which future decisions can see. This class includes
the first phase of Fix and the sequential local algorithms considered in [GS17]. Recall that the latter class
includes Belief and Survey Propagation Guided Decimation.
    In parts (c,d), where the goal is to satisfy all but an o(1) fraction of clauses, Theorem 2.14 gives algorithms
with success probability 1 − exp(−Ω(n  e 1/3 )) and 1 − exp(−Ω(n   e 1/5 )). This is within the range ruled out by
even Theorem 2.6. Of course, if the goal is to satisfy all clauses as in parts (a,b), we cannot ensure such a
high success probability because Φ ∼ Φk (n, m) is unsatisfiable with probability 1/poly(n) – for example, if
the first 2k clauses each contain variables x1 , . . . , xk with all 2k possible polarities.


3     The Overlap Gap Program and Sketch of Main Ideas
In this section, we outline our methods in the context of the OGP literature. We review the OGP work on
maximum independent set and introduce the negative free entropy chaining approach to multi-OGP from
[Wei20]. We discuss the challenges to extending this approach beyond maximum independent set and how
we overcome these challenges for random k-SAT.
    We remark that OGP and (several forms of) multi-OGP have also been harnessed to show the failure
of stable algorithms in problems such as largest submatrix [GL18], maxcut [CGPR19], number partitioning
[GK21a], and spin glass optimization [GJ21, GJW20, GJW21, HS21]. A different variant of OGP has been
linked to hardness in regression and planted problems [GZ17, GZ19, GJS19, BAWZ20].

3.1    OGP and Multi-OGP for Maximum Independent Set
Maximum independent set was the first problem where OGP methods derived a sharp algorithmic phase
transition. In this problem, we are given a sample G ∼ G(n, d/n) of a sparse Erdős-Rényi graph and our task
is to find a large independent set; the desired size of the set controls the problem difficulty. We work in the
double limit where n → ∞, and then d → ∞. It is known [Fri90, BGT10] that the largest independent set of
this graph has asymptotic size 2 log  d
                                     d n. More precisely, if Smax is the largest independent set, then as n → ∞
for fixed d we have n1 |Smax | → αd , for some αd = (1 + od (1)) 2 log    d
                                                                        d . However, the best polynomial-time
algorithm to date [Kar76] only finds an independent set of asymptotic size logd d n, half the optimum. It is
believed that no polynomial-time algorithm can find an asymptotically larger independent set.
     Rigorous results about this problem’s solution geometry support this conjecture: [COE15] showed that
for any fixed ε > 0, independent sets of size (1 + ε) logd d n are clustered in a way that implies that any local
Markov chain that samples these sets mixes slowly (but not necessarily that a local Markov chain cannot
efficiently find a single such set).

Hardness against local algorithms via OGP and multi-OGP. In [GS14], Gamarnik and Sudan
proved √that local algorithms (also called factors of i.i.d. algorithms) cannot find independent sets of size
(1 + 1/ 2 + ε) logd d n for any ε > 0. Their argument consists of two parts. First, they show that with
high probability, G ∼ G(n, d/n) does not have two independent sets of this size with intersection size in
[(1−δ) logd d n, (1+δ) logd d n], for δ > 0 depending on ε. Then, they construct an interpolation of correlated runs
of a putative local algorithm that finds an independent set of the desired size. From this interpolation, they
extract two runs that find two large independent sets with the forbidden intersection, yielding a contradiction.
    Rahman and Virág [RV17] generalized this argument, showing that local algorithms cannot find an
independent set of size (1 + ε) logd d n for any ε > 0. Their key insight is to consider a forbidden overlap
structure involving several large independent sets, generated from several correlated runs of a local algorithm.
They also showed local algorithms can find an independent set of size (1 − ε) logd d n, giving the first instance
of a multi-OGP identifying a sharp algorithmic phase transition.

Hardness against low degree polynomials by the ensemble innovation. Later work extended this
impossibility result to low degree polynomials, a significantly more powerful class of algorithms. Gamarnik,
       √ and Wein [GJW20] showed that low degree polynomials cannot find independent sets of size
Jagannath,
(1 + 1/ 2 + ε) logd d n. Their argument leverages an ensemble OGP, an idea introduced in [CGPR19]. They
construct an interpolation, this time over a sequence of correlated problem instances. They show that with


                                                         9
high probability, there do not exist two independent sets, possibly of different problem instances, of the desired
size with intersection size in [(1 − δ) logd d n, (1 + δ) logd d n]. Due to the stability of low degree polynomials, the
outputs of a low degree polynomial on consecutive problems in the interpolation are close with nontrivial
probability. So, a low degree polynomial finding independent sets of the desired size can be used to construct
the forbidden structure.
    Wein [Wei20] tightened this result using an ensemble multi-OGP, combining the multi-OGP and ensemble
OGP ideas. In this approach, the interpolation is over a sequence of correlated problem instances and the
forbidden structure consists of several independent sets, possibly of different problems, with prescribed many-
way overlaps. Wein showed that a low degree polynomial that finds independent sets of size (1 + ε) logd d n can
be used to construct the forbidden structure, and thus low degree polynomials cannot find independent sets
of this size. Conversely, Wein showed that low degree polynomials can simulate the local algorithms that
find independent sets of size (1 − ε) logd d n. This gives a stronger algorithmic phase transition: low degree
polynomials find independent sets of asymptotic size logd d n and no more.

Negative free entropy chaining in ensemble multi-OGP. At a high level, the ensemble multi-OGP
in [Wei20] chains together many small negative free entropy contributions to force a free entropy to be
negative. To simplify the discussion, we consider an overlap structure consisting of several independent sets
in the same problem instance. We will see that the following argument shows this structure does not occur
with high probability exactly when it also shows this structure, where the S (ℓ) can be from different problem
instances, does not occur with high probability (see Remark 5.4). Consider the normalized log first moment
                                                                                                       
                  1                    (S (1) , . . . , S (L) ) : S (1) , . . . , S (L) are independent
                    log     E      #                                                                      , (3.1)
                  n     G∼G(n,d/n)         sets of G of size (1 + ε) logd d n satisfying P

where P is a set of conditions on how S (1) , . . . , S (L) overlap. The structure inside the expectation in (3.1) is
the forbidden structure we wish to rule out. The log first moment (3.1) can be thought of as a free entropy
density of the uniform model over copies of this structure; we henceforth refer to (3.1) as a free entropy. If
(3.1) is negative, then this structure does not occur with high probability and the multi-OGP occurs.
    The key idea in [Wei20] is to set P = P2 ∩ P3 ∩ · · · ∩ PL , where Pℓ is a condition on how S (ℓ) overlaps
with S (1) , . . . , S (ℓ−1) , such that the following occurs for all 2 ≤ ℓ ≤ L.
 (1) Let Eℓ denote (3.1) with (S (1) , . . . , S (ℓ) ) in place of (S (1) , . . . , S (L) ) and P2 ∩ · · · ∩ Pℓ in place of P .
     Then, Eℓ is smaller than Eℓ−1 by an amount bounded away from 0. Informally, Pℓ requires S (ℓ) to
     overlap with its predecessors in a way that contributes a small negative free entropy to (3.1).
 (2) For any fixed S (1) , . . . , S (ℓ−1) , if S (ℓ) starts at S (ℓ−1) , evolves by small steps, and eventually evolves
     far away from all of S (1) , . . . , S (ℓ−1) , then at some point along this evolution the condition Pℓ occurs.
     Informally, Pℓ defines a moat that a stably evolving S (ℓ) must cross.
Due to condition (1), if we set L large enough, (3.1) becomes negative, and the structure in (3.1) is forbidden
with high probability. Suppose a low degree polynomial can find a size (1 + ε) logd d n independent set with
large enough probability. Because the outputs of a low degree polynomial on a sequence of correlated problem
instances is (with nontrivial probability) a stable sequence, condition (2) allows us to find a subsequence of
L outputs forming the forbidden structure. Namely, we take S (1) to be the first output in the sequence,
and for ℓ ≥ 2 we take S (ℓ) to be the first output after S (ℓ−1) such that Pℓ holds. This derives the desired
contradiction.
    The main technical challenge is to design the Pℓ such that both (1) and (2) hold. To do this, one must
construct a moat topologically disconnecting a high-dimensional space such that, for all values of S (ℓ) in
the moat, the free entropy decrease in condition (1) occurs. The requirement that the moat topologically
disconnects the space gives us little control, and therein lies the difficulty.
    [Wei20, Proposition 2.3] carries out this approach by defining Pℓ as the condition that
                                                                                
                                 (ℓ)    (1)         (ℓ−1)        ε log d ε log d
                               S \ S ∪ ···∪ S               ∈           n,       n
                                                                    4d       2d

and proving that the free entropy decrease in condition (1) occurs.

                                                             10
    Let us remark on the challenges of extending this technique beyond maximum independent set. In
maximum independent set, due to the independence of the edges of G ∼ G(n, d/n), the expectation in (3.1)
is essentially controlled by the total number of non-edges in the union S (1) ∪ · · · ∪ S (L) , for S (1) , . . . , S (L)
with overlap structure satisfying P . This fact makes the analysis of (3.1) tractable and shows in the relative
simplicity of the moats Pℓ , which only consider S (ℓ) ’s non-intersection with the union of its predecessors.
    In random k-SAT and other problems, the corresponding free entropy is more dependent and more tools
are needed to carry out this technique. We develop these tools for random k-SAT. The forbidden structure
we devise will take into account more fine-grained overlap information than previous work.

3.2    Multi-OGP for Random k-SAT and Our Contributions
This paper extends the negative free entropy chaining technique to show an ensemble multi-OGP for random
k-SAT at clause density (1 + ok (1))κ∗ 2k log k/k. We leverage this ensemble multi-OGP to show our hardness
results.
    Prior to this work, Gamarnik and Sudan [GS17] used a (non-ensemble) multi-OGP to prove that balanced
sequential local algorithms do not solve random NAE-k-SAT beyond clause density (1 + ok (1))2k−1 log2 k/k.
They required the algorithm to be balanced : on any input, each of the algorithm’s output bits must be unbi-
ased over the algorithm’s internal randomness. Their interpolation is over correlated runs of the algorithm
on a single input, and their proof requires balance to ensure that two fully independent runs give outputs
that are far apart. Due to this requirement, their result required the symmetry provided by the NAE variant
of random k-SAT. We improve on this result in three ways:
 (1) We improve the threshold clause density by a logarithmic factor, to (1 + ok (1))κ∗ 2k log k/k.
 (2) We generalize the algorithm class from balanced sequential local algorithms to local and low degree
     algorithms. Recall that both of these computation classes simulate sequential local algorithms, even
     without the balance requirement.
 (3) We show hardness for random k-SAT instead of NAE-k-SAT. A simple adaptation of our argument
     shows hardness of random NAE-k-SAT at clause density (1 + ok (1))κ∗ 2k−1 log k/k.

Improvements due to ensemble OGP. We consider an ensemble multi-OGP, where the random variable
resampled in the interpolation is the k-SAT instance instead of the algorithm’s internal randomness. The
ensemble interpolation allows us to show hardness for local and low degree algorithms. It also obviates the
requirement of balance, so we no longer require the additional symmetry provided by NAE-k-SAT. This
achieves improvements (2) and (3).

A tighter free entropy analysis. Crucially, we conduct a tighter free entropy analysis to achieve im-
provement (1). In contrast to previous work, our forbidden structure considers all 2k ways k + 1 satisfying
assignments y (0) , . . . , y (k) can agree or disagree. We formalize such an agreement pattern as an overlap profile
π. We will introduce this formally in Subsection 4.3. We will see in Lemma 5.1 that the analogue of the free
entropy (3.1) for random k-SAT at clause density α is
                                                                      n                      o
                                                       α
                                log 2 + max H(π) − k          E         y (ℓ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k    .             (3.2)
                                        π∈P            2 I∼unif([n]k )

Here y (0) , . . . , y (k) have overlap profile π, P is a collection of overlap constraints, and π ∈ P denotes the
set of overlap profiles π consistent with P . Moreover, y (ℓ) [I] is the bit string obtained by indexing y (ℓ) in
                              (ℓ)     (ℓ)
positions I, namely (yI1 , . . . , yIk ). The positive term H(π) is the overlap entropy of π, which arises because
log 2 + H(π) is the exponential rate of the number of assignment sequences y (0) , . . . , y (k) with overlap profile
π. The negative term captures the log likelihood that a random formula is satisfied by all of y (0) , . . . , y (k) .
We think of these two terms as the entropy and energy terms, respectively. We will choose P such that
the magnitude of the energy term exceeds the entropy term by more than log 2, which causes (3.2) to
be negative. This implies the absence (except with exponentially small probability) of a constellation of
satisfying assignments with overlap profile π ∈ P .


                                                           11
    Similarly to [Wei20], we chain together many small negative free entropies to make (3.2) negative. Because
the random k-SAT free entropy is dependent and harder to analyze, it is significantly more difficult to
identify the correct high-dimensional moats. In the multi-OGP of [GS17], the condition P stipulates that
the normalized Hamming distances ∆(y (i) , y (j) ) of k satisfying assignments are pairwise approximately logk k .
Using this, the energy term in (3.2) can be lower bounded by an inclusion-exclusion truncated at level 2.
The inclusion-exclusion truncation is not sharp, and consequently this analysis requires the larger clause
density α = (1 + ok (1))2k log2 k/k (for NAE-k-SAT, (1 + ok (1))2k−1 log2 k/k) to show that the contribution
of each y (ℓ) to (3.2) is a small negative number. The fact that this natural estimate of (3.2) gives a threshold
too large by a log k factor highlights the difficulty of accurately controlling the k-SAT free entropy and the
necessity of finding good moats.
    We find the correct moats. We set P = P1 ∩ · · · ∩ Pk , where Pℓ governs how y (ℓ) overlaps with its
predecessors y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) . Each Pℓ defines a moat that a smooth evolution of y (ℓ) starting from y (ℓ−1)
must cross. In order to obtain a fine control over the tradeoff between entropy and energy in (3.2), we
develop a notion of conditional overlap entropy H(π(y (ℓ) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) )), which is the contribution of y (ℓ)
to the entropy term H(π). Informally, this is a measure of the additional diversity that y (ℓ) adds to the
assignments y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) . For each ℓ ≥ 1, our condition Pℓ stipulates that
                                                                   log k       log k
                                                                                        
                                             (ℓ) (0)       (ℓ−1)
                                      H π(y |y , . . . , y       ) ∈ β−      , β+         .
                                                                          k         k

This choice of forbidden structure in terms of the conditional overlap entropy is an important contribution
of our work. The choice is motivated by the subsequent energy analysis, which shows a lower bound on the
energy contribution of y (ℓ) that counterbalances the entropy increase. We next summarize this analysis.

Energy increment bound via decoupling. We can express the energy term (without the prefactor) as
                    n                     o  X
              E      y (ℓ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k =   p(σ), where                                 (3.3)
                I∼unif([n]k )
                                                          σ∈{T,F}k
                                                                          h                                i
                                                 p(σ) =        P           σ = y (ℓ) [I] for some 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k .
                                                          I∼unif([n]k )


For each σ, 1 − p(σ) is the probability that σ 6= y (ℓ) [I] for all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k. This can be conditionally
expanded as a product of k factors, where the ℓth factor is the probability that σ 6= y (ℓ) [I] given the values
of y (0) [I], . . . , y (ℓ−1) [I]. We think of (1 minus) this factor as the contribution of y (ℓ) to p(σ).
    We apply the following estimate to decouple these products into sums. We round any factors in the
                                                         1                                                            1
conditional expansion that are less than 1 − k log         k up to 1. Then, we note that for 0 ≤ ε1 , . . . , εk ≤ k log k ,

                                1 − (1 − ε1 )(1 − ε2 ) · · · (1 − εk ) ≈ ε1 + ε2 + · · · + εk ,

up to a 1 + ok (1) multiplicative factor. This decouples the contributions of the y (ℓ) to the p(σ). We can
bound the total contribution of y (ℓ) to the energy term (3.3) by summing the now-decoupled contributions
over σ ∈ {T, F}k .

Probabilistic reinterpretation. Miraculously, this sum can be reinterpreted as the success probability
of an experiment involving a sum of k i.i.d. random variables, which can be controlled by concentration
inequalities. We find that if the contribution of y (ℓ) to the entropy term H(π) is β logk k , then its contribution
to the rescaled energy term (3.3) is at least 1 − βe−(β−1) . This motivates the choice of ι(β) as the (rescaled)
ratio of these contributions, and κ∗ as the best possible ratio. When α = κ2k log k/k for κ > κ∗ , the
condition Pℓ requires β to be in a range where the contribution of y (ℓ) to the energy term of (3.2) exceeds
its contribution to the entropy term by at least ε logk k , for constant ε depending on κ. Thus the overall
contribution of y (ℓ) to (3.2) is upper bounded by −ε logk k . Summed over the y (ℓ) , this shows that (3.2) is
negative, establishing the multi-OGP.
    This energy analysis via decoupling and probabilistic reinterpretation is original and is another key
contribution of our work.


                                                              12
Future directions. Because we establish a multi-OGP for random k-SAT within a constant factor of
the conjectured algorithmic threshold, we believe it is possible to leverage multi-OGPs to show algorithmic
hardness at or near the limits of efficient algorithms for many other problems. Closing the remaining
constant factor gap and extending the results of this paper to other random constraint satisfaction problems
are important open problems.


4     Proof of Impossibility for Low Degree Polynomials
This section and the next two sections are devoted to proving our main impossibility result, Theorem 2.6.
Throughout, we fix κ > κ∗ . We set α = κ2k log k/k and m = ⌊αn⌋.

4.1    Reduction to Deterministic Low Degree Polynomial
The following lemma shows that randomness does not significantly improve the power of low degree polyno-
mial algorithms.
Lemma 4.1. Suppose there exists a random degree-D polynomial that (δ, γ, η, ν)-solves Φk (n, m). Then,
there exists a deterministic degree-D polynomial that (3δ, 3γ, η, ν)-solves Φk (n, m).
Proof. Let f : RN × Ω → Rn be a random degree-D polynomial that (δ, γ, η, ν)-solves Φk (n, m). Then,
         h                                               i              h h               ii
                                                                                        2
       E P [(round ◦ f )(Φ, ω) does not (η, ν)-satisfy Φ] ≤ δ and     E E kf (Φ, ω)k2 ≤ γn.
        ω   Φ                                                                                   ω   Φ

By Markov’s inequality,
   h                                                    i 1                                      h h            i    i 1
                                                                                                              2
 P P [(round ◦ f )(Φ, ω) does not (η, ν)-satisfy Φ] ≥ 3δ ≤                       and            P E kf (Φ, ω)k2 ≥ 3γn ≤ .
 ω Φ                                                       3                                    ω Φ                    3
So, there exists ω ∈ Ω such that the deterministic polynomial g(Φ) = f (Φ, ω) satisfies
                                                                          h          i
                                                                                   2
                P [(round ◦ g)(Φ) (η, ν)-satisfies Φ] ≥ 1 − 3δ and      E kg(Φ)k2 ≤ 3γn.
                Φ                                                                           Φ




    By Lemma 4.1, it suffices to show hardness for deterministic polynomials. For the rest of this section
and Section 6, except where stated, f : RN → Rn is a deterministic degree-D polynomial.
    We let A(Φ) = B((round ◦ f )(Φ), Φ), where B(x, Φ) is a deterministic, computationally unbounded
subroutine outputting y ∈ {T, F}n with ∆(x, y) ≤ η. (If x has more than ηn entries equal to err, B outputs
“fail.”) Informally, B is a computationally unbounded assistant that repairs an ηn fraction of entries of
(round ◦ f )(Φ).
    Because f is deterministic, A is also deterministic. Note that round ◦ f outputting a (η, ν)-satisfying
assignment of Φ is equivalent to A outputting a ν-satisfying assignment of Φ. Showing that this does not
occur with the required probability will be our task from here on.

4.2    The Interpolation Path
We can enumerate the km literals of a formula Φ ∈ Ωk (n, m) in lexicographic order:
                                       Φ1,1 , Φ1,2 , . . . , Φ1,k , Φ2,1 , . . . , Φm,k .
For j ∈ [km], let L(j) denote the pair (a, b) such that Φa,b is the jth literal in this order. That is, L(j) = (a, b)
is the unique pair of integers (a, b) ∈ [m] × [k] satisfying k(a − 1) + b = j. We now define a sequence of
correlated random k-SAT formulas.
Definition 4.2 (Interpolation path). Let T = k 2 m. Let Φ(0) , . . . , Φ(T ) ∈ Ωk (n, m) be the sequence of k-SAT
instances sampled as follows. First, sample Φ(0) ∼ Φk (n, m). For each 1 ≤ t ≤ T , let σ(t) ∈ [km] be the
                                                                                                      (t)
unique integer such that t ≡ σ(t) (mod km). Then, Φ(t) is obtained from Φ(t−1) by resampling ΦL(σ(t)) from
unif(L). Moreover, for 0 ≤ t ≤ T , let x(t) = A(Φ(t) ).

                                                              13
    In other words, we start from a random k-SAT instance and resample the literals one by one in lexi-
cographic order. After we have resampled all the literals we start over, repeating the procedure until each
literal has been resampled k times. Note that each Φ(t) is marginally a sample from Φk (n, m) and that if
                               ′
|t − t′ | ≥ km, then Φ(t) ⊥⊥Φ(t ) . We run our assisted low degree algorithm A on all these k-SAT instances
and collect the outputs as the sequence x(0) , x(1) , . . . , x(T ) ∈ {T, F}n .

4.3    Overlap Profiles
We now introduce the overlap profile of an ordered list of assignments. The overlap profile summarizes the
bitwise agreement and disagreement pattern of a list of assignments.
   Let P2 (ℓ) denote the set of unordered partitions of {0, . . . , ℓ − 1} into two (possibly empty) sets. For
example,                     
                    P2 (3) = {{0, 1, 2}, ∅} , {{0, 1}, {2}} , {{0, 2}, {1}} , {{1, 2}, {0}} .
Note that |P2 (ℓ)| = 2ℓ−1 .
Definition 4.3 (Overlap profile). Let y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ∈ {T, F}n be a sequence of assignments. Their overlap
                                                           ℓ−1
profile π = π(y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ), is a vector π ∈ R2    indexed by unordered pairs {S, T } ∈ P2 (ℓ), where
               1                 (t)                                  (t)
      πS,T =     i ∈ [n] : all {yi : t ∈ S} equal one value and all {yi : t ∈ T } equal the other value .
               n
Example 4.4. Let ℓ = 3. The overlap profile π = π(y (0) , y (1) , y (2) ) consists of four entries π012,∅ , π01,2 ,
π02,1 , and π12,0 , where

                     1            (0)  (1)  (2)                                 1            (0)  (1)   (2)
          π012,∅ =     i ∈ [n] : yi = yi = yi             and        π01,2 =      i ∈ [n] : yi = yi 6= yi ,
                     n                                                          n
and π02,1 , π12,0 are analogous to π01,2 .
    We can interpret an overlap profile as a probability distribution: πS,T is the probability that in a random
                              (t)                                    (t)
position i ∼ unif([n]), all {yi : t ∈ S} equal one value and all {yi : t ∈ T } equal the other. We naturally
                                  (0)       (ℓ−1)
define the overlap entropy of y , . . . , y           by
                                                              X
                              H π(y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) = −       πS,T log πS,T .
                                                                {S,T }∈P2 (ℓ)


This is the entropy of the unordered pair of sets {S, T } obtained by sampling i ∼ unif([n]) and partitioning
                                          (t)
{0, . . . , ℓ − 1} based on the value of yi .
    We also define conditional overlap profiles. Let π = π(y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ). For each {S, T } ∈ P2 (ℓ − 1) with
πS,T > 0, π·|S,T is a probability distribution on the two partitions {S ∪ {ℓ − 1}, T } and {S, T ∪ {ℓ − 1}} with
                                πS∪{ℓ−1},T                                                     πS,T ∪{ℓ−1}
      πS∪{ℓ−1},T |S,T =                                  and         πS,T ∪{ℓ−1}|S,T =                            .
                          πS∪{ℓ−1},T + πS,T ∪{ℓ−1}                                       πS∪{ℓ−1},T + πS,T ∪{ℓ−1}

(If πS∪{ℓ−1},T = πS,T ∪{ℓ−1} = 0, we define this distribution arbitrarily.) This is the distribution of the
agreement pattern of y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) on a uniformly random position, conditioned on the agreement pattern
of y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−2) in that position being {S, T }. We denote the resulting collection of distributions, one for
each {S, T } ∈ P2 (ℓ − 1), by π·|· = π(y (ℓ−1) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−2) ). We analogously define the conditional overlap
entropy                                                                  X
                                 H π(y (ℓ−1) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−2) ) =         πS,T H(π·|S,T ).
                                                                {S,T }∈P2 (ℓ−1)

    Before proceeding, we collect some properties of overlap profiles which will be useful in the rest of the
section. The proofs of these assertions follow readily from the above definitions.
Fact 4.5. Overlap profiles have the following properties.


                                                          14
                                 ℓ−1
 (a) There are at most n2              distinct overlap profiles of ℓ assignments y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ∈ {T, F}n .
 (b) Overlap entropies satisfy the chain rule
                                                                                                               
              H π(y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) = H π(y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−2) ) + H π(y (ℓ−1) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−2) ) .

 (c) Repeated assignments do not affect overlap entropies. That is, if z (0) , . . . , z (r−1) are the distinct ele-
     ments of y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) , then
                                                                                                  
                                        H π(y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) = H π(z (0) , . . . , z (r−1) ) .

      If z (0) , . . . , z (r−2) are the distinct elements of y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−2) , then
                                                                                                              
                                  H π(y (ℓ−1) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−2) ) = H π(y (ℓ−1) |z (0) , . . . , z (r−2) ) .
                                                                                                            
      Furthermore, if y (ℓ−1) ∈ {y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−2) }, then H π(y (ℓ−1) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−2) ) = 0.

4.4     Outline of Proof of Impossibility
                           β
Recall that ι(β) = 1−βe−(β−1)      is strictly convex with with ι(β) → +∞ when β → 1+ or β → +∞, and
has minimum κ attained at β ∗ . Because κ > κ∗ , there exist two solutions βmin , βmax to ι(β) = κ, with
                  ∗
                                                            ∗                    ∗
βmin ∈ (1, β ∗ ) and βmax ∈ (β ∗ , +∞). Set β− = βmin2+β and β+ = βmax2+β . (This choice is arbitrary; any
deterministic βmin < β− < β+ < βmax will do.) Set ε > 0 such that 1−βeβ+ε      −(β−1) ≤ κ for all β ∈ [β− , β+ ]. We

emphasize that β− , β+ , ε depend on κ only.
                                             −β−
   For the rest of this proof, take η = β+8k     and ν = k212k . We next define the events Svalid , Sconsec , Sindep, Sogp ,
which are measurable in the interpolation path Φ(0) , . . . , Φ(T ) defined in Definition 4.2. Define
                                           n                                      o
                                Svalid = x(t) ν-satisfies Φ(t) for all 0 ≤ t ≤ T .

This is the event that A succeeds on all Φ(t) . Define
                                                                               
                                                       β+ − β−
                        Sconsec = ∆(x(t) , x(t−1) ) ≤          for all 1 ≤ t ≤ T .
                                                          2k
This is the event that outputs of A on consecutive Φ(t) are close in Hamming distance. Define Sindep as the
event that there do not exist indices 0 ≤ t0 ≤ t1 ≤ · · · ≤ tk ≤ T with tk ≥ tk−1 + km and an assignment
y ∈ {T, F}n such that
  (IND-A) y ν-satisfies Φ(tk ) ;
                                           
  (IND-B) H π(y|x(t0 ) , . . . , x(tk−1 ) ) ≤ β+ logk k .
This is the event that if tk is large enough that Φ(tk ) is independent of Φ(t0 ) , . . . , Φ(tk−1 ) , then all ν-satisfying
assignments to Φ(tk ) have high conditional overlap entropy relative to the outputs of A on Φ(t0 ) , . . . , Φ(tk−1 ) .
Finally, define Sogp as the event that there do not exist indices 0 ≤ t0 ≤ t1 ≤ · · · ≤ tk ≤ T and assignments
y (0) , . . . , y (k) ∈ {T, F}n such that
 (OGP-A) For all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, y (ℓ) ν-satisfies Φ(tℓ ) ;
                                                                 h                     i
 (OGP-B) For all 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, H π(y (ℓ) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) ∈ β− logk k , β+ logk k .
Sogp defines the main forbidden structure of our argument. Informally, this forbidden structure consists of
k + 1 assignments, each ν-satisfying possibly different Φ(t) in the interpolation, such that each assignment
has medium conditional overlap entropy relative to its predecessors.
   The key ingredients in our proof of Theorem 2.6 are the following two propositions. Proposition 4.6 shows
that these four events do not simultaneously occur, and Proposition 4.7 controls their probabilities. These
two propositions derive the main contradiction: if a low degree algorithm (δ, γ, η, ν)-solves Φk (n, m) for the
requisite (δ, γ, η, ν), then Proposition 4.6 implies Svalid ∩ Sconsec ∩ Sindep ∩ Sogp = ∅, while Proposition 4.7
and a union bound imply Svalid ∩ Sconsec ∩ Sindep ∩ Sogp 6= ∅.

                                                                   15
Proposition 4.6. For all sufficiently large k, Svalid ∩ Sconsec ∩ Sindep ∩ Sogp = ∅.
Proposition 4.7. Suppose f is a deterministic degree-D polynomial that (δ, γ, η, ν)-solves Φk (n, m). For
all sufficiently large k, the following inequalities hold.
                                         2
 (a) P(Svalid ∩ Sconsec ) ≥ (2n)−4γDk /(β+ −β− ) − (T + 1)δ.
        c
 (b) P(Sindep ) ≤ exp(−Ω(n)).
        c
 (c) P(Sogp ) ≤ exp(−Ω(n)).
    The remainder of this section and Sections 5 and 6 will be devoted to proving these propositions. We
will prove Proposition 4.6 in Subsection 4.5 and Proposition 4.7(b) in Subsection 4.6. We will prove Propo-
sition 4.7(c), which establishes the main multi-OGP, in Section 5. Finally, we will prove Proposition 4.7(a)
in Section 6. Let us first see how these results imply Theorem 2.6.
Proof of Theorem 2.6. Assume for sake of contradiction that there exists a (random) degree-D polynomial
f : RN × Ω → Rn that (δ, γ, η, ν)-solves Φk (n, m). By Lemma 4.1, there exists a deterministic degree-
D polynomial g : RN → Rn that (3δ, 3γ, η, ν)-solves Φk (n, m). We set k ∗ = k ∗ (κ) large enough that
Propositions 4.6 and 4.7 both hold. By Proposition 4.7 and a union bound,
                                                                   2
             P(Svalid ∩ Sconsec ∩ Sindep ∩ Sogp ) ≥ (2n)−12γDk /(β+ −β− ) − 3(T + 1)δ − exp(−Ω(n)).
                                                                                                 2
We will show this probability is positive for suitable C1 , C2 . Let C2 = 2 + β+12k                     2
                                                                                 −β− . Recall that T = k m =
                                                                           2
k 2 ⌊αn⌋. If δ ≤ exp(−C2 γD log n), then 3(T + 1)δ ≤ 31 (2n)−12γDk /(β+ −β− ) for sufficiently large n. Note that
if D ≤ γClog
           1n
             n , then
                                                                                            
                            −12γDk2 /(β+ −β− )        −24γDk2 /(β+ −β− )           24C1 k 2
                        (2n)                     ≥n                        ≥ exp −          n .
                                                                                   β+ − β−

Let C1 be small enough that the right-hand side is asymptotically larger than the exp(−Ω(n)) term. Thus for
                                                                     2
sufficiently large n, the exp(−Ω(n)) term is at most 13 (2n)−12γDk /(β+ −β− ) . Therefore, there exists n∗ such
that if n ≥ n∗ , then P(Svalid ∩Sconsec ∩Sindep ∩Sogp ) > 0. This implies that Svalid ∩Sconsec ∩Sindep ∩Sogp 6= ∅,
contradicting Proposition 4.6.

4.5    Constructing the Forbidden Structure from Algorithm Outputs
In this subsection, we will prove Proposition 4.6. We will show that if Svalid , Sconsec , and Sindep all hold,
then we can construct an example of the structure forbidden by Sogp , and therefore all four events cannot
hold simultaneously.
    We will need the following auxiliary lemma, which shows that a small change of x ∈ {T, F}n in Hamming
distance induces only a small change in H(π(x|y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) )). This lemma allows us to convert Sconsec to
a guarantee that consecutive conditional overlap entropies are small. We defer the proof to Subsection 4.7.
Lemma 4.8. Let ℓ ∈ N be arbitrary and let x, x′ , y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ∈ {T, F}n. If ∆(x, x′ ) ≤ 12 , then
                                                                               
               H π(x|y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) − H π(x′ |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) ≤ H (∆(x, x′ )) .

The H(·) on the right denotes the binary entropy function.
                                                                                           
                                                    −β−                            β+ −β−
Proof of Proposition 4.6. Set k large enough that β+2k  ≤ 21 and H                   2k         ≤ (β+ − β− ) logk k . The second
inequality holds for all sufficiently large k due to the inequality H(x) ≤ x log xe .
      Suppose that Svalid , Sconsec , and Sindep all hold. For 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, let y (ℓ) = x(tℓ ) , where 0 ≤ t0 ≤ t1 ≤
· · · ≤ tk ≤ T are defined has follows. Let it0 = 0. For 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, let tℓ be the smallest t > tℓ−1 such that
H(x(t) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) ∈ β− logk k , β+ logk k . We will show that such tℓ exists and satisfies tℓ ≤ tℓ−1 + km.


                                                            16
                                                                                                                             
    Let t′ = tℓ−1 + km, and let I = {tℓ−1 , tℓ−1 + 1, . . . , t′ }. For t ∈ I, let h(t) = H π(x(t) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) ;
we will analyze the evolution of h(t) as we increment t ∈ I. By Fact 4.5(c), h(tℓ−1 ) = 0.
    In the definition of Sindep, set tk = t′ and tℓ , tℓ+1 , . . . , tk−1 equal to tℓ−1 . By Fact 4.5(c) (which allows us
                                                 ′                                                                        
to ignore the duplicated tℓ , . . . , tk−1 ), Φ(t ) has no ν-satisfying assignment y with H π(y|y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) ≤
                                             ′                 ′
β+ logk k . But because Svalid holds, x(t ) ν-satisfies Φ(t ) . It follows that h(t′ ) > β+ logk k .
                                                                 −β−
    Because Sconsec holds, we have ∆(x(t) , x(t−1) ) ≤ β+2k             for all t. By Lemma 4.8,
                                                                                 
                                                    (t) (t−1)              β+ − β−                 log k
                       |h(t) − h(t − 1)| ≤ H ∆(x , x          ) ≤H                    ≤ (β+ − β− )       .               (4.1)
                                                                              2k                     k
                                                                                                       h                     i
Since h(tℓ−1 ) = 0 and h(t′ ) > β+ logk k , (4.1) implies the existence of t ∈ I such that h(t) ∈ β− logk k , β+ logk k .
So, tℓ is well defined and satisfies tℓ ≤ tℓ−1 + km.
    Because the interpolation path has length T = k 2 m, and tℓ ≤ tℓ−1 + km for all 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, this procedure
sets all of t1 , . . . , tk before the end of the interpolation. Finally, because Svalid holds, yℓ ν-satisfies Φ(tℓ ) for
all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k. We have thus constructed the structure forbidden by Sogp .

4.6     Solutions to Independent Instances Contribute Large Overlap Entropy
In this subsection, we will prove Proposition 4.7(b). The proof is by a first moment argument.
                                                                     c
Proof of Proposition 4.7(b). By Markov’s inequality, P(Sindep             ) is upper bounded by the expected number
of (t0 , . . . , tk , y) satisfying 0 ≤ t0 ≤ · · · ≤ tk ≤ T , tk ≥ tk−1 + km, and conditions (IND-A) and (IND-B).
There are at most (T + 1)k+1 possible choices of (t0 , . . . , tk ). Because tk ≥ tk−1 + km, Φ(tk ) is independent
of x(t0 ) , . . . , x(tk−1 ) .
    Let P = P (x(t0 ) , . . . , x(tk−1 ) ) denote the set of all overlap profiles π = π(x(t0 ) , . . . , x(tk−1 ) , y) over y ∈
                                                                                       k
{T, F}n with H(π(y|x(t0 ) , . . . , x(tk−1 ) )) ≤ β+ logk k . By Fact 4.5(a), |P | ≤ n2 . Thus,
                                           k
                c
             P(Sindep ) ≤ (T + 1)k+1 n2            max       max
                                               0≤t0 ≤···≤tk ≤T π∈P
                                                tk ≥tk−1 +km
                                                                                                              
                               E # y ∈ {T, F}n : y ν-satisfies Φ(tk ) and π(x(t0 ) , . . . , x(tk−1 ) , y) = π
                             Φ(tk )

We can evaluate this inner expectation by linearity of expectation. The number of y satisfying that
π(x(t0 ) , . . . , x(tk−1 ) , y) = π is
                                                                                                         
                               Y                                   X                           
                                          πS,T n                                         πS∪{k},T
                                                     = exp n                 πS,T H                + o(n)
                                        πS∪{k},T n                                         πS,T
                        {S,T }∈P2 (k)                           {S,T }∈P2 (k)
                                                                                                  
                                                     = exp nH π(y|x(t0 ) , . . . , x(tk−1 ) ) + o(n)
                                                                                 
                                                                   log k
                                                     ≤ exp nβ+           + o(n) .
                                                                     k
                                                                            P                         
Recall that Φ(tk ) is independent of x(t0 ) , . . . , x(tk−1 ) . Because νm          m              m
                                                                                j=0 j ≤ (m + 1) νm , the probability that
any one of these y ν-satisfies Φ(tk ) is at most
                                  X                                     
                                                                          m
                                          (1 − 2−k )m−|S| ≤ (m + 1)             (1 − 2−k )(1−ν)m
                                                                         νm
                              S⊆[m],|S|≤νm
                                                                             e                         
                                                          ≤ exp νm log − (1 − ν)2−k m + o(n)
                                                                            ν                     
                                                                             log k
                                                          = exp n −κ                + ok (1) + o(n) .
                                                                                k



                                                               17
                     a
                                     
                                   ea b
Here we used that    b       ≤      b   . Thus,
                                                                                           
                                       c                                        log k
                                    P(Sindep ) ≤ exp        −n(κ − β+ − ok (1))       + o(n) ,
                                                                                  k
                             k
where the (T + 1)k+1 n2 is absorbed in the o(n). Finally, as
                                                                   β+ + ε
                                                  β+ + ε ≤                      ≤ κ,
                                                               1 − β+ e−(β+ −1)
                            c
we have κ − β+ ≥ ε. Thus P(Sindep ) = exp(−Ω(n)) for sufficiently large k.

4.7       Small Hamming Distance Implies Small Conditional Overlap Entropy Dif-
          ference
We now present the deferred proof of Lemma 4.8, which shows that a small change in x ∈ {T, F}n causes
only a small change in H(π(x|y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) )).
Proof of Lemma 4.8. For each partition {S, T } ∈ P2 (ℓ), let
            n                                                                                      o
                             (t)                                  (t)
      IS,T = i ∈ [n] : all {yi : t ∈ S} equal one value and all {yi : t ∈ T } equal the other value .

Note that |IS,T | = πS,T n. If πS,T 6= 0, define
                             1                                                             1
              λS,T =               # (i ∈ IS,T : xi = T)          and          λ′S,T =             # (i ∈ IS,T : x′i = T) .
                         |IS,T |                                                         |IS,T |
(If πS,T = 0, we can set these values arbitrarily in [0, 1].) On each index set IS,T , x and x′ differ in at least

                                          |IS,T | · |λS,T − λ′S,T | = πS,T |λS,T − λ′S,T |n

positions. Thus,
                                        1                        X
                                          ≥ ∆(x, x′ ) ≥                      πS,T |λS,T − λ′S,T |.
                                        2
                                                             {S,T }∈P2 (ℓ)
      P                            ′
Let    {S,T }∈P2 (ℓ) πS,T |λS,T − λS,T | = µ. Moreover, from the definition of conditional overlap entropy,
                                                                            X
                                    H π(x|y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) =                   πS,T H(λS,T ),
                                                                        {S,T }∈P2 (ℓ)

and analogously for x′ . Note that H(·) is concave, so H ′ (·) is decreasing. Thus, for all [a, b] ∈ [0, 1] with
a ≥ b,
                                       Z b             Z a−b
                                             ′
                         H(a) − H(b) =     H (x) dx ≤          H ′ (x) dx = H(a − b).
                                                    a                    0
Similarly H(1 − b) − H(1 − a) ≤ H(a − b), whence |H(a) − H(b)| ≤ H(a − b). Thus,
                                                                         X
       H π(x|y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) − H π(x′ |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) ≤   πS,T H(λS,T ) − H(λ′S,T )
                                                                                     {S,T }∈P2 (ℓ)
                                                                                         X                                 
                                                                                 ≤                   πS,T H |λS,T − λ′S,T | .
                                                                                     {S,T }∈P2 (ℓ)

By concavity of H(·), this last quantity has maximum value H(µ), attained when all the |λS,T − λ′S,T | are
equal to µ. Because H(·) is increasing on [0, 21 ] and µ ≤ ∆(x, x′ ) ≤ 12 , we conclude that
                                                                              
              H π(x|y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) − H π(x′ |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) ≤ H(µ) ≤ H (∆(x, x′ )) .




                                                                   18
5      Proof of Presence of Ensemble Multi-OGP
In this section, we will prove Proposition 4.7(c), which shows that the forbidden structure in Sogp does not
occur with high probability.

5.1      Proof Outline
We first give a high level overview of the proof, which is by another first moment computation. Throughout
this section, for I ∈ [n]k and x ∈ {T, F}n, let x[I] = (xI1 , . . . , xIk ) be the subsequence of x indexed by I. We
                                                                                     c
begin with the following lemma, which bounds the exponential rate of P(Sogp             ) in terms of a maximum over
overlap profiles. We will prove this lemma in Subsection 5.2.
Lemma 5.1. Let P denote the set of overlap profiles π = hπ(y (0) , . . . , y (k) ) iover y (0) , . . . , y (k) ∈ {T, F}n
                                                                       
satisfying that for all 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, H π(y (ℓ) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) ∈ β− logk k , β+ logk k . Then,
                                                             n                      o
      1        c                            log k
        log P(Sogp ) ≤ log 2 + max H(π) − κ         E          y (ℓ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k    + ok (1) + o(1),                              (5.1)
      n                        π∈P            k I∼unif([n]k )

where in the expectation, y (0) , . . . , y (k) ∈ {T, F}n is a sequence of assignments with overlap profile π.
                                                          
     Note that the expectation EI∼unif([n]k ) y (ℓ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k has the same value for any y (0) , . . . , y (k) ∈
{T, F}n with overlap profile π. So, the quantity inside the maximum is a function of π.
     The negative term in (5.1) arises as an upper bound on the exponential rate of the probability that
y (0) , . . . , y (k) all respectively ν-satisfy Φ(t0 ) , . . . , Φ(tk ) , for fixed y (0) , . . . , y (k) and t0 , . . . , tk . Let us first
argue heuristically that this bounds the exponential rate; we will formalize this reasoning in Lemma 5.3
below. We expect this probability to be maximized when t0 = · · · = tk , because making the ti different
only introduces additional randomness (see Remark 5.4). So, let Φ(t0 ) , . . . , Φ(tk ) all equal the same k-SAT
instance Φ ∼ Φk (n, m). We also focus on the probability that y (0) , . . . , y (k) all satisfy Φ; we will see that
                                                                                                                               (0)      (k)
the relaxation to ν-satisfy only changes the exponential           (ℓ) rate by ok (1). The probability that y , . . . , y all
                                               −k
satisfy the first clause Φ1 is 1 − 2 EI∼unif([n]k ) y [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k , because if Φ1 contains the variables
                                  
xI1 , . . . , xIk , there are y (ℓ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k ways to set these variables’ polarities in Φ1 so that one of
y (0) , . . . , y (k) does not satisfy Φ1 . Then, the probability that y (0) , . . . , y (k) all satisfy Φ is upper bounded by
                                      n                      o m                                      n                         o
                                                                                   m
               1 − 2−k       E          y (ℓ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k        ≤ exp − k              E              y (ℓ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k      ,
                         I∼unif([n]k )                                            2 I∼unif([n]k )

and 2mk ≈ nκ logk k . The second ingredient in the proof of Proposition 4.7(c) is the following proposition, which
lower bounds the expectation in the negative term of (5.1). We will prove this proposition in Subsection 5.3.
Proving the bound in this proposition is one of the main technical challenges of this paper, which we overcome
via a surprising probabilistic reformulation of the left-hand expectation.
Proposition 5.2. Let β1, . . . , βk ∈ [β− , β+ ], and let y (0) , . . . , y (k) ∈ {T, F}n be assignments satisfying that
H π(y (ℓ) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) = βℓ logk k . Then,

                                         n                           o                    k 
                                                                                          X                     
                               E             y (ℓ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k       ≥ (1 − ok (1))         1 − βℓ e−(βℓ −1) .
                         I∼unif([n]k )
                                                                                          ℓ=1

      From Lemma 5.1 and Proposition 5.2, we can see the main ideas of the proof of Proposition 4.7(c) and
understand the motivation of the definition of Sogp . The ideas are as follows.
      We will prove Proposition 4.7(c) by showing that the right-hand side of (5.1) is negative. For each
π ∈ P , this quantity   can be regarded as a free entropy, with entropy term log 2 + H(π) and energy term
κ logk k EI∼unif([n]k ) y (ℓ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k . This free entropy exhibits a tradeoff where as the entropy term
increases, the assignments y (0) , . . . , y (k) become more diverse, and so the energy term increases too. The
event Sogp is selected so that for overlap profiles π ∈ P , where P is defined in Lemma 5.1, the energy term
is larger than the entropy term, which makes the free entropy negative. In particular, (due to Fact 4.5(b))

                                                                         19
                                                
we think of H π(y (ℓ) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) as the amount that y (ℓ) contributes to the entropy term. Given this
contribution, Proposition 5.2 lower bounds the amount that y (ℓ) contributes to hthe energy term.             i In the
                                                                                                log k   log k
definition of Sogp , we require the entropy contribution to be in a medium range β− k , β+ k                   because
(recalling the definition of β− , β+ ) in this range the energy-to-entropy ratio is favorable to the energy term.
Specifically, we show that if y (ℓ) contributes an entropy in this range, the energy it contributes is at least ε logk k
more. Thus each y (ℓ) decreases the free entropy by at least ε logk k . Together, the k assignments y (1) , . . . , y (k)
contribute a free entropy decrease of ε log k, which dominates the starting free entropy of log 2 and makes
the overall free entropy negative.
    We now prove Proposition 4.7(c) given Lemma 5.1 and Proposition 5.2.
                                                                                                     (0)
Proof of Proposition 4.7(c). Let P be as in Lemma 5.1. Let π ∈ P , and consider assignments        y ,log. . . , y (k) ∈
      n          (0)       (k)                                                (ℓ) (0)
{T, F} with π(y , . . . , y ) = π. For 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, define βℓ by H π(y |y , . . . , y        (ℓ−1)
                                                                                                 ) = βℓ k k . Note
                                                                                                            Pk
that the βℓ are determined given π and satisfy β1 , . . . , βk ∈ [β− , β+ ]. By Fact 4.5(b), H(π) = logk k ℓ=1 βℓ .
By Proposition 5.2,

                 log k             n                     o                log k X 
                                                                                           k        
            −κ           E          y (ℓ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k ≤ −(1 − ok (1))        κ 1 − βℓ e−(βℓ −1)
                   k I∼unif([n]k )                                          k
                                                                                          ℓ=1
                                                                                           k
                                                                                   log k X
                                                           ≤ −(1 − ok (1))                 (βℓ + ε) .
                                                                                     k
                                                                                          ℓ=1


The last inequality uses that 1−βeβ+ε
                                   −(β−1) ≤ κ for all β ∈ [β− , β+ ]. Therefore,




                   log k            n                     o  log k X
                                                                            k
                                                                                       log k X
                                                                                                            k
        H(π) − κ           E         y (ℓ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k ≤         βℓ − (1 − ok (1))         (βℓ + ε)
                     k I∼unif([n] )
                                 k                             k                         k
                                                                           ℓ=1                            ℓ=1
                                                                                   k
                                                                                   X
                                                                           log k
                                                                ≤ ok (1)                 βℓ − (1 − ok (1))ε log k
                                                                             k
                                                                                   ℓ=1
                                                                ≤ ok (1)β+ log k − (1 − ok (1))ε log k
                                                                = −(1 − ok (1))ε log k.

This bound holds for an arbitrary π ∈ P , and thus for the maximum over π ∈ P . By Lemma 5.1,
                           1        c
                             log P(Sogp ) ≤ log 2 − (1 − ok (1))ε log k + ok (1) + o(1) < 0
                           n
                                        c
for sufficiently large k and n. Thus P(Sogp ) ≤ exp(−Ω(n)).

5.2    Bounding the Exponential Rate by a Free Entropy
In this subsection, we will prove Lemma 5.1. We begin with the following lemma, which bounds the proba-
                                                          c
bility term arising in the first moment upper bound of P(Sogp ).

Lemma 5.3. Suppose y (0) , . . . , y (k) ∈ {T, F}n is a sequence of assignments and 0 ≤ t0 ≤ t1 ≤ · · · ≤ tk ≤ T .
Then,
 1      h                                          i     log k             n                     o
   log P y (ℓ) ν-satisfies Φ(tℓ ) for all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k ≤ −κ         E          y (ℓ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k + ok (1) + o(1).
 n                                                         k I∼unif([n]k )

Proof. Say a clause index i ∈ [m] is interrupted if for some 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, tℓ satisfies 1 ≤ σ(tℓ ) − (i − 1)k ≤ k − 1,
where σ(·) is defined in Definition 4.2. Informally, i is interrupted if there is some ℓ such that Φ(tℓ ) is partway
through resampling the ith clause. Let U denote the set of interrupted clause indices. Note that each tℓ
interrupts at most one clause, so |U | ≤ k + 1.



                                                           20
                                                                                (t )
    Say a clause index i ∈ [m] is bad if some y (ℓ) fails to satisfy Φi ℓ . Let S denote the set of bad clause
indices. If y (ℓ) ν-satisfies Φ(tℓ ) for all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, then each y (ℓ) fails to satisfy at most νm clauses of Φ(tℓ ) ,
so |S| ≤ (k + 1)νm.
    We will see that because so few clause indices are interrupted or bad, it does not hurt our analysis to
throw them out. We have that
       h                                        i
     P y (ℓ) satisfies Φ(tℓ ) for all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k
                 X             h                                                   i
                                                 (t )
     ≤                       P y (ℓ) satisfies Φi ℓ for all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, i ∈ [m] \ S
        S⊆[m],|S|≤(k+1)νm
                                          h                                                          i
                   m                                          (t )
     ≤ (m + 1)                  max        P y (ℓ) satisfies Φi ℓ for all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, i ∈ [m] \ (S ∪ U )
               (k + 1)νm S⊆[m],|S|≤(k+1)νm
                                            Y           h                                     i
                   m                                                       (t )
     = (m + 1)                  max                    P y (ℓ) satisfies Φi ℓ for all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k .       (5.2)
               (k + 1)νm S⊆[m],|S|≤(k+1)νm
                                                     i∈[m]\(S∪U)

                                                                          (t)
The last step uses that over i ∈ [m], the collections of clauses {Φi : 0 ≤ t ≤ T } are mutually independent.
    We now fix a single i ∈ [m] \ (S ∪ U ) and analyze the last probability. We exploit the following stochastic
                                                                                                    (t ) (t ) (t )
property of non-interrupted clauses: if i is not interrupted, then the clauses Φi 0 , Φi 1 , . . . , Φi k can be
partitioned into equivalence classes, such that all clauses in the same equivalence class are identical and all
clauses in different equivalence classes are mutually independent. Formally, for some 1 ≤ r ≤ k + 1, there
is a surjective map τ : {0, . . . , k} → [r] (dependent only on the indices t0 , . . . , tk and i) such that for i.i.d.
clauses C1 , . . . , Cr ∼ Φk (n, 1),
                                                                                               
                                     (t )  (t )           (t )
                                   Φi 0 , Φi 1 , . . . , Φi k =d Cτ (0) , Cτ (1) , . . . , Cτ (k) .

                                                                                             (t )
For 1 ≤ s ≤ r, let Bs = τ −1 (s) be the set of ℓ ∈ {0, . . . , k} such that Φi ℓ corresponds to Cs . Thus
B1 , . . . , Br partition {0, . . . , k}. Now,
                 h                                i Yr  h                                 i
                   (ℓ)         (tℓ )
                P y satisfies Φi for all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k =   P y (ℓ) satisfies Cs for all ℓ ∈ Bs .                                (5.3)
                                                                s=1

             k                                                                                  k
  (ℓ)I ∈ [n] be the indices of the k variables sampled by Cs , so I ∼ unif([n] ). Given
Let                                                                                                        I, there are
  y [I] : ℓ ∈ Bs ways to assign polarities to these k variables such that for some ℓ ∈ Bs , y (ℓ) does not satisfy
                                                                                                      
Cs . Thus, conditioned on I, the probability that y (ℓ) satisfies Cs for all ℓ ∈ Bs is 1 − 2−k y (ℓ) [I] : ℓ ∈ Bs .
It follows that
                h                                 i                         n                     o
               P y (ℓ) satisfies Cs for all ℓ ∈ Bs = 1 − 2−k       E          y (ℓ) [I] : ℓ ∈ Bs
                                                              I∼unif([n]k )
                                                                                n                    o
                                                    ≤ exp −2−k         E           y (ℓ) [I] : ℓ ∈ Bs    .
                                                                      I∼unif([n]k )


So, using (5.3) and recalling that B1 , . . . , Br partition {0, . . . , k}, we have
                                                                                                                    !
            h                                      i                                   r
                                                                                       X n                   o
                              (t )
           P y (ℓ) satisfies Φi ℓ for all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k ≤ exp −2−k               E            y (ℓ) [I] : ℓ ∈ Bs
                                                                       I∼unif([n]k )
                                                                                       s=1
                                                                                      n                           o
                                                       ≤ exp −2−k           E              y (ℓ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k        .
                                                                       I∼unif([n]k )


Next, we substitute into (5.2). Since |S| ≤ (k + 1)νm, |U | ≤ k + 1, and m = ⌊αn⌋ ≥ αn − 1,

                                     |m \ (S ∪ U )| ≥ (1 − (k + 1)ν)m − (k + 1)
                                                    ≥ (1 − (k + 1)ν)αn − k − 2.


                                                           21
So,
     h                                            i
   P y (ℓ) satisfies Φ(tℓ ) for all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k
                                                                                   n                   o     
                      m                   (1 − (k + 1)ν)αn − k − 2                        (ℓ)
   ≤ (m + 1)                    exp −                                       E           y [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k + o(n) .
                 (k + 1)νm                              2k           I∼unif([n]k )

                             b
Thus, using that ab ≤ ea    b    ,
            1        h                                        i
              log P y (ℓ) satisfies Φ(tℓ ) for all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k
            n
                                    e           (1 − (k + 1)ν)α               n                       o
                                                                                  (ℓ)
            ≤ (k + 1)να log                  −                      E           y     [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k   + o(1)
                                (k + 1)ν               2k       I∼unif([n]k )
                  α                n                       o
            ≤− k           E         y (ℓ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k + ok (1) + o(1).
                  2 I∼unif([n]k )

The result follows from α = κ2k log k/k.
                                                                        c
Proof of Lemma 5.1. By Markov’s inequality, P(Sogp                         ) is upper bounded by the expected number of 0 ≤
                                             (0)          (k)
t0 ≤ t1 ≤ · · · ≤ tk ≤ T and (y , . . . , y ) satisfying conditions (OGP-A) and (OGP-B). There are at most
                                                                                          k
(T + 1)k+1 choices of (t0 , . . . , tk ), and (by Fact 4.5(a)) |P | ≤ n2 . By linearity of expectation,
                                                                         (0)                                                   
                                                                                (y , . . . , y (k) ) ∈ {T, F}n×(k+1) :
                                                   k
                     c
                P(Sogp    ) ≤ (T + 1)k+1 n2               max        E #  y (ℓ) ν-satisfies Φ(tℓ ) for all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k  .
                                                     0≤t0 ≤···≤tk ≤T
                                                           π∈P                  and π(y (0) , . . . , y (k) ) = π
                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                                 
Let πn be the scalar product of π, treated as a vector, by n. There are 2n πn                                       sequences of assignments
                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                               
(y (0) , . . . , y (k) ) with π(y (0) , . . . , y (k) ) = π: 2n ways to choose y (0) , and then πn               ways to assign the positions
[n] to the partitions of {0, . . . , k}. Over all of these sequences of assignments, the probability of the event that
y (ℓ) satisfies Φ(tℓ ) for all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k is uniformly upper bounded by Lemma 5.3. By linearity of expectation,
the last expectation is upper bounded by
                                                                      n                          o                     
                              n                        log k
                         2n      exp −n κ                          E        y (ℓ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k + ok (1) + o(1)              .
                             πn                          k I∼unif([n]k )
                  n
                    
Because πn             = exp (n(H(π) + o(1))), the result follows.
                                                                                                                 Pr       (ℓ)
Remark 5.4. The step in the proof of Lemma 5.3 where we lower bound                                                s=1    y [I] : ℓ ∈ Bs by
  (ℓ)
   y [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k is tight when t0 , . . . , tk are all equal, because in this case r = 1 and B1 = {0, 1, . . . , k}.
                                                  c                                                                                      c
Thus the exponential rate of P(Sogp                   ) is dominated by the case when the ti are equal. In other words, P(Sogp              )
                                                                                                                     (ℓ)
has the same exponential rate as if, in the definition of Sogp , we required all the y to ν-satisfy the same
Φ(t) . This shows the power of the “ensemble” part of the ensemble multi-OGP: for no cost in the exponential
rate, we can generalize the forbidden structure to an ensemble. All ensemble (multi-)OGPs in the literature
share and leverage this property, see [GJW20, Wei20].

5.3      Lower Bounding the Energy Term
In this subsection, we will prove Proposition 5.2. Let y (0) , . . . , y (k) and β1 , . . . , βk be as in Proposition 5.2.
Without loss of generality, we can set y (0) = Tn .
    To analyze the expectation in Proposition 5.2, we introduce the following probabilistic quantities. For
0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k and σ ∈ {T, F}k , define
                 n              ′
                                                               o
        Eℓ (σ) = I ∈ [n]k : y (ℓ ) [I] = σ for some 0 ≤ ℓ′ ≤ ℓ           and     pℓ (σ) =          P      (Eℓ (σ)) .
                                                                                                          I∼unif([n]k )
                                                             n ′                     o
In other words, Eℓ (σ) is the event that σ appears in the set y (ℓ ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ′ ≤ ℓ , and pℓ (σ) is the probability
of this event. The probabilities pk (σ) will be relevant to our analysis by the following identity (5.4), while

                                                                    22
the probabilities pℓ (σ) for ℓ < k will arise in our inductive analysis below, where we lower bound pk (σ) by
peeling off one of y (1) , . . . , y (k) at a time. We have that
                                                                                  
                        n                         o                X                     X
               E           y (ℓ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k =        E         1 {I ∈ Ek (σ)} =        pk (σ).    (5.4)
           I∼unif([n]k )                             I∼unif([n]k )
                                                                     σ∈{T,F}k                     σ∈{T,F}k

     To prove Proposition 5.2, we will need to lower bound the right-hand side of (5.4). This task will require
several definitions; to motivate these definitions, we first outline our technique for deriving this lower bound.
     Our first step is a conditional expansion. Let I ∼ unif([n]k ). We reveal the k bit strings y (1) [I], . . . , y (k) [I]
one by one. (Recall that we fixed y (0) = Tn , so y (0) [I] = Tk is known.) Conditioned on its predecessors
y (1) [I], . . . , y (ℓ−1) [I], the distribution of y (ℓ) [I] can be described in terms of the conditional
                                                                                                            overlap profile
π(y (ℓ) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ). Then, 1 − pk (σ), the probability that σ does not appear in y (ℓ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k , can
be expanded as a product of k factors: the ℓth factor is the conditional probability that the revealed value
of y (ℓ) does not equal σ. The ℓth factor of this product can be thought of as (1 minus) the contribution of
y (ℓ) to pk (σ).
     Our second step is to estimate this product by a sum, whose ℓth summand is the contribution of y (ℓ) to
this estimate of pk (σ). The purpose of this estimation is to decouple the contributions of the y (ℓ) , so that we
can analyze the overall contribution of y (ℓ) by summing over σ ∈ {T, F}k . We achieve this by truncating the
                                            1                                                                     1        1
factors in the product at 1 − k log           k ; any factor smaller than this gets rounded up to 1. Because k log k ≪ k ,
we can separate the contributions of y (1) , . . . , y (k) to pk (σ) by the estimate

                                1 − (1 − ε1 )(1 − ε2 ) · · · (1 − εk ) ≈ ε1 + ε2 + · · · + εk

up to 1 − ok (1) multiplicative error. Propositions 5.5 and 5.6 below carry out this technique.
     Finally, our third step is to collect the (now additive) contributions of each y (ℓ) to the estimated pk (σ)
over all σ ∈ {T, F}k . Miraculously, we can interpret this sum as a probability of a sum of k i.i.d. random
variables, which can be controlled by a Chernoff bound. This step is carried out in Proposition 5.7.
                                                         (≤ℓ)      (1)         (ℓ)
     Formally, for 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k and i ∈ [n], let yi              = (yi , . . . , yi ). Similarly, for I ∈ [n]k , let y (≤ℓ) [I] =
                                                                                                                   (≤k)
(y (1) [I], . . . , y (ℓ) [I]). Because y (0) = Tn , the overlap profile π determines the distribution of yi              over
i ∼ unif([n]). Namely, for ξ ∈ {T, F}k ,
                                                          h          i
                                                            (≤k)
                                                    P      yi    = ξ = πS∪{0},T
                                            i∼unif([n])


where S = {ℓ ∈ [k] : ξℓ = T} and T = {ℓ ∈ [k] : ξℓ = F}. Moreover, the distribution of y (≤k) [I], where
I ∼ unif([n]k ), is the product of k i.i.d. copies of this distribution. For 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, b ∈ {T, F}, and
ξ ∈ {T, F}ℓ−1, define                              h                     i
                                                      (ℓ)     (≤ℓ−1)
                                φℓ (b|ξ) =    P      yi = b|yi        =ξ .
                                                  i∼unif([n])

The probabilities in the aforementioned conditional expansion are products of conditional probabilities
                                                                                Q             (≤ℓ−1)
φℓ (b|ξ). Namely, the probability that y (ℓ) [I] 6= σ given y (≤ℓ−1) [I] is 1 − kr=1 φℓ (σr |yIr     ).
                               k            k
    For 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, σ ∈ {T, F} and I ∈ [n] , further define
                k
                                    ! ( k                                 )
               Y            (≤ℓ−1)
                                        Y              (≤ℓ−1)       1
  Qℓ (σ, I) =      φℓ (σr |yIr     ) 1        φℓ (σr |yIr     )≤               and qℓ (σ) =       E         [Qℓ (σ, I)] .
               r=1                      r=1
                                                                 k log k                      I∼unif([n]k )

                                                                                1
Thus, 1 − Qℓ (σ, I) is a term in the conditional expansion, truncated at 1 − k log k in the aforementioned sense,
and qℓ (σ) is its expectation.
   For each σ ∈ {T, F}k , the following two propositions lower bound pk (σ) in terms of q1 (σ), . . . , qk (σ) by
peeling off one of y (1) , . . . , y (k) at a time.
Proposition 5.5. For each σ ∈ {T, F}k and 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, we have that
                                                    
                                                1
                               pℓ (σ) ≥ 1 −            pℓ−1 (σ) + qℓ (σ).
                                             k log k

                                                                23
Proof. Note that
                                           h ′                                 i
           1 − pℓ (σ) =         P           y (ℓ ) [I] 6= σ for all 0 ≤ ℓ′ ≤ ℓ
                           I∼unif([n]k )
                                           "                                                              !#
                                                n ′                               o    k
                                                                                       Y
                                                  (ℓ )                   ′                        (≤ℓ−1)
                       =        E              1 y [I] 6= σ for all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ ℓ − 1   1−   φℓ (σr |yIr     )   .
                           I∼unif([n]k )
                                                                                                         r=1

Here, we use that the event inside the indicator is y (≤ℓ−1) [I]-measurable, and conditioned on y (≤ℓ−1) [I] the
                                 Qk            (≤ℓ−1)                      Qk            (≤ℓ−1)
probability that y (ℓ) [I] = σ is r=1 φℓ (σr |yIr     ). Moreover, we have r=1 φℓ (σr |yIr      ) ≥ Qℓ (σ, I) by
definition. So,

                       1 − pℓ (σ) ≤             E      [(1 − 1 {I ∈ Eℓ−1 (σ)}) (1 − Qℓ (σ, I))]
                                         I∼unif([n]k )
                                                                                                      
                                                                      1
                                       ≤     E           1− 1−               1 {I ∈ Eℓ−1 (σ)} − Qℓ (σ, I)
                                         I∼unif([n]k )             k log k
                                                             
                                                         1
                                       =1− 1−                   pℓ−1 (σ) − qℓ (σ).
                                                      k log k
                                                       1
The second-last line uses the fact that Qℓ (σ, I) ≤ k log k almost surely, and the last line uses the definitions
of pℓ−1 (σ) and qℓ (σ). Rearranging yields the desired bound.
Proposition 5.6. For each σ ∈ {T, F}k , we have that
                                                                               X
                                                                                 k
                                                                          1
                                                    pk (σ) ≥ 1 −                        qℓ (σ).
                                                                        log k
                                                                                  ℓ=1

Proof. By iterating Proposition 5.5, we get
                                         k               k 
                                                           X                      k−ℓ                              k X
                                                                                                                        k
                                  1                                        1                                  1
            pk (σ) ≥    1−                      p0 (σ) +      1−                         qℓ (σ) ≥    1−                      qℓ (σ).
                               k log k                                  k log k                            k log k
                                                           ℓ=1                                                         ℓ=1

                                             k
                                         1
The result follows from the bound 1 − k log k    ≥ 1 − log1 k , by Bernoulli’s inequality.
                                                                             P           Pk
   Equation (5.4) and Proposition 5.6 leave the task of lower bounding          σ∈{T,F}k   ℓ=1 qℓ (σ). This is
                                                         P
achieved by the following proposition, which reinterprets σ∈{T,F}k qℓ (σ), the total contribution of y (ℓ) , as a
probability.
Proposition 5.7. For each 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, we have that
                                 X
                                       qℓ (σ) ≥ 1 − βℓ e−(βℓ −1) − ok (1).
                                                σ∈{T,F}k


Proof. Using the definition of qℓ (σ), we have
                                                           ! ( k                                                         )
  X                            X        k
                                        Y                      Y
                                                   (≤ℓ−1)                 (≤ℓ−1)                                  1       
       qℓ (σ) =     E                      φℓ (σr |yIr     ) 1    φℓ (σr |yIr     )≤
                   I∼unif([n]k )
                                                    r=1                             r=1
                                                                                                                k log k
σ∈{T,F}k                               σ∈{T,F}k
                                                                            ! (                                                        )
                                         X          k
                                                    Y                                    k
                                                                                         X
                                                                  (≤ℓ−1)                                   (≤ℓ−1)
               =        E                                 φℓ (σr |yIr       ) 1 −              log φℓ (σr |yIr     ) ≥ log k + log log k  .
                   I∼unif([n]k )
                                       σ∈{T,F}k     r=1                                  r=1


This quantity is the success probability of the following experiment. Sample positive random variables
u1 , . . . , uk by the following procedure, repeated independently for each r ∈ [k]. Sample i ∈ unif([n]); this


                                                                        24
                               (≤ℓ−1)                                                                             (≤ℓ−1)
determines the value of yi          . Then, sample b ∈ {T, F} from the measure φℓ (·|yi          ). Finally, set
                   (≤ℓ−1)                                  Pk
ur = − log φℓ (b|yIr      ). The experiment succeeds if r=1 ur ≥ log k + log log k.
    For r ∈ [k], let vr = min(ur , log k). This is a proxy for ur with an almost sure upper bound, which allows
us to control the experiment’s failure probability by a Chernoff bound. This failure probability is bounded
by        " k                         #     " k                          #    " k                       #
           X                                  X                                X vr           log log k
       P       ur < log k + log log k ≤ P          vr < log k + log log k = P            <1+              .
           r=1                                r=1                              r=1
                                                                                   log k        log k
               vr
Note that the log k are i.i.d. random variables in [0, 1] almost surely. To bound this last probability by a
Chernoff bound, we will lower bound E[vr ]. By the definition of φℓ ,
                                                            h                     i
                                                                          (≤ℓ−1)
                              E[ur ] =  E           E        − log φℓ (b|yi      )
                                              i∼unif([n]) b∼φℓ (·|y (≤ℓ−1) )
                                                                      i

                                                                                          log k
                                           = H(π(y (ℓ) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) )) = βℓ         .
                                                                                            k
Moreover,

            E[ur − vr ] = E [(ur − log k)1 {ur ≥ log k}]
                                                                                                                    
                                       X                                                                           
                                                  (≤ℓ−1)                            1                  (≤ℓ−1)    1 
                        =     E             φℓ (b|yi      ) log                       (≤ℓ−1)
                                                                                               1 φℓ (b|yi      )≤      .
                          i∼unif([n])                                         kφℓ (b|yi      )                    k
                                           b∈{T,F}


For each i ∈ [n], the quantity inside the last expectation is nonzero for at most one b ∈ {T, F} (for k ≥ 3).
                                                             1
Moreover, on the interval [0, k1 ], the function x 7→ x log kx                    1
                                                               has maximum value ek                    1
                                                                                    , attained at x = ek . Thus,
               1                               log k  1
E[ur − vr ] ≤ ek . It follows that E[vr ] ≥ βℓ k − ek . So,
                                                    " k        #
                                                     X vr                  1
                                                  E              ≥ βℓ −         .
                                                     r=1
                                                         log k          e log k

Furthermore, (1 + logloglogk k )/(βℓ − e log
                                          1        1
                                             k ) = βℓ + ok (1). So, by a Chernoff bound,

                                                                      βℓ −ok (1)
              " k                      #                1
               X vr                               −(1−    −o k (1))
                             log log k         e      βℓ
                                                                       
            P            <1+             ≤               β1 +ok (1)            = βℓ e−(βℓ −1) + ok (1).
                   log k       log k          1               ℓ
                                              βℓ + ok (1)
               r=1


Hence,                             " k                                    #
                                    X
                               P          ur ≥ log k + log log k ≥ 1 − βℓ e−(βℓ −1) − ok (1),
                                   r=1

as desired.
   We can now combine these propositions to prove Proposition 5.2.
Proof of Proposition 5.2. By combining (5.4), Proposition 5.6, and Proposition 5.7, we have

                                      n                           o                     X
                                                                                          k         X
                                                                                   1
                           E              y (ℓ) [I] : 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k       ≥     1−                           qℓ (σ)
                      I∼unif([n]k )                                              log k
                                                                                          ℓ=1 σ∈{T,F}k
                                                                                         k 
                                                                                         X                     
                                                                      ≥ (1 − ok (1))           1 − βℓ e−(βℓ −1) .
                                                                                         ℓ=1




                                                                      25
6     Stability of Low Degree Polynomials
In this section, we will prove Proposition 4.7(a), which lower bounds the probability that x(t) satisfies Φ(t)
for all 0 ≤ t ≤ T and the sequence x(t) has no large jumps in Hamming distance.
    The proof is a mild generalization of the stability analysis in [GJW20, Subsection 4.1] and [Wei20,
Subsection 2.3] from a biased Boolean hypercube to a product of discrete uniform measures. Like in these
two works, the proof proceeds in two steps. The interpolation path can be modeled as a walk on a product
graph whose vertices are the elements of Ωk (n, m), where two vertices are adjacent if they differ by one
literal. An edge (Φ, Φ′ ) is bad if the output of our polynomial f has a large jump between inputs Φ and Φ′ .
In the first step, we will use Fourier analysis to upper bound the fraction of bad edges. In the second step,
we translate this bound to a lower bound on the probability that our walk encounters no bad edges.

6.1    An Upper Bound on the Rate of Bad Steps
We begin by formalizing the notion of c-badness. Recall that N = m · k · 2n, and each Φ ∈ Ωk (n, m) is
identified with a vector of indicators in {0, 1}N , which is the input of a low degree polynomial.
Definition 6.1 (c-badness). Let c > 0 and let f : RN → Rn be a deterministic degree-D polynomial. A
                                                                                         2                        2
pair of formulas (Φ, Φ′ ) ∈ Ωk (n, m)2 is c-bad (with respect to f ) if kf (Φ) − f (Φ′ )k2 > c EΦ∼Φk (n,m) kf (Φ)k2 .

    Recall the interpolation path Φ(0) , Φ(1) , . . . , Φ(T ) defined in Definition 4.2. We will prove Proposi-
tion 4.7(a) via the following proposition, which controls the probability that the output of f does not
have a large jump between any pair of consecutive assignments in the interpolation path.
Proposition 6.2. Let f : RN → Rn be a deterministic degree-D polynomial. With probability at least
(2n)−4Dk/c , (Φ(t−1) , Φ(t) ) is not c-bad with respect to f for any 1 ≤ t ≤ T .
    We will prove this proposition in Subsection 6.3. The objective of this subsection is to prove Proposi-
tion 6.3 below, which upper bounds the fraction of all possible steps that are bad. To this end, for 1 ≤ j ≤ km,
define Φk (n, m; j) as the measure of a sample (Φ, Φ′ ) ∈ Ωk (n, m)2 obtained by sampling Φ ∼ Φk (n,    m), and
then obtaining Φ′ from Φ by resampling the jth lexicographic literal Φ′L(j) from unif L \ {ΦL(j) } . (Recall
the definition of L(j) before Definition 4.2.) Define

                           λj =             P          ((Φ, Φ′ ) is c-bad with respect to f ) .
                                  (Φ,Φ′ )∼Φk (n,m;j)

This is the fraction of pairs of formulas in Ωk (n, m), differing in exactly the jth lexicographic literal, that
are c-bad with respect to f .
                                                                        Pkm
Proposition 6.3. If f is a deterministic degree-D polynomial, then j=1 λj ≤ 4D       c .

   We recall the following orthogonal decomposition property of functions on product measures, which can
be thought of as a generalization of Fourier analysis on the Boolean cube. We will give brief self-contained
proofs of the relevant facts; a full discussion can be found in [O’D14, Chapter 8.3]. Let (X , PX ) be an
arbitrary probability space, and let J be a positive integer. Let X = (X1 , . . . , XJ ) ∈ X J . For j ∈ [J], define
the operators Dj and Ej as follows. For any function g : X J → R, Ej g is the function satisfying

                                                Ej g(X) =           E        g(X),
                                                              Xj ∼(X ,PX )

where in the right-hand side the coordinate Xj is resampled from (X , PX ). Let Dj g = g − Ej g. Note that
the operators {Dj , Ej }j∈[J] commute. For S ⊆ [J], define the functions
                                                 Y       Y
                                           ĝS =    Dj        Ej g.
                                                        j∈S       j∈[J]\S
                P
Note that g =     S⊆[J] ĝS . Moreover, ĝS depends only on the inputs {Xj : j ∈ S}. For any j,
                                                                                 
                                  E        g(X)2 =        E             (Dj g)(X)2 + (Ej g)(X)2 ,
                            Xj ∼(X ,PX )             Xj ∼(X ,PX )


                                                               26
and so by induction                                                     X
                                                E        g(X)2 =                       E            ĝS (X)2 .
                                          X∼(X ,PX )⊗J                         X∼(X ,PX )⊗J
                                                                       S⊆[J]
                                                         
For j ∈ [J], define Varj g(X) = EXj ∼(X ,PX ) (Dj g)(X)2 . We begin with the following inequality, which can
be considered a converse to the Efron-Stein inequality.
                                                                                    PI
Lemma 6.4. Suppose a function g : X J → R can be written in the form g(X) = i=1 gi (X), where each
gi (X) depends on at most D coordinates of X. Then,
                                                                       J
                                                                       X
                                       D        Var       g(X) ≥                       E           Varj g(X).
                                           X∼(X ,PX )⊗J                      X∼(X ,PX )⊗J
                                                                       j=1

Proof. By the orthogonal expansion above, we have
                    X                                                                                                X
    Var     g(X) =           E ⊗j ĝS (X)2     and                                         E         Varj g(X) =                  E         ĝS (X)2 .
X∼(X ,PX )⊗J                     X∼(X ,PX )                                       X∼(X ,PX )⊗J                               X∼(X ,PX )⊗j
                         S⊆[J]                                                                                      S⊆[J]
                          S6=∅                                                                                       S∋j
                                                                                      Q
We claim that for all S ⊆ [J] with |S| > D, we have ĝS ≡ 0. For each i ∈ [I], weQhave j∈S Dj gi ≡ 0,
because S contains at least one j such that gi (X) does not depend on Xj . Thus, j∈S Dj g ≡ 0, and so
ĝS ≡ 0, as desired. Hence,
               J
               X                                          X
                           E           Varj g(X) =               |S|          E            ĝS (X)2 ≤ D          Var         g(X).
                     X∼(X ,PX )⊗J                                      X∼(X ,PX )⊗j                         X∼(X ,PX )⊗J
               j=1                                       S⊆[J]
                                                         |S|≤D




Proof of Proposition 6.3. Note that Φk (n, m) is composed of km i.i.d. literals, and thus can be thought of
as the product measure unif(L)⊗km . By slight abuse of notation, for 1 ≤ j ≤ km, we can define Dj and Ej
as the above operators with respect to the jth lexicographic literal ΦL(j) of Φ.
    For 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ n, let fℓ denote the ℓth component of f . By Markov’s inequality and the inequality
(a − b)2 ≤ 2a2 + 2b2 , we have
                         km
                         X            km
                                      X                                        2
                                         E(Φ,Φ′ )∼Φk (n,m;j) kf (Φ) − f (Φ′ )k                 2
                               λj ≤                                                2
                         j=1          j=1            c EΦ∼Φk (n,m) kf (Φ)k2
                                      Pn        Pkm                                                  ′ 2
                                          ℓ=1       j=1 E(Φ,Φ′ )∼Φk (n,m;j) ((Dj fℓ )(Φ) − (Dj fℓ )(Φ ))
                                 =                         Pn
                                                          c ℓ=1 EΦ∼Φk (n,m) fℓ (Φ)2
                                          Pn      Pkm                                   2            ′ 2
                                                                                                                         
                                      2     ℓ=1      j=1 E(Φ,Φ′ )∼Φk (n,m;j) (Dj fℓ )(Φ) + (Dj fℓ )(Φ )
                                 ≤                           Pn
                                                           c ℓ=1 EΦ∼Φk (n,m) fℓ (Φ)2
                                          Pn      Pkm
                                      4     ℓ=1      EΦ∼Φk (n,m) Varj fℓ (Φ)
                                 =            Pn j=1                         .
                                             c ℓ=1 EΦ∼Φk (n,m) fℓ (Φ)2

Now, each fℓ is a degree-D polynomial in the indicators Φi,j,s that Φi,j is the sth literal in L. So, each
monomial of each fℓ depends on at most D literals of Φ. By Lemma 6.4,
                         km
                         X
                                   E         Varj fℓ (Φ) ≤ D            Var        fℓ (Φ) ≤ D              E      fℓ (Φ)2 .
                               Φ∼Φk (n,m)                         Φ∼Φk (n,m)                         Φ∼Φk (n,m)
                         j=1

      Pkm         4D
So,    j=1 λj ≤    c .




                                                                        27
6.2    Bounding the Probability of no Bad Step
Proposition 6.3 bounds the combined rate of c-bad steps. To derive Proposition 6.2, we must translate this
bound on the rate of c-bad steps to a bound on the probability that interpolation path never takes a c-bad
step. To make the ideas in our argument more clear, we abstract to the following graph theoretic problem,
which is interesting in its own right.
    Let Σ be a set of symbols and J, T be positive integers. Let G be a graph on ΣJ , where two nodes are
adjacent if their Hamming distance is exactly 1. Each edge has a direction j ∈ [J], the index on which its
endpoints disagree. Let an arbitrary subset of edges be bad ; for adjacent vertices v, w, let B(v, w) denote
the event that the edge (v, w) is bad. For j ∈ [J], let λj denote the fraction of edges in direction j that are
bad. Equivalently, λj = P(B(v, w)), where v ∼ unif(G) and w is obtained from v by resampling wj from
unif (Σ \ {vj }).
    Let σ : [T ] → [J] be an arbitrary map. Consider the (lazy) random walk v (0) , v (1) , . . . , v (T ) such that
                                                                                (t)
v ∼ unif(G) and for 1 ≤ t ≤ T , v (t) is obtained from v (t−1) by resampling vσ(t) from unif(Σ).
 (0)

                                                          PT
Lemma 6.5. With probability at least |Σ|−                  t=1 λσ(t)   , no step of the random walk v (0) , v (1) , . . . , v (T ) traverses
a bad edge.
    Note that at each step, the random walk either traverses an edge or does not move; we say that the steps
that do not move do not traverse a bad edge. The lemma is sharp, for example, when all the λj are 0 or 1:
in this case, the random walk does not traverse a bad edge if it does not move at all times t with λσ(t) = 1.

Proof. For v ∈ ΣJ , let q(v) be the probability that the random walk v (0) , v (1) , . . . , v (T ) does not traverse a
bad edge, starting from v (0) = v. We will prove by induction on T that
                                                                                     T
                                                                                     X
                                                 E        log q(v) ≥ − log |Σ| ·           λσ(t) .
                                            v∼unif(G)
                                                                                     t=1

The lemma then follows from Jensen’s inequality, because log E q(v) ≥ E log q(v).
   The base case of the claim, T = 0, follows trivially. For the inductive step, let q̃(v) be the probability
that the random walk v (1) , v (2) , . . . , v (T ) does not traverse a bad edge, starting from v (1) = v. Let j = σ(1).
Let v∼j ∈ ΣJ−1 denote an element of ΣJ with the jth coordinate left blank. For s ∈ Σ, let v∼j [s] ∈ ΣJ
denote v∼j with the jth coordinate set to s.
   For now, fix some v∼j ∈ ΣJ−1 . For s ∈ Σ, we have that
                       X 1                                        c
           q(v∼j [s]) =          1 s′ = s or B (v∼j [s], v∼j [s′ ]) q̃(v∼j [s′ ])
                             |Σ|
                       s′ ∈Σ
                           X                                                                              
                                    1      1               |Σ| − 1                          c
                     =                       q̃(v∼j [s]) +           1 B (v∼j [s], v∼j [s′ ]) q̃(v∼j [s′ ]) .
                        ′
                                 |Σ| − 1 |Σ|                  |Σ|
                          s ∈Σ\{s}

By Jensen’s inequality, this implies
                              X                                                                                       
                                           1               1                |Σ| − 1                   ′ c          ′
       log q(v∼j [s]) ≥                         log           q̃(v∼j [s]) +        1 B (v∼j [s], v∼j [s ]) q̃(v∼j [s ]) .
                                        |Σ| − 1           |Σ|                 |Σ|
                          s′ ∈Σ\{s}


Taking an expectation over s ∼ unif(Σ), we have
                           X                                                                               
                                  1              1                |Σ| − 1                   ′ c          ′
   E      log q(v∼j [s]) ≥                 log      q̃(v∼j [s]) +        1 B (v∼j [s], v∼j [s ]) q̃(v∼j [s ])
s∼unif(Σ)                  ′
                             |Σ|(|Σ| − 1)       |Σ|                 |Σ|
                              s,s ∈Σ
                               s6=s′
                               X              1
                          =                           ξ(v∼j , s, s′ ),                                                                (6.1)
                                        2|Σ|(|Σ| − 1)
                              s,s′ ∈Σ
                               s6=s′




                                                                       28
where for s 6= s′ ,
                                                                                                    
                            ′         1                  |Σ| − 1                    ′ c          ′
               ξ(v∼j , s, s ) = log      q̃(v∼j [s]) +           1 B (v∼j [s], v∼j [s ]) q̃(v∼j [s ])
                                     |Σ|                   |Σ|
                                                                                                        
                                            1           ′      |Σ| − 1                   ′ c
                                  + log        q̃(v∼j [s ]) +         1 B (v∼j [s], v∼j [s ]) q̃(v∼j [s]) .
                                           |Σ|                   |Σ|

If B (v∼j [s], v∼j [s′ ]) holds, then ξ(v∼j , s, s′ ) = log q̃(v∼j [s]) + log q̃(v∼j [s′ ]) − 2 log |Σ|. Otherwise, by Jensen’s
inequality we have
                                                                           
         1                  |Σ| − 1                      ′ c            ′         1                     |Σ| − 1
  log       q̃(v∼j [s]) +          1 B (v∼j [s], v∼j [s ]) q̃(v∼j [s ]) ≥             log q̃(v∼j [s]) +          log q̃(v∼j [s′ ])
        |Σ|                   |Σ|                                                 |Σ|                      |Σ|

and similarly for the other term of ξ(v∼j , s, s′ ). In this case, ξ(v∼j , s, s′ ) ≥ log q̃(v∼j [s]) + log q̃(v∼j [s′ ]). So,
in all cases
                 ξ(v∼j , s, s′ ) ≥ log q̃(v∼j [s]) + log q̃(v∼j [s′ ]) − 21 {B (v∼j [s], v∼j [s′ ])} log |Σ|.
Substituting into (6.1), we have
                                                                                              X 1 {B (v∼j [s], v∼j [s′ ])}
                  E       log q(v∼j [s]) ≥           E        log q̃(v∼j [s]) − log |Σ| ·                                  .
              s∼unif(Σ)                           s∼unif(Σ)                                   ′
                                                                                                     |Σ|(|Σ| − 1)
                                                                                             s,s ∈Σ
                                                                                              s6=s′

Taking an expectation over v∼j yields

                                             E      log q(v) ≥         E       log q̃(v) − log |Σ| · λj .
                                     v∼unif(G)                     v∼unif(G)

By induction, we have
                                                                                       T
                                                                                       X
                                                    E        log q̃(v) ≥ − log |Σ| ·         λσ(t) ,
                                                 v∼unif(G)
                                                                                       t=2

and the result follows.

6.3     Completing the Proof of Stability
Proof of Proposition 6.2. Our interpolation scheme can be modeled as the random walk in Subsection 6.2,
with Σ = L, J = km, T = k 2 m, σ(t) defined in Definition 4.2, and where the bad edges are the c-bad edges.
This correspondence is consistent because the steps in the interpolation path where a formula transitions to
itself are never c-bad.
    Since σ maps to every value in [km] k times and |L| = 2n, Proposition 6.3 and Lemma 6.5 imply that
the probability of never traversing a c-bad edge is at least (2n)−4Dk/c .
                                       −β−
Proof of Proposition 4.7(a). Set c = β+γk  . Let Sno-bad be the event that for all 1 ≤ t ≤ T , (Φ(t−1) , Φ(t) ) is
                                                                                                  2
not c-bad with respect to f . By Proposition 6.2, P(Sno-bad ) ≥ (2n)−4Dk γ/(β+ −β− ) .
                                                                                       2
   By a union bound, P(Svalid ) ≥ 1 − (T + 1)δ. Thus, P(Svalid ∩ Sno-bad ) ≥ (2n)−4Dk γ/(β+ −β− ) − (T + 1)δ.
We claim that on Svalid ∩ Sno-bad , the event Sconsec also occurs.
   Suppose for sake of contradiction that Svalid ∩ Sno-bad holds and for some 1 ≤ t ≤ T , we have that
                      −β−
∆(x(t−1) , x(t) ) > β+2k  . Because (Φ(t−1) , Φ(t) ) is not c-bad, we have
                                                         2
                                                                                        2              β+ − β−
                           f (Φ(t−1) ) − f (Φ(t) )            ≤c       E        kf (Φ)k2 ≤ cγn =               n.
                                                         2         Φ∼Φk (n,m)                             k
                      (t−1)        (t)              −β−
Let I = {i ∈ [n] : xi           6= xi }, so |I| > β+2k  n. Define
                                                n                                   o
                                                           (t)
                                        B (t) = i ∈ [n] : xi 6= (round ◦ f )(Φ(t) )i .


                                                                       29
           (t)
Because xi = A(Φ(t) )i and the assistance subroutine B in A can edit only an η fraction of bits of the
                                −β−                                                                     −β−
assignment, |B (t) | ≤ ηn = β+8k    n. For similarly defined B (t−1) , we likewise have |B (t−1) | ≤ β+8k   n.
                     (t−1)    (t)           β+ −β−                                (t−1)             (t)
    Let J = I \ (B         ∪ B ), so |J| > 4k n. For all i ∈ J, one of fi (Φ            ) and fi (Φ ) is at least 1
and the other is at most −1, so |fi (Φ(t−1) ) − fi (Φ(t) )| ≥ 2. So,
                                                  2       X                                      β+ − β−
                        f (Φ(t−1) ) − f (Φ(t) )       ≥         |fi (Φ(t−1) ) − fi (Φ(t) )|2 >           n.
                                                  2                                                 k
                                                          i∈J

This is a contradiction. Therefore Sconsec ⊇ Svalid ∩ Sno-bad , and so
                                                                                     2
                  P(Svalid ∩ Sconsec ) ≥ P(Svalid ∩ Sno-bad ) ≥ (2n)−4Dk γ/(β+ −β− ) − (T + 1)δ.




7     Proof of Impossibility for Local Algorithms
This section proves our impossibility result for local algorithms, Theorem 2.13. Throughout, fix κ > κ∗ and
r ∈ N. Fix a probability space (Ω, Pω ), and let A be an r-local algorithm that, on input Φ ∈ Ωk (n, m) with
factor graph (G, ρ), samples internal randomness ϕ ∼ (Ω, Pω )⊗(VG ∪EG ) .
    Let ϕV = ϕ VG and ϕE = ϕ EG . We will actually prove Theorem 2.13 conditioned on any realization of
ϕV . Fix once and for all a realization of ϕV ; all probabilities and expectations in this section will implicitly
be conditioned on this realization.

7.1    A Different Interpolation
Instead of the interpolation path of k 2 m problem instances used in the proof of Theorem 2.6, we now use
an interpolation structured as k paths of length km originating at a common point. We also couple to this
interpolation the internal randomness ϕE of A run on these problem instances.
Definition 7.1 (Interplation structure). Let T ′ = km. We will sample Φ(0) and Φ(ℓ,t) ∈ Ωk (n, m) for
1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, 1 ≤ t ≤ T ′ . Let the factor graphs of these k-SAT instances be (G(0) , ρ(0) ) and (G(ℓ,t) , ρ(ℓ,t) ). We
                      (0)                   (ℓ,t)
also sample maps ϕE : EG(0) → Ω and ϕE : EG(ℓ,t) → Ω.
                                        (0)
     We sample Φ(0) ∼ Φk (n, m) and ϕE ∼ (Ω, Pω )⊗EG(0) . For 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, 1 ≤ t ≤ T ′ , we obtain Φ(ℓ,t) from
                                                          (ℓ,t)
Φ(ℓ,t−1) (take Φ(ℓ,0) = Φ(0) for all ℓ) by resampling ΦL(t) from unif(L). (Recall that L(t) is the tth pair
(a, b) ∈ [m] × [k] in lexicographic order.)
     This resampling deletes an edge e from G(ℓ,t−1) , adds an edge e′ to G(ℓ,t) (possibly in the same location),
                                                   (ℓ,t)        (ℓ,t−1)
and samples ρ(ℓ,t) (e) ∼ unif({T, F}). We obtain ϕE from ϕE             by deleting the entry for e′ and sampling
  (ℓ,t)
ϕE (e) ∼ (Ω, Pω ).
    In other words, starting from a random k-SAT instance we sample k interpolation paths, where in each
path we resample the literals one by one in the same order. Resampling a literal resamples an edge of the
factor graph, and we also resample the output of ϕE on that edge.
                                (ℓ,t)
    Note that each (Φ(ℓ,t) , ϕE ) is marginally distributed as (Φ, ϕE ) where Φ ∼ Φk (n, m) and ϕE ∼
                                                                     ′     (ℓ,T ′ )                              (0)
(Ω, Pω )⊗EG , where (G, ρ) is the factor graph of Φ. Moreover, (Φ(ℓ,T ) , ϕE        ) is independent of (Φ(0) , ϕE )
                  ′
         ′      (ℓ ,t)
and (Φ(ℓ ,t) , ϕE ) for all ℓ′ 6= ℓ.

7.2    Selecting Problem Instances Yielding the Forbidden Structure
We set β− , β+ , ε as in Subsection 4.4. Recall that these numbers depend only on κ, and 1−βeβ+ε
                                                                                              −(β−1) ≤ κ for

all β ∈ [β− , β+ ]. Moreover, set β0 = β− +β
                                          2
                                             +
                                               .
    In the proof of Theorem 2.6, we selected the problem instances Φ(t0 ) , Φ(t1 ) , . . . , Φ(tk ) where the algorithm
outputs form a forbidden structure after observing the entire interpolation. Here, because we can leverage


                                                                  30
concentration properties of local algorithms (instead of stability properties of low degree polynomials), we
know in advance which problem instances to choose. This allows us to immediately restrict our attention to
k + 1 problem instances, instead of the full interpolation structure.
   We will choose the problem instances Φ(0) and Φ(ℓ,tℓ ) for 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, for indices t1 , . . . , tk we now
determine. Consider random variables (which depend on the tℓ )
                                                 (0)                                      (ℓ,t )
                               x(0) = A(Φ(0) , ϕE )       and       x(ℓ) = A(Φ(ℓ,tℓ ) , ϕE ℓ )

for 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k. Here, A(Φ, ϕE ) denotes A run with input Φ and internal randomness ϕE (we suppress the
dependence on ϕV , which is fixed).
    We inductively define tℓ in terms of t1 , . . . , tℓ−1 as the smallest number satisfying 1 ≤ tℓ ≤ T ′ and
                                                                              log k
                                       E H π(x(ℓ) |x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) ) ≥ β0       .
                                                                                  k
If no such tℓ exists, set tℓ = T ′ and say ℓ is deficient. Note that the tℓ are a deterministic function of A and
                                                  (ℓ)     (ℓ,t )
ϕV . For 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, define Φ(ℓ) = Φ(ℓ,tℓ ) and ϕE = ϕE ℓ . Let (G(ℓ) , ρ(ℓ) ) be the factor graph of Φ(ℓ) .
    The following lemma follows from the stability of the expected conditional overlap entropy when we
resample one literal of Φ(ℓ,t) . We defer its proof to Subsection 7.6. The exponent − 21 can be replaced by
any constant larger than −1.

Lemma 7.2. If ℓ ∈ [k] is not deficient, then

                              log k                                          log k
                         β0         ≤ E H π(x(ℓ) |x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) ) ≤ β0       + O(n−1/2 ).
                                k                                                k

7.3     Outline of the Proof
                                        −β−
For the rest of this proof, take η = β+32k 2 and ν = k212k . We now define events Svalid , Sconc , Sindep, Sogp ,
                                          (ℓ)
which are measurable in the (Φ(ℓ) , ϕE ) for 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k.
   Let Svalid be the event that for all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, x(ℓ) (η, ν)-satisfies Φ(ℓ) . Let Sconc be the event that for all
1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k,
                                                                                            1
                    H π(x(ℓ) |x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) ) − E H π(x(ℓ) |x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) ) ≤       .
                                                                                              log n
                    ℓ
For 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, let Sindep be the event that there does not exist an assignment y ∈ {T, F}n such that

 (IND-A) y ν-satisfies Φ(ℓ) ;
                                       
  (IND-B) H π(y|x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) ) ≤ β+ logk k .

Let Sogp be the event that there does not exist assignments y (0) , . . . , y (k) ∈ {T, F}n such that
(OGP-A) For all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, x(ℓ) ν-satisfies Φ(ℓ) ;
                                                                 h                     i
 (OGP-B) For all 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, H π(y (ℓ) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) ∈ β− logk k , β+ logk k .

   Finally, define
                                          p = P [A(Φ, ϕE ) (η, ν)-satisfies Φ] ,
where the probability is over the randomness of Φ ∼ Φk (n, m) and ϕE ∼ (Ω, Pω )⊗EG , where (G, ρ) is the
factor graph of Φ. This is the probability upper bounded by Theorem 2.13.
    We will derive Theorem 2.13 from the following two propositions.
Proposition 7.3. For all sufficiently large k and n, the following relations hold.
                                                       ℓ
 (a) If ℓ ∈ [k] is deficient, then Svalid ∩ Sconsec ∩ Sindep = ∅.
 (b) If no ℓ ∈ [k] is deficient, then Svalid ∩ Sconsec ∩ Sogp = ∅.


                                                             31
Proposition 7.4. For all sufficiently large k and n, the following inequalities hold.
 (a) P(Svalid ) ≥ pk+1 .
                          e 1/3 )).
 (b) P(Sconc ) ≥ 1 − exp(−Ω(n
                                      ℓ
 (c) If ℓ ∈ [k] is deficient, then P(Sindep ) ≥ 1 − exp(−Ω(n)).
 (d) If no ℓ ∈ [k] is deficient, then P(Sogp ) ≥ 1 − exp(−Ω(n)).
    We will prove Proposition 7.3 in Subsection 7.4, Proposition 7.4(a) in Subsection 7.5, and Proposi-
tion 7.4(b) in Subsection 7.6. Proposition 7.4(c,d) are analogous to Proposition 4.7(b,c). The proofs are
exactly the same, except we no longer need to union bound over all possible choices of the tℓ .
    First, let us see how these bounds imply Theorem 2.13.
Proof of Theorem 2.13. Set k ∗ such that for all k ≥ k ∗ , Propositions 7.3 and 7.4 both hold.
                                                                                               ℓ
    Suppose some ℓ ∈ [k] is deficient. By Proposition 7.3(a), P(Svalid ) + P(Sconc ) + P(Sindep   ) ≤ 2. By
Proposition 7.4, this implies
                                   pk+1 ≤ exp(−Ω(ne 1/3 )) + exp(−Ω(n)),
whence p ≤ exp(−Ω(n e 1/3 )). If no ℓ ∈ [k] is deficient, then by Proposition 7.3(b), P(Svalid ) + P(Sconc ) +
P(Sogp ) ≤ 2. By Proposition 7.4, we get the same conclusion. So, p ≤ exp(−Ω(n  e 1/3 )) conditionally on any
realization of ϕV .

                                                 ℓ
7.4     Successful Algorithm Outputs Contradict Sindep or Sogp
The following corollary to Lemma 4.8 is obvious.
Corollary 7.5. Let ℓ ∈ N be arbitrary and let x, x′ , y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ∈ {T, F}n. If ∆(x, x′ ) ≤ 21 , then
                                                                                   
                 H π(x, y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) − H π(x′ , y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) ≤ H(∆(x, x′ )).

Proof. Use Fact 4.5(b).
Proof of Proposition 7.3. Suppose Svalid and Sconc both hold. We will construct an example of the structure
                    ℓ
forbidden by Sindep       or Sogp . Since Svalid holds, there exists y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ) such that for all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k,
∆(x(ℓ) , y (ℓ) ) ≤ η and y (ℓ) ν-satisfies Φ(ℓ) .                                  
    Suppose ℓ ∈ [k] is deficient. Then, E H π(x(ℓ) |x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) ) ≤ β0 logk k by definition. By Lemma 4.8,
                                                                                             β+ − β− log k
                H π(y (ℓ) |x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) ) − H π(x(ℓ) |x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) ) ≤ H(η) ≤           · 2
                                                                                                    8       k
for sufficiently large k, using the bound H(x) ≤ x log xe . In tandem with Sconc , this implies
                                                          log k β+ − β− log k              1        log k
                    H π(y (ℓ) |x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) ) ≤ β0      +                 · 2 +         ≤ β+
                                                              k              8         k   log n        k
                                                                                    ℓ
for sufficiently large n. This is an example of the structure forbidden by Sindep        . This proves part (a).
    Otherwise, suppose no ℓ ∈ [k] is deficient. Writing (by Fact 4.5(b))
                                                                                                       
                 H π(x(ℓ) |x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) ) = H π(x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ) ) − H π(x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) )

and applying Corollary 7.5 repeatedly, we have, for all 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k,
                                                                                                  β+ − β− log k
         H π(x(ℓ) |x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) ) − H π(y (ℓ) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) ≤ 2(k + 1)H(η) ≤            ·
                                                                                                         4        k
for sufficiently large k. By Lemma 7.2 and Sconc , this implies
                                               log k   β+ − β− log k               1                 β+ − β− log k
       H π(y (ℓ) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) − β0       ≤                ·        +       + O(n−1/2 ) ≤          ·
                                                   k          4              k     log n                   2        k
                                                                          h                i
for sufficiently large n. So, H π(y (ℓ) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) ∈ β− logk k , β+ logk k for all 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k. This is an
example of the structure forbidden by Sogp . This proves part (b).

                                                           32
7.5     Lower Bound on the All-Success Probability
Consider the random variable Ψ = (Φ, ϕE ), for Φ ∼ Φk (n, m) and ϕE ∼ (Ω, Pω )⊗EG where (G, ρ) is the
factor graph of Φ. In this and the next subsection, the following representation of Ψ as a sequence of km
i.i.d. random variables will be useful. We can reformat Ψ = (ψj )1≤j≤km , where ψj = (ΦL(j) , ϕE (e)) and e
is the edge in G corresponding to ΦL(j) . Each ψj is an i.i.d. sample from Υ = unif(L) × (Ω, Pω ).
                                           (ℓ)
   For 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, let Ψ(ℓ) = (Φ(ℓ) , ϕE ), which is marginally distributed as Ψ. We similarly can reformat
         (ℓ)
Ψ(ℓ) = (ψj )1≤j≤km .
Proof of Proposition 7.4(a). For Ψ as above, let

                                       f (Ψ) = 1 {A(Φ, ϕE ) (η, ν)-satisfies Φ} .

Note that E f (Ψ) = p by definition, and
                                                                    " k               #
                                                                     Y
                                                 P(Svalid ) = E               f (Ψ(ℓ) ) .
                                                                      ℓ=0

We wish to show this expectation is at least pk+1 .
                                        (ℓ)         (ℓ)
  The constituent random variables ψj of Ψ(ℓ) = (ψj )1≤j≤km have the following stochastic structure.
                                                                   (ℓ)
For each 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, the last km − tℓ variables (ψj )tℓ <j≤km in Ψ(ℓ) are identical to the corresponding
                                                        (ℓ)
variables in Ψ(0) , and the first tℓ variables (ψj )1≤j≤tℓ are fresh i.i.d. draws from Υ.
      Let τ : [k] → [k] be a permutation such that tτ (1) ≤ tτ (2) ≤ · · · ≤ tτ (k) , and let sℓ = tτ (ℓ) . Then,
                                                               (ℓ)
Ψ , . . . , Ψ(k) all share their last km − sk variables ψj ; all but Ψ(τ (k)) share the next sk − sk−1 variables;
   (0)

all but Ψ(τ (k)) and Ψ(τ (k−1)) share the next sk−1 − sk−2 variables, and so on.
      For 0 ≤ i ≤ k, let ξi be a sequence of si+1 − si i.i.d. draws from Υ, where s0 = 0 and sk+1 = km. Let
ξi0 , ξi1 , . . . be a sequence of i.i.d. copies of ξi . By the above discussion, we can generate Ψ(0) , . . . , Ψ(k) by
                                                                             (ℓ−i)+ k
generating Ψ(0) = (ξi0 )ki=0 , and for 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, generating Ψ(τ (ℓ)) = (ξi        )i=0 . For example, when k = 3,

                                                      Ψ(0) = (ξ00 , ξ10 , ξ20 , ξ30 ),
                                                   Ψ(τ (1)) = (ξ01 , ξ10 , ξ20 , ξ30 ),
                                                   Ψ(τ (2)) = (ξ02 , ξ11 , ξ20 , ξ30 ),
                                                   Ψ(τ (3)) = (ξ03 , ξ12 , ξ21 , ξ30 ).

Let f (ξ0 , . . . , ξk ) denote f (Ψ), for the Ψ that can be formatted (by the above discussion) as (ξ0 , . . . , ξk ). Let
f0 = f , and for 0 ≤ d ≤ k, define

                                        fd+1 (ξd+1 , . . . , ξk ) = E fd (ξd , . . . , ξk ).
                                                                         ξd

Note that fk+1 takes no inputs and outputs p. Further, for 0 ≤ d ≤ k + 1 define
                                            " k                   #
                                             Y  (ℓ−i)           
                                                           + k
                                    Pd = E      fd (ξi       )i=d .
                                                          ℓ=0

In particular P0 = P(Svalid ) and Pk+1 = pk+1 . To finish the proof we will show that Pd ≥ Pd+1 for all




                                                                   33
0 ≤ d ≤ k. By Jensen’s inequality,
                               "                                                                #
                                                       k
                                                  d+1 Y                                   
                                                                          (ℓ−i)+ k
                           Pd = E fd (ξi0 )ki=d                fd       (ξi     )i=d
                                                       ℓ=d+1
                                    "                                                        #
                                             h        d+1 i Y
                                                             k             h              i
                                                                                (ℓ−i)+ k
                               = E E0 fd (ξi0 )ki=d                      E fd (ξi     )i=d
                                        ξd                              ξdℓ−d
                                                            ℓ=d+1
                                    "                                                                 #
                                                           k
                                                      d+1 Y                   h                  i
                                                                                         (ℓ−i)+ k
                               ≥ E E0 fd (ξi0 )ki=d                      E          fd (ξi     )i=d
                                        ξd                              ξdℓ−d
                                                            ℓ=d+1
                                    "                                                                     #
                                                            k
                                                       d+1 Y                                           
                                                                                          (ℓ−i)+ k
                               = E fd+1 (ξi0 )ki=d+1                    fd+1            (ξi     )i=d+1
                                                             ℓ=d+1

                               = Pd+1 .



7.6     Bounded Differences and Concentration of Local Algorithms
We will use the following variant of McDiarmid’s inequality, which allows a bad event on which bounded
differences are large.
                                                                                               Q
Lemma 7.6 ([Kut02, Theorem 3.3]). Let M ∈ N. Let Ω1 , . . . , ΩM be probability spaces and Ω = M i=1 Ωi .
Let S ⊂ Ω and f : Ω → R have the following properties.
  (i) If X, X ′ ∈ S differ in coordinate i, then |f (X) − f (X ′ )| ≤ ci .
 (ii) If X, X ′ ∈ Ω differ in coordinate i, then |f (X) − f (X ′ )| ≤ bi .
Then,                                                                                      !               M
                                                                                                           X
                                                             t2                                       c      bi
                        P [|f (X) − E f (X)| ≥ t] ≤ 2 exp − PM                                 + 2 P(S )              .
                       X∼Ω                                 8 i=1 c2i                                       i=1
                                                                                                                 ci

   The following definition gives the complement of the bad event we will use. The exponent 13 is chosen to
minimize the failure probability in Lemma 7.6 by balancing the two terms.
Definition 7.7. A k-SAT formula Φ ∈ Ωk (n, m) is r-locally small if, for (G, ρ) the factor graph of Φ,
|Nr (v, G)| ≤ n1/3 for all v ∈ VaG .
Fact 7.8. If Φ ∼ Φk (n, m) and r ∈ N is constant, Φ is r-locally small with probability 1 − exp(−Ω(n1/3 )).
Proof. This follows from Lemma 8.5 and a union bound. Note that the r-neighborhood of any v ∈ ClG is
contained in the (r + 1)-neighborhood of any of its neighbors.
Proof of Proposition 7.4(b). We present the argument for ℓ = k; showing concentration for      the other condi-
tional overlap entropies is similar. The random variable Y = H π(x(k) |x(0) , . . . , x(k−1) ) is measurable in
                                                                (ℓ)
Ψ(0) , . . . , Ψ(k) . For each 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, we can write Ψ(ℓ) = (ψj )1≤j≤km . The constituent random variables
 (ℓ)
ψj can be partitioned into equivalence classes, where variables in the same equivalence class are identical
and different equivalence classes are mutually independent. Let ζ = (ψ1 , . . . , ψM ) contain one representative
from each equivalence class. Note that ψ1 , . . . , ψM i.i.d. samples from Υ and M ≤ k 2 m.
                                 (ℓ)
    All the Φ(ℓ) (G(ℓ) , ρ(ℓ) , ϕE ), x(ℓ) , overlap profiles of the x(ℓ) , and Y are ζ-measurable. We will use Y (ζ)
to denote the Y given by this realization of ζ, and similarly for the remaining random variables.
    Let S ⊆ ΥM be the event that Φ(ℓ) (ζ) is r-locally small for all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k. By a union bound on Fact 7.8,
P(S c ) ≤ exp(−Ω(n1/3 )).
    Suppose ζ, ζ ′ ∈ S differ in only one coordinate ψi . For each 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, the decorated factor graphs
                (ℓ)                        (ℓ)
(G(ℓ) , ρ(ℓ) , ϕE )(ζ) and (G(ℓ) , ρ(ℓ) , ϕE )(ζ ′ ) differ in at most one edge. Because ζ, ζ ′ ∈ S and A is local, x(ℓ) (ζ)

                                                            34
and x(ℓ) (ζ ′ ) differ in O(n1/3 ) bits. So, corresponding entries in π(x(0) , . . . , x(k) )(ζ) and π(x(0) , . . . , x(k) )(ζ ′ )
differ by O(n−2/3 ). Thus, |Y (ζ) − Y (ζ ′ )| ≤ O(n−2/3 log n).
    Moreover, for any ζ, ζ ′ ∈ ΥM , we have |Y (ζ) − Y (ζ ′ )| ≤ log 2 because the conditional overlap entropy
attains values in [0, log 2]. By Lemma 7.6,
                                                                                      2          
                             1                       1/ log2 n                   1/3      2k m log 2
        P |Y − E Y | ≥             ≤ 2 exp − 2                        + exp(−Ω(n     ))O
                           log n             8k mO((n−2/3 log n)2 )                       n−2/3 log n
                                           e 1/3 )).
                                   ≤ exp(−Ω(n



    Similar ideas prove Lemma 7.2.
Proof of Lemma 7.2. The lower bound follows from the definition of deficient. For 1 ≤ t ≤ T , let x(ℓ,t) =
            (ℓ,t)
A(Φ(ℓ,t) , ϕE ). We will show that

                  E H(π(x(ℓ,t) |x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) )) − E H(π(x(ℓ,t−1) |x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) )) ≤ O(n−1/2 ).

Since E H(π(x(ℓ,tℓ −1) |x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) )) < β0 logk k , the above inequality implies the result.
    Let S be the event that Φ(ℓ,t−1) and Φ(ℓ,t) are both r-locally small. By Fact 7.8 and a union bound,
                                                                                          (ℓ,t−1)                           (ℓ,t)
P(S c ) ≤ exp(−Ω(n1/3 )). The decorated factor graphs (G(ℓ,t−1) , ρ(ℓ,t−1) , ϕE                   ) and (G(ℓ,t) , ρ(ℓ,t) , ϕE )
differ in at most one edge. On the event S, x(ℓ,t) and x(ℓ,t−1) differ in at most O(n1/3 ) bits, and by
Lemma 4.8,

    H(π(x(ℓ,t) |x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) )) − H(π(x(ℓ,t−1) |x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) )) ≤ H(∆(x(ℓ,t) , x(ℓ,t−1) )) ≤ O(n−2/3 log n).

Moreover, this difference is always at most log 2. Thus

        E H(π(x(ℓ,t) |x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) )) − E H(π(x(ℓ,t−1) |x(0) , . . . , x(ℓ−1) )) ≤ O(n−2/3 log n) + P(S c ) log 2
                                                                                      ≤ O(n−1/2 ).




8      Simulation of Local Memory Algorithms
In this section, we introduce the class of local memory algorithms. These algorithms are a natural general-
ization of local algorithms, which make local decisions in series (in a random vertex order) and allow earlier
decisions to leave local information that later decisions can see. This class includes the first phase of Fix,
as well as the sequential local algorithms considered in [GS17]. We show, somewhat surprisingly, that any
local memory algorithm can be simulated by a local algorithm of larger radius. We then show that any local
algorithm can be simulated by a constant degree polynomial.
    The main results of this section are the following two propositions. Throughout this section, fix arbitrary
α = α(k) independent of n and let m = ⌊αn⌋.
Proposition 8.1 (Local algorithms simulate local memory algorithms). Suppose αk, k − 1 ≥ 2 and η > 0.
Let A be an r-local memory algorithm (defined in Definition 8.12) with output in {T, F}n. There exists R ∈ N
depending on α, k, r, η and an R-local algorithm A′ such that, for some coupling of the internal randomnesses
of A, A′ ,
                                  P [∆(A(Φ), A′ (Φ)) ≥ η] ≤ exp(−Ω(n1/3 )),
where the probability is over Φ ∼ Φk (n, m) and the randomnesses of A, A′ .




                                                               35
    We parse the outputs of a low degree polynomial with the function strictRound : R → {T, F, err},
defined by                                         
                                                   
                                                   T     x = 1,
                                 strictRound(x) = F       x = −1,
                                                   
                                                   
                                                     err otherwise.
When applied to a real-valued vector, strictRound is applied coordinate-wise. Note that this is a more
stringent parsing scheme than round. Let N = m · k · 2n. Recall that each Φ ∈ Ωk (n, m) can be identified
with a vector in {0, 1}N , as described below Definition 2.2.
Proposition 8.2 (Low degree polynomials simulate local algorithms). Suppose αk, k − 1 ≥ 2 and η > 0.
Let A be an r-local algorithm with output in {T, F}n. There exist D, γ > 0 depending on α, k, r, η and a
(random) degree-D polynomial f : RN × Ω → Rn such that the following holds. Let A′ = strictRound ◦ f .
For some coupling of the internal randomnesses of A and f ,

                                   P [∆(A(Φ), A′ (Φ)) ≥ η] ≤ exp(−Ω(n1/3 )),
                                                                                                           2
where the probability is over Φ ∼ Φk (n, m) and the randomnesses of A, A′ . Moreover, EΦ,ω kf (Φ, ω)k2 ≤ γn.
    Both simulation results incur an error tolerance η independent of n which can be made arbitrarily small
in k and fail with probability only exp(−Ω(n1/3 )).
    These simulation results imply that our hardness theorems, Theorems 2.6 and 2.13, apply to any local
memory algorithm. We will also use these results in Section 9 with the fact that the first phase of Fix is a
local memory algorithm to show that local algorithms and low degree polynomials solve random k-SAT at
clause density α = (1 − ε)2k log k/k.
    This section is structured as follows. In Subsection 8.1 we review properties of local algorithms and
the k-SAT factor graph. In Subsection 8.2 we define local memory algorithms. In Subsection 8.3 we prove
Proposition 8.1, and in Subsection 8.4 we prove Proposition 8.2. Subsection 8.5 contains deferred proofs.

8.1    Properties of Local Algorithms and the k-SAT Factor Graph
Throughout this section, fix a probability space (Ω, Pω ). Let DFG(n, m, k, (Ω, Pω )) denote the law of the
decorated random k-SAT factor graph (G, ρ, ϕ), where Φ ∼ Φk (n, m), (G, ρ) is the factor graph of Φ, and
ϕ ∼ (Ω, Pω )⊗(VG ∪EG ) . We write this as DFG(n, m, k) when (Ω, Pω ) is unambiguous.
    Equivalently, (G, ρ, ϕ) ∼ DFG(n, m, k) can be sampled as follows. VaG = {v1 , . . . , vn } and ClG =
{c1 , . . . , cm } are fixed. EG consists of k edges from each c ∈ ClG to i.i.d. uniformly random vertices in VaG ,
and ρ, ϕ are sampled by ρ ∼ unif({T, F})⊗EG , ϕ ∼ (Ω, Pω )⊗(VG ∪EG ) .
    A (possibly infinite) graph is locally finite if every vertex has finite degree. The formalism in Def-
initions 2.9, 2.10, and 2.11 applies verbatim to locally finite G. The local geometry of a sample from
DFG(n, m, k) can be understood in analogy to the following locally finite tree.
Definition 8.3 (Decorated Alternating Galton-Watson Tree). Let d1 > 0, d2 ∈ N. Let DGW(d1 , d2 , (Ω, Pω ))
denote the law of the following rooted decorated tree (o, T, ρ, ϕ). The rooted tree (o, T ) is sampled by the
following procedure.
   • Start with a root vertex o in layer 0.
   • For ℓ ≥ 1:
        – If ℓ is even, each vertex in layer ℓ independently spawns Pois(d1 ) children in layer ℓ + 1.
        – If ℓ is odd, each vertex in layer ℓ spawns d2 children in layer ℓ + 1.
      Each non-root vertex is connected to its parent by an edge.
Let VaT and ClT be the sets of even and odd depth vertices of T . Further, let VT = VaT ∪ ClT and let ET
be the edge set of T . Sample ρ ∼ unif({T, F})⊗ET and ϕ ∼ (Ω, Pω )⊗(VT ∪ET ) .



                                                        36
    When (Ω, Pω ) is unambiguous, we write this as DGW(d1 , d2 ). The significance of this tree is that as
n → ∞, local neighborhoods Nr (v, G, ρ, ϕ) of a sample (G, ρ, ϕ) ∼ DFG(n, m, k), where v ∈ VaG is fixed,
converge weakly to local neighborhoods of the root of DGW(αk, k − 1). This is analogous to the fact that
local neighborhoods of the sparse Erdős-Rényi graph G(n, d/n) converge weakly to local neighborhoods of
the root of the Poisson Galton-Watson tree PGW(d).
    We now state several lemmas pertaining to local geometry of samples from DGW(d1 , d2 ) and DFG(n, m, k).
Lemmas 8.4 and 8.5 control the local neighborhood sizes of the root of DGW(d1 , d2 ) and of a left-vertex
in DFG(n, m, k). Lemma 8.6 makes precise the sense in which local neighborhoods of left-vertices of
DFG(n, m, k) converge to local neighborhoods of the root of DGW(αk, k − 1). Lemma 8.7 shows con-
centration for the sum of a local function. These lemmas are analogous to [BCN20, Lemma 11.1, Lemma
11.2, Lemma 12.4, Proposition 12.3], which give the analogous results with G(n, m, k) and DGW(αk, k − 1)
replaced by G(n, d/n) and PGW(d) (and without the decorations ρ, ϕ, which do not affect the results). We
omit their proofs, which are easily adapted from the corresponding proofs of [BCN20].
Lemma 8.4. Let d1 , d2 ≥ 2 and (o, T, ρ, ϕ) ∼ DGW(d1 , d2 ). There are universal constants c0 , c1 > 0 such
that for all λ > 0,

                      P [|N2r (o, T )| ≤ λ(d1 d2 )r for all positive integers r] ≥ 1 − c1 e−c0 λ .

Lemma 8.5. Let αk, k − 1 ≥ 2. Let (G, ρ, ϕ) ∼ DFG(n, m, k), and let v ∈ VaG be fixed. There are universal
constants c0 , c1 > 0 such that for all λ > 0,

                   P [|N2r (v, G)| ≤ λ(αk(k − 1))r for all positive integers r] ≥ 1 − c1 e−c0 λ .

   Recall that Λ is the set of (possibly infinite, locally finite) rooted decorated bipartite graphs.
Lemma 8.6. Let αk, k − 1 ≥ 2. Let (o, T, ρ, ϕ) ∼ DGW(αk, k − 1), (G, ρ′ , ϕ′ ) ∼ DFG(n, m, k), and let
v ∈ VaG be fixed. Let f : Λ → [−1, 1] be a 2r-local function. There exists c > 0 (depending on α, k, r) such
that for all n,
                                                                          c log n
                               |E f (o, T, ρ, ϕ) − E f (v, G, ρ′ , ϕ′ )| ≤ 1/2 .
                                                                           n
Lemma 8.7. Let αk, k − 1 ≥ 2, and let (G, ρ, ϕ) ∼ DFG(n, m, k). Let f : Λ → [−1, 1] be a 2r-local function.
There exists c > 0 (depending on α, k, r) such that for all p ≥ 2,
                       "                                              p#
                          X                       X                                 p
                     E         f (v, G, ρ, ϕ) − E      f (v, G, ρ, ϕ)    ≤ cn1/2 p3/2 .
                           v∈VaG                     v∈VaG

   We can translate Lemma 8.7, into the following tail bound for sums of local functions.
Corollary 8.8. Let αk, k − 1 ≥ 2, and let (G, ρ, ϕ) ∼ DFG(n, m, k). Let f : Λ → [−1, 1] be a 2r-local
function. There exists c > 0 (depending on α, k, r) such that for all t ≥ cn1/2 ,
                     "                                                 #               
                         X                       X                                 t2/3
                   P         f (v, G, ρ, ϕ) − E      f (v, G, ρ, ϕ) ≥ t ≤ exp − 1/3 .
                       v∈Va                     v∈Va
                                                                                  cn
                             G                         G

                                                                                 2/3
Proof. Let c be as in Lemma 8.7, and suppose t ≥ 23/2 ecn1/2 . Set p = ecnt1/2        ≥ 2, so by Lemma 8.7,
   "                                               #       "                                                  p#
      X                       X                                 X                        X
                                                       −p
 P         f (v, G, ρ, ϕ) − E    f (v, G, ρ, ϕ) ≥ t ≤ t E            f (v, G, ρ, ϕ) − E        f (v, G, ρ, ϕ)
     v∈VaG                    v∈VaG                                          v∈VaG                  v∈VaG
                                                                       1/2 3/2
                                                                                p
                                                                   cn        p
                                                           ≤                         = exp(−p)
                                                                         t
                                                                                           
                                                                                 t2/3
                                                           = exp −                              .
                                                                             (ec)2/3 n1/3
The result follows by adjusting the constant c.

                                                           37
8.2    Local Memory Algorithms
We now define local memory algorithms. In addition to the usual features of a local algorithm, these
algorithms have access to a mutable memory map µ : VG → Z≥0 , which we think of as an unlimited notepad
on each variable. The algorithm processes vertices v ∈ VG (both variables and clauses) in a uniformly random
order. Each step, the algorithm accesses the r-local neighborhood of a vertex and can overwrite the data
written on any vertex in that neighborhood. In the end, each variable v ∈ VaG decides to be true or false
depending on the final value µ(v) on its notepad.
   To formalize this algorithm class, we will define memory-augmented versions of Definitions 2.9, 2.10, and
2.11.
Definition 8.9 (Rooted memory-augmented decorated bipartite graph). A memory-augmented decorated
bipartite graph is a tuple (G, ρ, ϕ, µ), where (G, ρ, ϕ) is a decorated bipartite graph and µ is a function
µ : VG → Z≥0 . A rooted memory-augmented decorated bipartite graph is a tuple (v, G, ρ, ϕ, µ), where
(G, ρ, ϕ, µ) is a memory-augmented decorated bipartite graph and v ∈ VG .
   Let Λ̃ denote the set of rooted memory-augmented decorated bipartite graphs. Two such graphs are
isomorphic of there exists a bijection between them preserving v, VaG , ClG , EG , ρ, ϕ, µ.
Definition 8.10 (r-neighborhood). Let (v, G, ρ, ϕ, µ) ∈ Λ̃ and r ∈ N. Define Nr (v, G, ρ, ϕ, µ) to be
(v, G′ , ρ′ , ϕ′ , µ′ ) ∈ Λ̃, where (v, G′ , ρ′ , ϕ′ ) = Nr (v, G, ρ, ϕ) and µ′ = µ G′ is the restriction of µ to G′ .

Definition 8.11 (r-local subroutine). An algorithm f with input space Λ̃ is an r-local subroutine if the
execution of f (v, G, ρ, ϕ) depends only on the isomorphism class of Nr (v, G, ρ, ϕ, µ) = (v, G′ , ρ′ , ϕ′ , µ′ ), and
f interacts with its input by editing the outputs of µ′ .
   We are now ready to define a local memory algorithm. In the following definition, ψ is an auxiliary
random variable on each vertex that determines the order in which vertices are processed.
Definition 8.12 (r-local memory algorithm). Let f1 be an r-local subroutine and f2 : Z≥0 → {T, F}
be a function. The r-local memory algorithm based on (f1 , f2 ), denoted Af1 ,f2 , runs as follows on input
Φ ∈ Ωk (n, m) with factor graph (G, ρ).

 (1) Initialize µ : VG → Z≥0 to the all-0 map. Sample ϕ ∼ (Ω, Pω )⊗(VG ∪EG ) and ψ ∼ unif([0, 1])⊗VG .
 (2) Loop through vertices v ∈ VG (both variables and clauses) in increasing order of ψ(v). For each v, run
     f1 (v, G, ρ, ϕ, µ).
 (3) Output x ∈ {T, F}n where xi = f2 (µ(vi )).
   We will see (Fact 9.3) that the first phase of Fix is in this class. The following variant of the sequential
local algorithms in [GS17] is also in this class.
Definition 8.13 (Sequential r-local algorithm). Let f : Λ → [0, 1] be an r-local function. The sequential
r-local algorithm based on f , denoted Bf , runs as follows on input Φ ∈ Ωk (n, m) with factor graph (G, ρ).
 (1) Sample ϕ ∼ (Ω, Pω )⊗(VG ∪EG ) and ψ ∼ unif([0, 1])⊗VaG .
 (2) Loop through v ∈ VaG in increasing order of ψ(v). For each v = vi :
       (a) Compute p = f (v, G, ρ, ϕ). Set xi = T with probability p, and otherwise xi = F.
       (b) Simplify Φ by deleting clauses satisfied by this setting of xi and appearances of xi in clauses not
           satisfied by this setting. Furthermore, delete any clauses that become empty (thus not satisfied)
           as a result of the latter operation.
       (c) Let G′ be the corresponding simplification of G, and let ρ′ = ρ G′ and ϕ′ = ϕ G′ .
       (d) Set (G, ρ, ϕ) ← (G′ , ρ′ , ϕ′ ).

 (3) Output (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ {T, F}n.


                                                         38
Fact 8.14. For any r ∈ N, a sequential r-local algorithm can simulated by a max(r, 2)-local memory algo-
rithm.
Proof. Let Bf be a sequential r-local algorithm, whose randomness is sampled i.i.d. from (Ω, Pω ). We will
construct an r-local memory algorithm Af1 ,f2 simulating Bf .
    This algorithm maintains the invariant that for v = vi ∈ VaG , µ(v) = 0 if xi is not yet set, 1 if xi is set
true, and 2 if xi is set false. For clause vertices c ∈ ClG , µ(c) = 1 if the clause corresponding to c has been
deleted in the simplification, and otherwise µ(c) = 0.
    Thus, Af1 ,f2 uses randomness sampled from (Ω, Pω ) × unif([0, 1]). That is, its internal randomness is
ϕ∗ = (ϕ, q), which is sampled by ϕ ∼ (Ω, Pω )⊗(VG ∪EG ) and q ∼ unif([0, 1])⊗(VG ∪EG ) .
    The r-local subroutine f1 runs as follows on input (v, G, ρ, ϕ∗ , µ). If v ∈ ClG , do nothing. Note that the
remaining loop over v ∈ VaG runs over these vertices in a uniformly random order, as desired. If v = vi ∈ VaG ,
let G′ be the simplification of G determined by the information recorded in µ, and let ρ′ = ρ G′ , ϕ′ = ϕ G′ .
We can simulate the computation of p = f (v, G′ , ρ′ , ϕ′ ) because simplification only deletes vertices and edges,
so any r-local decision in the simplified factor graph is still r-local in the simulation. We then set xi = T if
p < q(v), and otherwise xi = F. We update µ to record this value of xi and any clause simplifications that
result (which is a 2-local operation).
    At the end of the algorithm, µ(v) ∈ {1, 2} for all v ∈ VaG . Let f2 (x) = T if x = 1 and F if x = 2.

    Definition 8.13 differs slightly from the presentation in [GS17] in the following way. [GS17] studies NAE-
k-SAT, in which a clause is satisfied if it contains at least one true and false literal. In partially simplfied
formulas of this problem, clauses can exist in four states: “removed,” “already contains true,” “already
contains false,” and “contains neither true nor false,” and the sequential local algorithms of [GS17] track
this information. Of course, we can just as well simulate this by a local memory algorithm by having µ track
these clause states.

8.3    Local Algorithms Simulate Local Memory Algorithms
In this subsection, we prove Proposition 8.1, that any local memory algorithm can be simulated by a local
algorithm of larger (but still constant) radius.
    The simulation is the natural one: we expand ϕ to also generate the auxiliary randomness ψ determining
the vertex order, and then determine the output at each v ∈ VaG by simulating the local memory algorithm on
the R-neighborhood of v. Formally, we expand ϕ to ϕ∗ , whose outputs are sampled from (Ω, Pω )×unif([0, 1]).
We collect the first coordinates of the outputs into ϕ and the second coordinates into ψ. (This generates
ψ : VG ∪ EG → [0, 1], and we ignore ψ EG .)
    Because sequentiality usually does not create long dependence chains, this simulation will often faithfully
capture the local memory algorithm’s behavior.
Definition 8.15 (R-local simulation). Let Af1 ,f2 be an r-local memory algorithm, with i.i.d. internal
randomness from (Ω, Pω ). For R ∈ N, the R-local simulation of Af1 ,f2 is the R-local algorithm Af that runs
as follows on input Φ ∈ Ωk (n, m) with factor graph (G, ρ).
 (1) Sample ϕ∗ = (ϕ, ψ), where ϕ ∼ (Ω, Pω )⊗(VG ∪EG ) and ψ ∼ unif([0, 1])⊗(VG ∪EG ) .
 (2) For each v = vi ∈ VaG , set xi = f (v, G, ρ, ϕ∗ ). Here f (v, G, ρ, ϕ∗ ) is the following R-local function.
       (a) Let NR (v, G, ρ, ϕ∗ ) = (v, G′ , ρ′ , ϕ′∗ ). Let ϕ′∗ = (ϕ′ , ψ ′ ), where ϕ′ = ϕ G′ and ψ ′ = ψ G′ .
       (b) Initialize µ : VG′ → Z≥0 to the all-0 map.
       (c) For u ∈ VG′ in increasing order of ψ ′ (u), run f1 (u, G′ , ρ′ , ϕ′ , µ).
       (d) Output f (v, G, ρ, ϕ∗ ) = f2 (µ(v)).
 (3) Output (x1 , . . . , xn ).
   The main idea of the proof of Proposition 8.1 is that dependencies caused by sequentiality all arise from
the following structure.



                                                           39
Definition 8.16 (r-hop ψ-dependence chain). Let G be a locally finite graph and ψ : VG → [0, 1] be a
function. Let r ∈ N. A sequence v1 , v2 , . . . , vs ∈ VG is an r-hop ψ-dependence chain if consecutive vertices
in the sequence are at most distance r apart and ψ(v1 ), ψ(v2 ), . . . , ψ(vs ) is decreasing.
    We can now define a notion of insulation in terms of these dependence chains. The key point of the
following definition is that if in the R-local simulation in Definition 8.15, v ∈ VaG is (r, R, ψ)-insulated, then
the R-local simulation’s output at v must match that of the local memory algorithm run with the same ϕ, ψ.
Definition 8.17 ((r, R, ψ)-insulated). Let G be a locally finite graph and ψ : VG → [0, 1] be a function.
Let v ∈ VG and r, R ∈ N with R ≥ 2r. v is (r, R, ψ)-insulated if there is no 2r-hop ψ-dependence chain
v1 , v2 , . . . , vs ∈ VG with v = v1 and vs ∈ NR (v, G) \ NR−2r (v, G).
   In Definition 8.15, if Φ ∼ Φk (n, m), then (G, ρ, ϕ∗ ) is a sample from the decorated k-SAT factor graph
DFG(n, m, k, (Ω, Pω ) × unif([0, 1])). To prove Proposition 8.1, it suffices to upper bound the fraction of
v ∈ VaG that are not (r, R, ψ)-insulated. To achieve this, we will control the probability that the root
of DGW(d1 , d2 , (Ω, Pω ) × unif([0, 1])) is not (r, R, ψ)-insulated. Then, because (r, R, ψ)-insulatedness is an
R-local property, we can translate this bound to the k-SAT factor graph by the machinery of Lemma 8.6
and Corollary 8.8.
Proposition 8.18. Let d1 , d2 ≥ 2, r ∈ N, and η ∈ (0, 1). Let (o, T, ρ, ϕ∗ ) ∼ DGW(d1 , d2 , (Ω, Pω ) ×
unif([0, 1])), and write ϕ∗ = (ϕ, ψ) for ϕ : VT ∪ ET → Ω and ψ : VT ∪ ET → [0, 1]. There exists R dependent
on d1 , d2 , r, η such that
                                    P [o is (r, R, ψ)-insulated in T ] ≥ 1 − η.
    The proof of this proposition relies on the following technical lemma, whose proof we defer to Subsec-
tion 8.5.
Lemma 8.19. Let d1 , d2 ≥ 2 and (o, T, ρ, ϕ) ∼ DGW(d1 , d2 ). For any r ∈ N and η ∈ (0, 1), there exist
C, R∗ > 0 depending on d1 , d2 , r, η such that for all integers R ≥ R∗ ,
                                                                                       CR
                                                  max          |N2r (v, T )| ≤
                                              v∈NR (o,T )                          log(r+1) R

with probability at least 1 − η. Here, log(r+1) denotes the (r + 1)th iterate of log.
Proof of Proposition 8.18. Let R ∈ N be a number we will determine later. Lemma 8.19 gives R∗ such that
if R ≥ R∗ , then the conclusion of Lemma 8.19 holds with probability at least 1 − η/2. Consider a realization
of T, ρ, ϕ such that this event holds. We will control the probability over ψ that o is not (r, R, ψ)-insulated
in T .
     If o is not (r, R, ψ)-insulated, there exists a 2r-hop ψ-dependence chain o = v1 , v2 , . . . , vs ∈ VT where
vs ∈ NR (o, T ) \ NR−2r (o, T ). By taking an initial subsequence, we get a 2r-hop ψ-dependence chain o =
                                          R
v1 , v2 , . . . , vt ∈ VT of length t = ⌈ 2r ⌉. By Markov’s inequality,

       P [o is not (r, R, ψ)-insulated in T ] ≤ E # (2r-hop ψ-dependence chains o = v1 , v2 , . . . , vt ∈ VT ) .
                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                   CR
The last expectation is bounded as follows. By Lemma 8.19, there are at most log(r+1)                    R
                                                                                                               sequences
o = v1 , v2 , . . . , vt with consecutive vertices at most distance 2r apart, and for each one, ψ(v1 ), ψ(v2 ), . . . , ψ(vt )
is decreasing with probability t!1 . So (using t! ≥ (t/e)t ) the last expectation is at most
                                                 t                         t                       t
                            1           CR                        eCR                        2eCr
                                                       ≤                           ≤                         ≤ η/2      (8.1)
                            t!       log(r+1) R                t log(r+1) R                log(r+1) R
for a large enough choice of R. Thus, over the randomness of ψ,

                                          P [o is (r, R, ψ)-insulated in T ] ≥ 1 − η/2.

The result follows by a union bound.

                                                                      40
    Unfortunately, due to the last inequality in (8.1), the R needed to make this proposition hold is approxi-
mately the power tower exp(r+1) 2eCr. This is the R we will need to simulate an r-local memory algorithm
by an R-local algorithm. While this R is a constant for any constant r, it would of course be nice to improve
this dependence.
    Finally, we can prove Proposition 8.1.
Proof of Proposition 8.1. We let A′ be the R-local simulation of A, for R to be determined. We couple the
runs of A, A′ to use the same ϕ, ψ. If (G, ρ) is the factor graph of Φ, then
                                                1 X
                            ∆(A(Φ), A′ (Φ)) ≤       1 {v is (r, R, ψ)-insulated in G} .
                                                n
                                                 v∈VaG

Recall that (G, ρ, (ϕ, ψ)) ∼ DFG(n, m, k, (Ω, Pω ) × unif([0, 1])). The last indicator is an R-local function
taking values in [−1, 1]. By Corollary 8.8 with t = ηn/3,
              1 X
                  1 {v is (r, R, ψ)-insulated in G} ≤ η/3 + E 1 {v is (r, R, ψ)-insulated in G}
              n
                v∈VaG


with probability 1 − exp(−Ω(n1/3 )). Let (o, T, ρ, (ϕ, ψ)) ∼ DGW(αk, k − 1, (Ω, Pω ) × unif([0, 1])). By
Lemma 8.6,
                                                       c log n
               E 1 {v is (r, R, ψ)-insulated in G} ≤           + E 1 {o is (r, R, ψ)-insulated in T } .
                                                        n1/2
By Proposition 8.18, for sufficiently large R depending on α, k, r, η,

                                     E 1 {o is (r, R, ψ)-insulated in T } ≤ η/3.

Putting this all together, with probability 1 − exp(−Ω(n1/3 )),

                                                                   c log n
                                      ∆(A(Φ), A′ (Φ)) ≤ 2η/3 +             ≤η
                                                                    n1/2
for sufficiently large n.

8.4    Low Degree Polynomials Simulate Local Algorithms
In this subsection, we prove Proposition 8.2, that any local algorithm can be simulated by a constant degree
polynomial. The proof closely resembles the proof of [Wei20, Theorem 1.4]. The main idea is to construct
a low degree polynomial by inclusion-exclusion that simulates the behavior of the local algorithm on any
r-neighborhood that is a tree without too many edges. We now define this simulation.
    Consider Φ ∈ Ωk (n, m) with factor graph (G, ρ). Recall that Φ is encoded by indicators Φi,j,s (i ∈ [m],
j ∈ [k], s ∈ [2n]) that Φi,j is the sth literal of L. For each s ∈ [2n], let v(s) ∈ [n] be the index of the underlying
variable of the sth literal of L. Each triple (i, j, s) is naturally associated with the edge e = (vv(s) , ci ) of the
factor graph. For a set S ⊆ [m] × [k] × [2n], let e(S) be the (multi-)set of edges associated in this manner to
triples (i, j, s) ∈ S. For D ∈ N and v ∈ VaG , let Gv,r,D be the collection of sets S ⊆ [m] × [k] × [2n] such that
 (a) The bipartite graph G(S) = (VaG , ClG , e(S)) is a tree in which every non-isolated vertex has a path
     to v of length at most r. (This includes that G(S) does not have multiple edges.)
 (b) |S| ≤ D.
Equivalently, Gv,r,D is the collection of sets of (i, j, s) corresponding to all possible tree shaped r-neighborhoods
of v in G of size at most D.
Definition 8.20 (Degree-D simulation). Let Ag be an r-local algorithm, with i.i.d. internal randomness
from (Ω, Pω ). For D ∈ N, the degree-D simulation of Ag is the random polynomial that runs as follows on
input Φ ∈ Ωk (n, m) with factor graph (G, ρ).

                                                         41
 (1) Sample ϕ ∼ (Ω, Pω )⊗(VG ∪EG ) .
 (2) For each v = vi ∈ VaG , set
                                                   X                             Y
                                   fi (Φ, ϕ) =              h(v, G(S), ρ, ϕ)               Φ(i,j,s) ,                          (8.2)
                                                 S∈Gv,r,D                      (i,j,s)∈S

      where the coefficients h(v, G(S), ρ, ϕ) are given recursively by
                                                                                               X
            h(v, G(S), ρ, ϕ) = (strictRound−1 ◦ g)(v, G(S), ρ G(S) , ϕ G(S) ) −                         h(v, G(S ′ ), ρ, ϕ).   (8.3)
                                                                                              S ′ (S


   The internal randomness of f is the map ϕ. It is clear that this f is a degree-D polynomial. We will
analyze the performance of the degree-D simulation by analogy to the following local function.
Definition 8.21 (D-truncation). If g : Λ → {T, F} is an r-local function, the D-truncation g≤D : Λ →
{T, F, err} is defined by
                                       (
                                         g(v, G, ρ, ϕ) Nr (v, G) is a tree and |Nr (v, G)| ≤ D,
                    g≤D (v, G, ρ, ϕ) =
                                         err           otherwise.

   By inclusion-exclusion, (8.2) and (8.3) immediately imply the following fact.
Fact 8.22. For all v = vi ∈ VaG where g≤D (v, G, ρ, ϕ) 6= err,
                            (strictRound ◦ fi )(Φ, ϕ) = g(v, G, ρ, ϕ) = g≤D (v, G, ρ, ϕ).
   In other words, when Ag , Ag≤D , and the degree-D simulation f of Ag are run with the same ϕ,
strictRound ◦ f correctly simulates any output of Ag that Ag≤D correctly simulates. Therefore, we can
upper bound the fraction of variables where the simulation f fails by bounding the fracton of variables
where Ag≤D fails. We achieve this by controlling the corresponding probability in DGW(d1 , d2 ), and then
translating this bound to the k-SAT factor graph by the machinery of Lemma 8.6 and Corollary 8.8.
Lemma 8.23. Suppose αk, k − 1 ≥ 2 and η > 0. Let Ag be an r-local algorithm with output in {T, F}n .
There exists D > 0 depending on α, k, r, η such that if Ag and Ag≤D are run with the same ϕ, then
                                                         
                             P ∆(Ag (Φ), Ag≤D (Φ)) ≥ η ≤ exp(−Ω(n1/3 )),
where the probability is over the randomness of Φ ∼ Φk (n, m) and ϕ.
Proof. By Corollary 8.8 with t = ηn/3,
                                           1 X
                 ∆(Ag (Φ), Ag≤D (Φ)) =         1 {Nr (v, G) is not a tree or |Nr (v, G)| > D}
                                           n
                                             v∈VaG

                                        ≤ η/3 + E 1 {Nr (v, G) is not a tree or |Nr (v, G)| > D}

with probability 1 − exp(−Ω(n1/3 )), because the indicator is an r-local function taking values in [−1, 1]. Let
(o, T, ρ, ϕ) ∼ DGW(αk, k − 1). By Lemma 8.6,
                                                                        c log n
               E 1 {Nr (v, G) is not a tree or |Nr (v, G)| > D} ≤               + E 1 {|Nr (o, T )| > D} ,
                                                                         n1/2
where we use that Nr (o, T ) is always a tree. By Lemma 8.4, we can pick D large enough (depending on
α, k, r, η) that
                                        E 1 {|Nr (o, T )| > D} ≤ η/3.
Putting this all together, with probability 1 − exp(−Ω(n1/3 )),
                                                                         c log n
                                    ∆(Ag (Φ), Ag≤D (Φ)) ≤ 2η/3 +                 ≤η
                                                                          n1/2
for sufficiently large n.

                                                             42
   We get the second conclusion of Proposition 8.2 from the following lemma.
Lemma 8.24. If Ag is an r-local algorithm and f is its degree-D simulation, then there exists γ depending
on α, k, r, D such that
                                         E kf (Φ, ϕ)k22 ≤ γn.
Proof. We will upper bound each EΦ,ϕ [fi (Φ, ϕ)2 ] by a constant depending only on α, k, r, η. Fix i ∈ [n].
Let v = vi ∈ VaG and define the random variable X = |Nr (v, G)|. In the expansion (8.2), the monomial
indexed by S ∈ Gv,r,D is only nonzero if e(S) is a subset of the edges of Nr (v, G). So, the number of nonzero
monomials is at most
                                            D  
                                            X
                                          D       X
                                        k             ≤ k D (X + 1)D .
                                                  d
                                                 d=0

Moreover, by (8.3), each of the coefficients h(v, G(S), ρ, ϕ) is upper bounded by a constant a dependent on
α, k, r, D. Thus
                                         fi (Φ, ϕ)2 ≤ a2 k 2D (X + 1)2D
pointwise, and so                                                      
                                        E fi (Φ, ϕ)2 ≤ a2 k 2D E (X + 1)2D .
Lemma 8.5 gives an exponential bound on the tail probability of X. Integration by tails gives the result.
Proof of Proposition 8.2. Set D such that Lemma 8.23 holds, and let f be the degree-D simulation of A.
We couple f, Ag , Ag≤D to all use the same ϕ. Fact 8.22 and Lemma 8.23 imply the first conclusion. Since
D depends on only α, k, r, η, so does the γ given by Lemma 8.24. This implies the second conclusion.

8.5    Deferred Proofs
In this subsection, we give the deferred proof of Lemma 8.19. We first prove a sharper version of Lemma 8.4
for a specific r, where the bound is improved by an r-iterated logarithmic factor.
Lemma 8.25. Let r ∈ N, d1 , d2 ≥ 2 and (o, T, ρ, ϕ) ∼ DGW(d1 , d2 ). There exists t∗ (depending on r, d1 , d2 )
such that for all t ≥ t∗ ,                                        
                                                   2t
                              P |N2r (o, T )| ≤           (d d
                                                            1 2 )r
                                                                     ≥ 1 − e−t .
                                                 log(r) t
Proof. For 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ 2r, let Sℓ denote the number of vertices in DGW(d1 , d2 ) at depth ℓ. The Sℓ have the
following distribution. First, S0 = 1. For ℓ ≥ 1, Sℓ is the sum of Sℓ−1 i.i.d. copies of Pois(d1 ) if ℓ is odd,
and Sℓ = d2 Sℓ−1 if ℓ is even.
    For i ∈ [r], define the event                                    
                                                         t      i i−1
                                      Ei = S2i−1 ≤             d1 d2    .
                                                      log(i) t
This is equivalent to the event that S2i ≤ logt(i) t di1 di2 . For convenience, also define E0 = {S0 = 1}, which
                         Tr
holds almost surely. On i=0 Ei , we have
                                        2r
                                        X               t   dr1 dr−1
                                                                 2    + dr1 dr2     2t
                      |N2r (o, T )| =         Sℓ ≤      (r)
                                                             ·            −1
                                                                                ≤          (d1 d2 )r .
                                        ℓ=0          log t   1  −  (d d
                                                                     1 2 )        log(r) t
                                Tr
So, it remains to show that P [ i=0 Ei ] ≥ 1 − e−t .
    Consider i ∈ [r]; we will upper bound P(Eic |Ei−1 ). Let N = log(i−1)t
                                                                             di−1 di−1
                                                                            t 1    2   (where log(0) t = t).
                                                                                   PN
Conditioned on Ei−1 , we have S2i−2 ≤ N , so S2i−1 is stochastically dominated by j=1 ξi , where the ξi are




                                                              43
i.i.d. samples from Pois(d1 ). By a standard Chernoff bound,
                                                                         
                                              X N           (i−1)
                                                        log       t
                          P(Eic |Ei−1 ) ≤ P       ξi ≥       (i)
                                                                    d1 N 
                                               j=1        log t
                                          "                                             !#N
                                                                         log(i−1) t
                                        ≤ inf E exp(sξ1 ) · exp −                   sd1
                                            s>0                           log(i) t
                                          "                                            !#N
                                                         s              log(i−1) t
                                        = inf exp (e − 1)d1 −                      sd1
                                            s>0                          log(i) t
                                                                         !!
                                                             log(i−1) t
                                        = exp −N d1 γ                        ,
                                                               log(i) t

where γ(x) = x log x − x + 1. For large enough t,
                                        !
                             log(i−1) t     3 log(i−1) t     log(i−1) t  2
                         γ                ≥              log            ≥ log(i−1) t,
                              log(i) t      4 log(i) t        log(i) t   3

while (as d1 , d2 ≥ 2 implies di1 di−1
                                   2   ≥ 22i−1 ≥ 2i for i ≥ 1)
                                                        t                                         t
                                        N d1 =         (i−1)
                                                                   di1 di−1
                                                                        2   ≥ 2i ·               (i−1)
                                                                                                             .
                                                 log           t                           log           t

Thus, for large enough t, P(Eic |Ei−1 ) ≤ exp(− 43 it). So,
                       " r      #         r
                          \              X                                                exp(− 34 t)
                     P      Ei ≥ 1 −         P(Eic |Ei−1 ) ≥ 1 −                                        ≥ 1 − e−t
                             i=0               i=1
                                                                                        1 − exp(− 34 t)

for sufficiently large t.
Proof of Lemma 8.19. Set λ > 0 such that the conclusion of Lemma 8.4 holds with probability 1 − η/2.
Denote this event S; on this event, |NR (o, T )| ≤ λ(d1 d2 )⌈R/2⌉ for all R ∈ N.
   For R ∈ N, let t(R) be the smallest positive integer such that λ(d1 d2 )⌈R/2⌉ e−t(R) ≤ η/2; note that
t(R) = Θ(R) for d1 , d2 , r, η fixed. Set R∗ such that t(R∗ ) ≥ t∗ for the t∗ in Lemma 8.25. Henceforth let
R ≥ R∗ and t = t(R) ≥ t∗ .
                      ↓
   For v ∈ VaT , let N2r  (v, T ) denote the subset of N2r (v, T ) in the descendant subtree of v. Note that the
                                                                       ↓
descendant subtree of v has distribution DGW(d1 , d2 ), so |N2r          (v, T )| =d |N2r (o, T )|. By Lemma 8.25, for
each v ∈ VaT ,                                                          
                                         ↓              2t
                                   P |N2r  (v, T )| ≤          (d1 d2 )r ≥ 1 − e−t .
                                                      log(r) t
By a union bound,
                                                                                      
                                          ↓                    2t                                     η
        P S and             max         |N2r (v, T )| ≤           (r)
                                                                                   r
                                                                            (d1 d2 )       ≥1−          − λ(d1 d2 )⌈R/2⌉ e−t ≥ 1 − η.
                     v∈VaT ∩NR (o,T )                       log         t                             2

Let S ′ be the event in this probability. Note that for v ∈ VaT ,
                                           ↓             ↓                         ↓
                            N2r (v, T ) ⊆ N2r (v, T ) ∪ N2r (gr(v), T ) ∪ · · · ∪ N2r (grr (v), T ),

where gr(v) denotes the grandparent of v. Thus, on the event S ′ , we have

                                                                                  2t(r + 1)
                                           max          |N2r (v, T )| ≤                           (d1 d2 )r .
                                     v∈VaT ∩NR (o,T )                                  log(r) t

                                                                        44
For v ∈ ClT ∩ NR (o, T ), simply note that N2(r−1) (v, T ) ⊆ N2r (pa(v), T ), where pa(v) denotes the parent of
v. It follows that on S ′ ,

                                                              2t(r + 1)                        CR
                             max        |N2(r−1) (v, T )| ≤          (r)
                                                                               (d1 d2 )r ≤              ,
                          v∈NR (o,T )                          log         t                 log(r) R

using that t = t(R) and t(R) = Θ(R). The result follows by renaming r to r + 1.


9     Proof of Achievability
Throughout this section, let ε > 0, α = (1 − ε)2k log k/k, and m = ⌊αn⌋. In this section we will prove
Theorem 2.14, that local algorithms and low degree polynomials can solve random k-SAT at this clause
density α.
    We will prove this theorem by simulating the first phase of Fix, which we denote Fix1, by these two
computation classes. Parts (a,b) of Theorem 2.14 follow immediately from guarantees on Fix1 in [CO10] and
our simulation results, Propositions 8.1 and 8.2. To prove parts (c,d), we use the fact that Fix1 is simulated
by a local algorithm to argue concentration of the number of clauses satisfied, in order to prove the stronger
bound on the failure probability.
    This section is structured as follows. In Subsection 9.1 we define Fix1 and introduce its guarantees. This
immediately implies Theorem 2.14(a,b). In Subsection 9.2 we show concentration of the number of clauses
satisfied and prove Theorem 2.14(c,d).

9.1    Review of Fix
At clause density α = (1 − ε)2k log k/k, Fix produces a (exactly) satisfying assignment with high probability.
At a high level, Fix runs in three phases. In the first phase, it produces a almost-satisfying assignment.
In the second phase, it modifies this assignment in a small fraction of variables, at most k −12 with high
probability, to “don’t know.” This is done in such a way that the remaining problem of assigning truth
values to the “don’t know” variables is equivalent to a very subcritical random 3-SAT instance. The third
phase solves the remaining problem with a maxflow algorithm.
   We will only show that local algorithms and low degree polynomials simulate the first phase Fix1. Because
the the rest of Fix changes at most a k −12 fraction of variables with high probability, simulating Fix1 within
normalized Hamming distance η ′ > 0 simulates Fix within error η = k −12 + η ′ . This is why Theorem 2.14
requires η > k −12 . Let us record the guarantees on Fix1 proved in [CO10].
Theorem 9.1 (Implicit in [CO10, Section 3]). Let Fix1 be defined in Algorithm 9.2 below. Then,
                                                            
                            P Fix1(Φ) (k −12 , 0)-satisfies Φ ≥ 1 − o(1).

The probability is over Φ ∼ Φk (n, m) and the (independent) internal randomness of Fix1.
   We now define Fix1. This phase starts from the all-true assignment x = Tn and selects a set of indices
Z ⊆ [n] such that if {xi : i ∈ Z} are set false, most clauses are satisfied. To do this, it scans through
the clauses of the input formula Φ. When it encounters an all-negative clause that does not contain any
variable from Z, it tries to find a true variable xi from this clause that when made false does not create more
unsatisfied clauses. It adds this i to Z. Formalizing this idea, we say xi (for i ∈ [n] \ Z) is Z-safe if, when
we set {xi′ : i′ ∈ [n] \ Z} to true and {xi′ : i′ ∈ Z} to false, xi is not the sole true literal in any clause.
Algorithm 9.2 (Fix, Phase 1; [CO10]). On input Φ ∈ Ωk (n, m), Fix1 runs as follows.
 (1) Set Z = ∅.
 (2) Relabel the clauses {Φi : i ∈ [m]} in a uniformly random order. Also, for each i ∈ [m], relabel the
     literals {Φi,j : j ∈ [k]} in a uniformly random order.
 (3) For i ∈ [m] in increasing order:


                                                              45
      (a) If Φi is all-negative and contains no variable from {xi : i ∈ Z}:
            (i) If there is 1 ≤ j < ⌈k/2⌉ such that the underlying variable of Φi,j is Z-safe, pick the smallest
                such j and add the underlying variable of Φi,j to Z.
           (ii) Otherwise, add the underlying variable of Φi,⌈k/2⌉ to Z.
 (4) Output x ∈ {T, F}n where xi = F if i ∈ Z and otherwise xi = T.
   The presentation of Fix1 in [CO10] does not rerandomize the clause and literal orders, but of course this
makes no difference. We add this rerandomization so that the algorithm is a local memory algorithm in the
sense we define. For technical reasons having to do with the analysis in [CO10], Fix1 only considers flipping
variables Φi,j where j ≤ ⌈k/2⌉.
Fact 9.3. Fix1 is a 3-local memory algorithm.
Proof. We will construct a 3-local subroutine f1 and a function f2 : Z≥0 → {T, F} such that Af1 ,f2 simulates
Fix1. Let (G, ρ) be the factor graph of Φ, and let the i.i.d. randomness of ϕ be sampled from unif([0, 1]).
    We will maintain the invariant that for each v = vi ∈ VaG , µ(v) = 1 if i ∈ Z, and otherwise µ(v) = 0.
    The subroutine f1 runs as follows on (v, G, ρ, ϕ, µ). If v ∈ VaG , do nothing. The remaining loop over
v ∈ ClG runs over these vertices in a uniformly random order, as desired. If v = ci ∈ ClG , f1 orders the
edges e incident to ci in increasing order of ϕ(e). It runs the logic inside the for loop of Fix1, with the
corresponding literals {Φi,j : j ∈ [k]} relabeled in this order, and records the outcome on µ. Note that the
literals {Φi,j : j ∈ [k]} are relabeled in a uniformly random order, and that the logic inside the for loop is
3-local.
   The proof of Theorem 2.14(a,b) follows immediately from Fact 9.3 and our simulation results.
Proof of Theorem 2.14(a,b). Since η > k −12 , we can find η ′ > 0 such that η = k −12 + 2η ′ . Theorem 9.1,
Fact 9.3 and Proposition 8.1 give r > 0 and an r-local algorithm A such that
                                                                  
                               P A(Φ) (k −12 + η ′ , 0)-satisfies Φ ≥ 1 − δ(n)                        (9.1)

for δ(n) = o(1) + exp(−Ω(n1/3 )) = o(1). Since k −12 + η ′ < η, this proves part (a).
    Proposition 8.2 gives D, γ and a random degree-D polynomial that (δ(n), γ, η, 0)-solves Φk (n, m), for δ(n)
with a larger exp(−Ω(n1/3 )) term. Here we use that η = k −12 + 2η ′ . Finally, Lemma 4.1 gives a deterministic
degree-D polynomial that (3δ(n), 3γ, η, 0)-solves Φk (n, m). This proves part (b).

9.2    Concentration of Clauses Satisfied
For x ∈ {T, F}n, Φ ∈ Ωk (n, m), and η ∈ (0, 1), define the objective

                        Satη (x, Φ) =         max            (# clauses of Φ satisfied by y) .             (9.2)
                                        y∈{T,F}n :∆(x,y)≤η


To prove Theorem 2.14(c), we will show that the objective attained by any local algorithm concentrates. For
an assignment x ∈ {T, F}n and a partial assignment z ∈ {T, F}B , where B ⊆ [n], it will be useful to define
the replacement operator Rep(x, z) by
                                                                     (
                                                n                      xi i 6∈ B,
                         Rep(x, z) = y ∈ {T, F}      where      yi =                                  (9.3)
                                                                       zi i ∈ B.

Proposition 9.4. Let A be an r-local algorithm with internal randomness ϕ. Let η ∈ (0, 1) and Y =
Satη (A(Φ, ϕ), Φ). Then,                          
                                               m            e 1/3 )).
                             P |Y − E Y | ≥          ≤ exp(−Ω(n
                                             log n




                                                             46
Proof. We will show Y has bounded differences with high probability, which implies concentration by
Lemma 7.6.
   Throughout this section, we will write A(Φ, ϕ) for A run with input Φ and internal randomness ϕ. Define
z = z(Φ, ϕ) ∈ {T, F}B as the partial assignment maximizing

                                             Sat0 (Rep(A(Φ, ϕ), z), Φ) ,

where the maximization is over all B ⊆ [n] with |B| ≤ ηn. We break ties arbitrarily but deterministically.
By definition of Y , Rep(A(Φ, ϕ), z) satisfies Y clauses of Φ.
   Let (G, ρ) be the factor graph of Φ. Let the vertex sets of G be Va = {v1 , . . . , vn }, Cl = {c1 , . . . , cm },
and V = Va ∪ Cl, which are fixed across all realizations of G.
   All the above random variables are (Φ, ϕ)-measurable. We can reformat (Φ, ϕ) into km + n + m in-
dependent parts ζ = (ψ1 , . . . , ψkm+n+m ): for 1 ≤ j ≤ km, ψj = (ΦL(j) , ϕ(e)) where e is the edge in G
corresponding to ΦL(j) , and for km + 1 ≤ j ≤ km + m + n, ψj = ϕ(v) ranges over v ∈ V . We will henceforth
write Y (ζ) to denote the Y corresponding to this realization of ζ, and similarly for other random variables,
which are all ζ-measurable.
   Let S denote the set of ζ such that Φ(ζ) is (r + 1)-locally small (recall Definition 7.7). By Fact 7.8,
P(S c ) ≤ exp(−Ω(n1/3 )). Suppose ζ, ζ ′ ∈ S differ in only one coordinate. We will upper bound |Y (ζ)−Y (ζ ′ )|.
For now, assume the differing coordinate is ψj for 1 ≤ j ≤ km; thus the factor graphs G(ζ), G(ζ ′ ) differ in
one edge. Let c ∈ Cl be the common endpoint of this edge.
   Assume without loss of generality that Y (ζ) ≥ Y (ζ ′ ). Then,

                 Y (ζ) − Y (ζ ′ ) = Sat0 (Rep(A(ζ), z(ζ)), Φ(ζ)) − Sat0 (Rep(A(ζ ′ ), z(ζ ′ )), Φ(ζ ′ ))
                                 ≤ Sat0 (Rep(A(ζ), z(ζ)), Φ(ζ)) − Sat0 (Rep(A(ζ ′ ), z(ζ)), Φ(ζ ′ ))

The last inequality holds because z(ζ ′ ) maximizes the number of clauses of Φ(ζ ′ ) satisfied by Rep(A(ζ ′ ), z(ζ ′ )).
   Note that A(ζ) and A(ζ ′ ) only differ in coordinates i ∈ [n] where vi ∈ Nr (c, G(ζ)) ∪ Nr (c, G(ζ ′ )). Thus
Rep(A(ζ), z(ζ)) and Rep(A(ζ ′ ), z(ζ)) differ in only these coordinates. So, if

          1 {Rep(A(ζ), z(ζ))) satisfies clause Φ(ζ)i } 6= 1 {Rep(A(ζ ′ ), z(ζ))) satisfies clause Φ(ζ ′ )i } ,

then ci ∈ Nr+1 (c, G(ζ)) ∪ Nr+1 (c, G(ζ ′ )). Because ζ, ζ ′ ∈ S, this implies |Y (ζ) − Y (ζ ′ )| ≤ O(n1/3 ).
    We can analogously show the same bounded difference inequality when ζ, ζ ′ ∈ S differ in coordinate ψj
for km + 1 ≤ j ≤ km + m + n, corresponding to a vertex of the factor graphs. Moreover, for all ζ, ζ ′ , clearly
|Y (ζ) − Y (ζ ′ )| ≤ m. By Lemma 7.6,
                                                                                             
                      m                       m2 / log2 n                1/3       2(km + m + n)m
     P |Y − E Y | ≥         ≤ 2 exp                           + exp(−Ω(n     ))O
                    log n             8(km + m + n)O(n2/3 )                             n1/3
                                     e
                            ≤ exp(−Ω(n   1/3
                                             )).



Proof of Theorem 2.14(c). Equation (9.1) gives an r-local algorithm A such that A(Φ, ϕ) (η, 0)-satisfies Φ
with probability 1 − o(1). If Y = Satη (A(Φ, ϕ), Φ), this implies

                                                 E Y = (1 − o(1))m.

Proposition 9.4 proves the result with ν(n) = log1 n + o(1) = o(1).
   Recall that the proof of Proposition 8.2 simulates a local algorithm by its D-truncation, which can be
implemented by a low degree polynomial. We will prove Theorem 2.14(d) by showing a concentration result
analogous to Proposition 9.4 for D-truncations of local algorithms.
   To formulate this result, we first extend the definition (9.2) of Satη to allow x ∈ {T, F, err}n . Note that
the y in the maximum of (9.2) must differ from x in all positions where the entry of x is err. We define
Satη (x, Φ) = 0 if x has more than ηn entries equal to err. (In particular, Sat0 (x, Φ) = 0 if x has any entry
equal to err.) We similarly extend the definition (9.3) of Rep to allow x ∈ {T, F, err}n .

                                                           47
Proposition 9.5. Let Ag be an r-local algorithm with internal randomness ϕ, where g : Λ → {T, F} is an
r-local function, and let g≤D be the D-truncation of g. Let η ∈ (0, 1). Let D be large enough that
                                                               
                                 P ∆(Ag (Φ, ϕ), Ag≤D (Φ, ϕ)) ≥ η ≤ exp(−Ω(n1/3 )).                                (9.4)

(Such D exists by Lemma 8.23.) Let Y = Satη (Ag≤D (Φ, ϕ), Φ). Then,
                                                           
                                                        m            e 1/5 )).
                                       P |Y − E Y | ≥         ≤ exp(−Ω(n
                                                      log n

Proof. We will again show Y has bounded differences with high probability and use Lemma 7.6. Define
z = z(Φ, ϕ) ∈ {T, F}B as the partial assignment maximizing

                                              Sat0 (Rep(Ag≤D (Φ, ϕ), z), Φ).

Let (G, ρ) be the factor graph of Φ, with vertex sets Va = {v1 , . . . , vn }, Cl = {c1 , . . . , cm }, and V = Va ∪ Cl.
   Define ζ as in the proof of Proposition 9.4. Let S denote the set of ζ such that:
  (i) ∆(Ag (ζ), Ag≤D (ζ)) ≤ η and

 (ii) For all v ∈ VG , |Nr+1 (v, G)| ≤ n1/5 .
By the assumption (9.4) and Lemma 8.5, P(S c ) ≤ exp(−Ω(n1/5 )). Note that for ζ ∈ S, (i) implies that
Rep(Ag≤D (ζ), z(ζ)) has no err symbols.
   Suppose ζ, ζ ′ ∈ S differ in only one coordinate. We will upper bound |Y (ζ)− Y (ζ ′ )|. Assume the differing
coordinate is ψj for some 1 ≤ j ≤ km. (The case km + 1 ≤ j ≤ km + m + n is analogous.) Then, the factor
graphs G(ζ), G(ζ ′ ) differ in one edge. Let c ∈ Cl be the common endpoint of this edge.
   Let U = Nr (c, G(ζ)) ∪ Nr (c, G(ζ ′ )). Because ζ, ζ ′ ∈ S, (ii) implies |U | ≤ 2n1/5 . Note that Ag≤D (ζ) and
Ag≤D (ζ ′ ) only differ in coordinates i ∈ [n] where vi ∈ U .
   Assume without loss of generality that Y (ζ) ≥ Y (ζ ′ ). Unlike in the proof of Proposition 9.4, the estimate

                              Sat0 (Rep(Ag≤D (ζ ′ ), z(ζ ′ ))) ≥ Sat0 (Rep(Ag≤D (ζ ′ ), z(ζ)))

is not helpful because the right-hand side is 0 when Rep(Ag≤D (ζ ′ ), z(ζ)) has err symbols. Instead we note
that, because Ag≤D (ζ) and Ag≤D (ζ ′ ) differ in at most |U | positions, there exists z ′ differing from z(ζ) in
at most 2|U | positions (|U | entries in z(ζ) not in z ′ and vice versa) such that Rep(Ag≤D (ζ ′ ), z ′ ) has no err
symbols. We use the estimate

               Y (ζ) − Y (ζ ′ ) = Sat0 (Rep(Ag≤D (ζ), z(ζ)), Φ(ζ)) − Sat0 (Rep(Ag≤D (ζ ′ ), z(ζ ′ )), Φ(ζ ′ ))
                              ≤ Sat0 (Rep(Ag≤D (ζ), z(ζ)), Φ(ζ)) − Sat0 (Rep(Ag≤D (ζ ′ ), z ′ ), Φ(ζ ′ )).

Now, if
                                                          
         1 Rep(Ag≤D (ζ), z(ζ))) satisfies clause Φ(ζ)i 6= 1 Rep(Ag≤D (ζ ′ ), z ′ )) satisfies clause Φ(ζ ′ )i ,

either ci ∈ Nr+1 (c, G(ζ)) ∪ Nr+1 (c, G(ζ ′ )) or ci is adjacent to one of the (at most) 2|U | variables where z(ζ)
and z ′ disagree. By definition of S, there are at most 2n1/5 clauses in the former case, and 2|U |n1/5 clauses
in the latter case. Thus |Y (ζ) − Y (ζ ′ )| ≤ O(n2/5 ).
    For general ζ, ζ ′ , we have |Y (ζ) − Y (ζ ′ )| ≤ m. By Lemma 7.6,
                                                                                           
                    m                         m2 / log2 n                 1/5    2(km + m + n)m
   P |Y − E Y | ≥         ≤ 2 exp                               + exp(−Ω(n ))O
                  log n             8(km + m + n)O((n2/5 )2 )                         n2/5
                                   e
                          ≤ exp(−Ω(n   1/5
                                           )).




                                                             48
Proof of Theorem 2.14(d). Set η ′ > 0 such that η = k −12 + 2η ′ . Let A = Ag be the r-local algorithm
achieving (9.1). By Lemma 8.23, there exists D dependent on ε, k, η such that
                                                          
                          P ∆(Ag (Φ, ϕ), Ag≤D (Φ, ϕ)) ≥ η ′ ≤ exp(−Ω(n1/3 )).

With (9.1), this implies                                         
                                  P Ag≤D (Φ, ϕ) (η, 0)-satisfies Φ ≥ 1 − o(1).
Thus,
                                     E Satη (Ag≤D (Φ, ϕ), Φ) = (1 − o(1))m.
For ν(n) = o(1) + log1 n = o(1), Proposition 9.5 implies that
                                                            
                                                                         e 1/5 )).
                        P Satη (Ag≤D (Φ, ϕ), Φ) ≥ (1 − ν(n))m ≥ 1 − exp(−Ω(n

Fact 8.22 implies that the degree-D simulation f of Ag satisfies

                                                                                  e 1/5 )).
                  P [Satη ((strictRound ◦ f )(Φ, ϕ), Φ) ≥ (1 − ν(n))m] ≥ 1 − exp(−Ω(n

In other words,
                                                                                  e 1/5 )).
                    P [(strictRound ◦ f )(Φ, ϕ) (η, ν(n))-satisfies Φ] ≥ 1 − exp(−Ω(n

Lemma 8.24 gives γ such that
                                                             2
                                               E kf (Φ, ϕ)k2 ≤ γn.
                                            e 1/5 )), γ, η, ν(n))-solves Φk (n, m). Finally, Lemma 4.1 gives
Thus, f is a degree-D polynomial that (exp(−Ω(n
                                               e 1/5 )), 3γ, η, ν(n))-solves Φk (n, m).
a deterministic degree-D polynomial that (exp(−Ω(n


10      Discussion
In this paper we proved that degree D = o(n/ log n) polynomials do not solve random k-SAT at clause density
(1+ok (1))κ∗ 2k log k/k with success probability 1−exp(−Ω(D log n)). We proved that local algorithms cannot
solve random k-SAT even with success probability exp(−Ω(n e 1/3 )) at this clause density, and that at clause
                     k
density (1 − ok (1))2 log k/k both computation classes succeed with very high probability. We now discuss
related OGP work, future directions, and some open problems that remain.

The constant factor gap. The main open problem is to close the constant factor gap remaining between
the clause densities of the positive and negative results. Because the negative free entropy chaining technique
stalls at a clause density lower bounded by 1.716 ·2k log k/k (see Appendix A), further ideas will be necessary
to close this gap.
    Two innovations in multi-OGPs appeared recently that may be useful for this task. [GK21a] constructs a
large interpolation and uses Ramsey theory to show the existence of a constellation of solutions with pairwise
overlaps all approximately equal to a prescribed value. This gives a finer control on the overlap structure
constructed from the algorithm outputs than our approach, which only uses that some algorithm output falls
into each moat we construct. [HS21] uses a branching OGP, where the multi-OGP’s forbidden structure is
an arbitrarily complex ultrametric tree of solutions. The branching OGP allows their argument to navigate
the rich replica symmetry breaking structure of spin glasses and may be useful here.
    More speculatively, we expect the limiting clause density for efficient algorithms to coincide with the
                                                            +
clustering
                                       terms. [KMRT 07, Equation 6] gives the more precise expression
            threshold, even in lower order
2k
k   log k + log log k + 1 + O( logloglogk k ) for the clustering threshold. On the algorithmic side, we expect this
clause density to be attained (in the large-radius limit) by suitable refinements of Fix, where the radius of
the neighborhood used to make each decision grows from 3 to a large constant.




                                                        49
Local Markov chains. Proposition 8.1, our simulation result, can be lightly modified to show that local
algorithms (and therefore low degree polynomials, by Proposition 8.2) simulate the following class of local
Markov chains run for O(n) time. Start at a uniformly random initialization x ∈ {T, F}n. At each step,
choose a uniformly random vertex v ∈ VG of the factor graph and, based on its r-neighborhood and the
restriction of x to this neighborhood, choose (possibly randomly) to toggle the bits of x in this neighborhood.
This model includes the Glauber dynamics, which corresponds to making a 2-local decision when v ∈ VaG
and doing nothing when v ∈ ClG . It also includes a lazy version of walksat, where instead of maintaining a
list of unsatisfied clauses we choose vertices randomly and do nothing on any v ∈ VaG or any v ∈ ClG whose
clause is already satisfied. We note that at clause density Ok (2k /k 2 ), where walksat is known to succeed,
it does succeed in O(n) time [COFF+ 09]; the aforementioned lazy version of walksat incurs overhead from
laziness, but nonetheless finds a ν-satisfying assignment in O(n) time for any ν independent of n.
     This model can be implemented as a variant of an r-local memory algorithm where vertices are sampled
uniformly and i.i.d. instead of by a random permutation. The number of iterations may increase from n
to any constant multiple of n. The simulation result is proved analogously to Proposition 8.1, by choosing
a simulation radius R such that it is unlikely for r-hop dependence chains to escape an R-neighborhood.
Consequently, our hardness results also apply to this Markov chain run for O(n) time. Unfortunately it
is much harder to reason about time scales longer than O(n), which is the time scale needed to aggregate
global information. At long time scales the best result is still [COHH17], which shows walksat fails at clause
density Ok (2k log2 k/k). Showing hardness for local Markov chains at a tighter clause density is another
open problem.

Limitations of OGP for low degree hardness. Current OGP techniques to show low degree hardness
only rule out quite large success probabilities. This limitation arises because these arguments use that
low degree polynomials are stable, which occurs with small but nontrivial probability. In contrast, OGP
techniques to show hardness for (for example) local algorithms leverage these algorithms’ concentration
properties, which occur with high probability; this allows us to show these algorithms cannot succeed with
even small probability. To see this difference, compare Proposition 4.7(a) with Proposition 7.4(b). It would
be nice to lower the success probability that low degree hardness results rule out, perhaps by leveraging a
property stronger than stability.
    Concentration style OGPs also allow the construction of more complex forbidden structures such as the
branching OGP of [HS21], which appears difficult to replicate by stability style OGPs. Allowing the use of
these structures is another potential benefit of leveraging a property stronger than stability.
    It would also be interesting to prove a low degree hardness result that does not exclude the interval (−1, 1)
in the rounding scheme (and thus, does not reference the normalization parameter γ). Such a hardness result
would be based on the inherent stability of polynomial threshold functions, rather than the stability imposed
by a variance condition in γ. Note that a generalization of the Gotsman-Linial conjecture [GL92] to non-
binary product spaces, plugged √  in modularly in place of Proposition 6.3, would yield a version of Theorem 2.6
in this setting at δ = exp(−CD n log n). One could hope to devise a different OGP argument that improves
this probability.

Other random CSPs. Random k-SAT is one example of a random constraint satisfaction problem.
[ACO08], the seminal paper linking clustering to algorithmic hardness, predicted that this connection holds
in substantial generality for random CSPs. We believe that recent developments in multi-OGP methodology
make it possible to show similar hardness results in other CSPs. Showing a general hardness result of this
type for random CSPs would be a significant advancement of the field.

When clustering does not imply hardness. Recent work on the symmetric Ising perceptron [ALS21,
PX21] showed that clustering (in the sense that is linked to hardness in random CSPs) does not always
imply hardness. In particular, at any positive constraint density in the symmetric Ising perceptron, all but
an exponentially small fraction of solutions are isolated, forming clusters of size one, even though efficient
algorithms that find a solution exist at some positive constraint densities [BS19]. Forthcoming work [GK21b]
shows that at a constraint density only slightly above where efficient algorithms exist, a multi-OGP rules
out stable algorithms.



                                                       50
   Thus, while the rigorous connection between multi-OGP and the failure of stable algorithms still holds,
the heuristic that clustering implies hardness breaks down. It would be interesting to clarify this heuristic
and identify a refined notion of clustering that does match the limits of algorithms for this problem.

The refutation problem. Closely related to the problem of finding a satisfying assignment is the problem
of certifying that there is no satisfying assignment. A well-studied problem is to identify the refutation
threshold, the clause density above the satisfiability threshold where it is possible to certify the lack of a
satisfying assignment with high probability.
    It is known [Sch08] that the SOS framework cannot efficiently refute satisfiability of random k-SAT with
m = O(nk/2−ε ) clauses. For the DPLL-based Resolution framework, the same fact is known for k = 3
[BSW99]. On the positive side, [AOW15] showed that refutation is possible with m = Ω(n     e k/2 ) clauses; see
[AOW15, Table 1] for a history. Thus there is strong evidence that the refutation threshold is at the scale
m = Θ(ne k/2 ). An open problem is to furnish rigorous evidence for this threshold for more general models
of computation. It would be interesting to identify a signature for refutation hardness at the level of the
problem’s energy landscape. It would also be interesting to show hardness for other certification tasks, such
as certifying an upper bound on the number of satisfying assignments, see e.g. [HMX21].

Planted problems. Another variant of OGP has been used to study the computational hardness of
estimation problems and problems with planted structure [GZ17, GZ19, GJS19, BAWZ20], see also [CM19].
This notion of OGP tracks the overlap between a single solution and the planted truth, instead of between
two or more solutions. OGP occurs if the best loss attained by a solution at some overlap with the planted
truth, as a function of the overlap, is nonmonotone with one minimum at high overlap and another at low
overlap. If this OGP occurs, gradient descent or any local Markov chain with worst-case initialization will be
unable to efficiently find the planted truth. An open problem is to extend these hardness results for planted
problems from local Markov chains to arbitrary stable algorithms.


References
[ABM04]      Dimitris Achlioptas, Paul Beame, and Michael Molloy. Exponential bounds for DPLL below
             the satisfiability threshold. In Proceedings of 15th SODA, pages 139–140, 2004.
[Ach09]      Dimitris Achlioptas. Random satisfiability, volume 185, pages 245–270. IOS Press, 2009.
[ACO08]      Dimitris Achlioptas and Amin Coja-Oghlan. Algorithmic barriers from phase transitions. In
             Proceedings of 49th FOCS, pages 793–802, 2008.
[Ajt83]      Miklós Ajtai. σ11 -formulae on finite structures. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 24(1):1–48,
             1983.
[ALS21]      Emmanuel Abbe, Shuangping Li, and Allan Sly. Proof of the contiguity conjecture and lognor-
             mal limit for the symmetric perceptron. arXiv preprint 2102.13069, 2021.
[AMS20]      Ahmed El Alaoui, Andrea Montanari, and Mark Sellke. Optimization of mean-field spin glasses.
             arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.00904, 2020.
[AOW15]      Sarah R. Allen, Ryan O’Donnell, and David Witmer. How to refute a random csp. In Proceedings
             of 56th FOCS, pages 689–708, 2015.
[AS00]       Dimitris Achlioptas and Gregory B. Sorkin. Optimal myopic algorithms for random 3-SAT. In
             Proceedings of 41st FOCS, pages 590–600, 2000.
[BAWZ20]     Gérard Ben Arous, Alexander S. Wein, and Ilias Zadik. Free energy wells and overlap gap
             property in sparse PCA. In Proceedings of 33rd COLT, pages 479–482, 2020.
[BB20]       Matthew Brennan and Guy Bresler. Reducibility and statistical-computational gaps from secret
             leakage. In Proceedings of 33rd COLT, pages 648–847, 2020.


                                                      51
[BBH+ 21]   Matthew Brennan, Guy Bresler, Samuel B. Hopkins, Jerry Li, and Tselil Schramm. Statistical
            query algorithms and low-degree tests are almost equivalent. Proceedings of 34th COLT, page
            774, 2021.
[BBK+ 21]   Afonso S. Bandeira, Jess Banks, Dmitriy Kunisky, Cristopher Moore, and Alexander S. Wein.
            Spectral planting and the hardness of refuting cuts, colorability, and communities in random
            graphs. Proceedings of 34th COLT, pages 410–473, 2021.
[BCN20]     Charles Bordenave, Simon Coste, and Raj Rao Nadakuditi. Detection thresholds in very sparse
            matrix completion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.06062, 2020.
[BGT10]     Mohsen Bayati, David Gamarnik, and Prasad Tetali. Combinatorial approach to the interpola-
            tion method and scaling limits in sparse random graphs. In Proceedings of 42nd STOC, pages
            105–114, 2010.
[BHK+ 19]   Boaz Barak, Samuel B. Hopkins, Jonathan Kelner, Pravesh K. Kothari, Ankur Moitra, and
            Aaron Potechin. A nearly tight sum-of-squares lower bound for the planted clique problem.
            SIAM Journal on Computing, 48(2):687–735, 2019.
[BKW20]     Afonso S. Bandeira, Dmitriy Kunisky, and Alexander S. Wein. Computational hardness of
            certifying bounds on constrained PCA problems. In Proceedings of 11th ITCS, 2020.
[BM11]      Mohsen Bayati and Andrea Montanari. The dynamics of message passing on dense graphs, with
            applications to compressed sensing. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 57(2):764–785,
            2011.
[BMZ05]     Alfredo Braunstein, Marc Mézard, and Riccardo Zecchina. Survey propagation: an algorithm
            for satisfiability. Random Structures & Algorithms, 27(2):201–226, 2005.

[BS19]      Nikhil Bansal and Joel H. Spencer. On-line balancing of random inputs. arXiv preprint
            arXiv:1903.06898, 2019.
[BSW99]     Eli Ben-Sasson and Avi Wigderson. Short proofs are narrow – resolution made simple. In
            Proceedings of 31st STOC, pages 517–526, 1999.
[CGPR19]    Wei-Kuo Chen, David Gamarnik, Dmitry Panchenko, and Mustazee Rahman. Suboptimality
            of local algorithms for a class of max-cut problems. Annals of Probability, 47(3):1587–1618,
            2019.
[CHK+ 20]   Yeshwanth Cherapanamjeri, Samuel B. Hopkins, Tarun Kathuria, Prasad Raghavendra, and
            Nilesh Tripuraneni. Algorithms for heavy-tailed statistics: Regression, covariance estimation,
            and beyond. In Proceedings of 52nd STOC, pages 601–609, 2020.
[CM19]      Michael Celentano and Andrea Montanari. Fundamental barriers to high-dimensional regression
            with convex penalties. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.10603, 2019.
[CMM09]     Moses Charikar, Konstantin Makarychev, and Yury Makarychev. Integrality gaps for sherali-
            adams relaxations. In Proceedings of 41st STOC, pages 283–292, 2009.
[CO10]      Amin Coja-Oghlan. A better algorithm for random k-SAT. SIAM Journal on Computing,
            39:2823–2864, 2010.
[COE15]     Amin Coja-Oghlan and Charilaos Efthymiou. On independent sets in random graphs. Random
            Structures & Algorithms, 47(3):436–486, 2015.
[COFF+ 09] Amin Coja-Oghlan, Uriel Feige, Alan Frieze, Michael Krivelevich, and Dan Vilenchik. On
           smoothed k-CNF formulas and the walksat algorithm. In Proceedings of 20th SODA, pages
           451–460, 2009.




                                                   52
[COHH17]   Amin Coja-Oghlan, Amir Haqshenas, and Samuel Hetterich. Walksat stalls well below the
           satisfiability threshold. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 31:1160–1173, 2017.
[Coo71]    Stephen Cook. The complexity of theorem proving procedures. In Proceedings of 3rd STOC,
           pages 151–158, 1971.
[COP16]    Amin Coja-Oghlan and Konstantinos Panagiotou. The asymptotic k-SAT threshold. Advances
           in Mathematics, 288:985–1068, 2016.
[CR92]     Václav Chvátal and Bruce Reed. Mick gets some (the odds are on his side). In Proceedings of
           33th FOCS, pages 620–627, 1992.
[CSS18]    Ruiwen Chen, Rahul Santhanam, and Srikanth Srinivasan. Average-case lower bounds and
           satisfiability algorithms for small threshold circuits. Theory of Computing, 14(9):1–55, 2018.
[DKWB20] Yunzi Ding, Dmitriy Kunisky, Alexander S. Wein, and Afonso S. Bandeira. Subexponential-
         time algorithms for sparse PCA. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11635, 2020.
[DLL61]    Martin Davis, George Logemann, and Donald Loveland. A machine program for theorem
           proving. Communications of the ACM, 5(7):394–397, 1961.
[DMM09]    David L. Donoho, Arian Maleki, and Andrea Montanari. Message-passing algorithms for com-
           pressed sensing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(45):18914–18919, 2009.
[DMMZ08]   Hervé Daudé, Marc Mézard, Thierry Mora, and Riccardo Zecchina. Pairs of SAT assignment
           in random boolean formulae. Theoretical Computer Science, 393:260–279, 2008.
[DP60]     Martin Davis and Hilary Putnam. A computing procedure for quantification theory. Journal
           of the ACM, 7(3):201–205, 1960.
[DSS15]    Jian Ding, Allan Sly, and Nike Sun. Proof of the satisfiability conjecture for large k. In
           Proceedings of 47th STOC, pages 59–68, 2015.
[FP83]     John Franco and Marvin Paull. Probabilistic analysis of the Davis-Putnam procedure for solving
           the satisfiability problem. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 5(1):77–87, 1983.
[Fri90]    Alan Frieze. On the independence number of random graphs. Discrete Mathematics, 81(2):171–
           175, 1990.
[FS96]     Alan Frieze and Stephen Suen. Analysis of two simple heuristics on a random instance of
           k-SAT. Journal of Algorithms, 20:312–355, 1996.
[FSS84]    Merrick L. Furst, James B. Saxe, and Michael Sipser. Parity, circuits, and the polynomial-time
           hierarchy. Mathematical Systems Theory, 17(1):13–27, 1984.
[Gam21]    David Gamarnik. The overlap gap property: A topological barrier to optimizing over random
           structures. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(41), 2021.
[GJ21]     David Gamarnik and Aukosh Jagannath. The overlap gap property and approximate message
           passing algorithms for p-spin models. The Annals of Probability, 49(1):180–205, 2021.
[GJS19]    David Gamarnik, Aukosh Jagannath, and Subhabrata Sen. The overlap gap property in prin-
           cipal submatrix recovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09959, 2019.
[GJW20]    David Gamarnik, Aukosh Jagannath, and Alexander S. Wein. Low-degree hardness of random
           optimization problems. In Proceedings of 61st FOCS, pages 131–140, 2020.
[GJW21]    David Gamarnik, Aukosh Jagannath, and Alexander S. Wein. Circuit lower bounds for the
           p-spin optimization problem. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.01342, 2021.
[GK21a]    David Gamarnik and Eren C. Kızıldağ. Algorithmic obstructions in the random number par-
           titioning problem. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.01369, 2021.

                                                  53
[GK21b]     David Gamarnik and Eren C. Kızıldağ. A curious case of symmetric binary perceptron model:
            algorithms and barriers. Simons Institute presentation https://youtu.be/io2OXE1Xw04, Oc-
            tober 2021.
[GL92]      Craig Gotsman and Nathan Linial. The equivalence of two problems on the cube. Journal of
            Combinatorial Theory, Series A, 61(1):142–146, 1992.
[GL18]      David Gamarnik and Quan Li. Finding a large submatrix of a Gaussian random matrix. The
            Annals of Statistics, 46(6A):2511–2561, 2018.
[GPB82]     Allen T. Goldberg, Paul W. Purdom, and Cynthia Brown. Average time analysis of simplified
            Davis-Putnam procedures. Information Processing Letters, 15:72–75, 1982.
[Gri01]     Dima Grigoriev. Linear lower bound on degrees of positivstellensatz calculus proofs for the
            parity. Theoretical Computer Science, 259(1-2):613–622, 2001.
[GS14]      David Gamarnik and Madhu Sudan. Limits of local algorithms over sparse random graphs. In
            Proceedings of 5th ITCS, pages 369–376, 2014.
[GS17]      David Gamarnik and Madhu Sudan. Performance of sequential local algorithms for the random
            NAE-k-SAT problem. SIAM Journal on Computing, 46(2):590–619, 2017.
[GZ17]      David Gamarnik and Ilias Zadik. High-dimensional regression with binary coefficients. esti-
            mating squared error and a phase transition. In Proceedings of 30th COLT, pages 948–953,
            2017.
[GZ19]      David Gamarnik and Ilias Zadik. The landscape of the planted clique problem: dense subgraphs
            and the overlap gap property. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.07174, 2019.
[Hås86]    Johan Håstad. Almost optimal lower bounds for small depth circuits. In Proceedings of 18th
            STOC, pages 6–20, 1986.
[Het16]     Samuel Hetterich. Analysing Survey Propagation guided decimation on random formulas. In
            Proceedings of 43rd ICALP, 2016.
[HKP+ 17]   Samuel B. Hopkins, Pravesh K. Kothari, Aaron Potechin, Prasad Raghavendra, Tselil
            Schramm, and David Steurer. The power of sum-of-squares for detecting hidden structures. In
            Proceedings of 58th FOCS, pages 720–731, 2017.
[HMX21]     Jun-Ting Hsieh, Sidhanth Mohanty, and Jeff Xu. Certifying solution geometry in random csps:
            counts, clusters and balance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.12710, 2021.
[Hop18]     Samuel B. Hopkins. Statistical Inference and the Sum of Squares Method. PhD thesis, Cornell
            University, 2018.
[HS17]      Samuel B. Hopkins and David Steurer. Efficient Bayesian estimation from few samples: com-
            munity detection and related problems. In Proceedings of 58th FOCS, pages 379–390, 2017.
[HS21]      Brice Huang and Mark Sellke. Tight Lipschitz hardness for optimizing mean field spin glasses.
            arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.07847, 2021.
[JM13]      Adel Javanmard and Andrea Montanari. State evolution for general approximate message
            passing algorithms, with applications to spatial coupling. Information and Inference: A Journal
            of the IMA, 2(2):115–144, 2013.
[Kar76]     Richard M. Karp. The probabilistic analysis of some combinatorial search algorithms, pages
            1–19. Academic Press, 1976.
[KKKS98]    Lefteris M. Kirousis, Evangelos Kranakis, Danny Krizanc, and Yannis C. Stamatiou. Approx-
            imating the unsatisfiability threshold of random formulas. Random Structures & Algorithms,
            12(3):253–269, 1998.

                                                   54
[KMOW17] Pravesh K. Kothari, Ryuhei Mori, Ryan O’Donnell, and David Witmer. Sum of squares lower
         bounds for refuting any CSP. In Proceedings of 49th STOC, pages 132–145, 2017.
[KMRT+ 07] Florent Krzakala, Andrea Montanari, Federico Ricci-Tersenghi, Guilhem Semerjian, and Lenka
           Zdeborová. Gibbs states and the set of solutions of random constraint satisfaction problems.
           Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104:10318–10323, 2007.
[Kut02]     Samuel Kutin. Extensions to McDiarmid’s inequality when differences are bounded with high
            probability. Technical report, University of Chicago, Department of Computer Science, 2002.
[KWB19]     Dmitriy Kunisky, Alexander S. Wein, and Afonso S. Bandeira. Notes on computational hard-
            ness of hypothesis testing: predictions using the low-degree likelihood ratio. arXiv preprint
            arXiv:1907.11636, 2019.
[LMS98]     Michael G. Luby, Michael Mitzenmacher, and M. Amin Shokrollahi. Analysis of random pro-
            cesses via and-or tree evaluation. In Proceedings of 9th SODA, pages 364–373, 1998.
[LZ20]      Yuetian Luo and Anru R. Zhang. Tensor clustering with planted structures: statistical opti-
            mality and computational limits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.10743, 2020.
[Mon19]     Andrea Montanari. Optimization of the Sherrington-Kirkpatrick hamiltonian. In Proceedings
            of 60th FOCS, pages 1417–1433, 2019.
[MPZ02]     Marc Mézard, Giorgio Parisi, and Riccardo Zecchina. Analytic and algorithmic solution of
            random satisfiability problems. Science, 297:812–815, 2002.
[MRTS07]    Andrea Montanari, Federico Ricci-Tersenghi, and Guilhem Semerjian. Solving constraint satis-
            faction problems through Belief Propagation-guided decimation. In Proceedings of 45th Aller-
            ton, pages 352–359, 2007.
[MTF90]     Chao Ming-Te and John Franco. Probabilistic analysis of a generalization of the unit-clause
            literal selection heuristic for the k-satisfiability problem. Information Sciences, 51:289–314,
            1990.
[NSS20]     Danny Nam, Allan Sly, and Youngtak Sohn. One-step replica symmetry breaking of random
            regular NAE-k-SAT. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.14270, 2020.
[O’D14]     Ryan O’Donnell. Analysis of Boolean functions. Cambridge University Press, 2014.
[Pap91]     Christos H. Papadimitriou. On selecting a satisfying truth assignment. In Proceedings of 32nd
            FOCS, pages 163–169, 1991.
[PX21]      Will Perkins and Changji Xu. Frozen 1-RSB structure of the symmetric Ising perceptron. arXiv
            preprint arXiv:2102.05163, 2021.
[RV17]      Mustazee Rahman and Bálint Virág. Local algorithms for independent sets are half-optimal.
            The Annals of Probability, 45(3):1543–1577, 2017.
[Sch08]     Grant Schoenebeck. Linear level lasserre lower bounds for certain k-CSPs. In Proceedings of
            49th FOCS, pages 593–602, 2008.
[Sel21]     Mark Sellke. Optimizing mean field spin glasses with external field.           arXiv preprint
            arXiv:2105.03506, 2021.
[SW20]      Tselil Schramm and Alexander S. Wein. Computational barriers to estimation from low-degree
            polynomials. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.02269, 2020.
[Wei20]     Alexander S. Wein. Optimal low-degree hardness of maximum independent set. arXiv preprint
            arXiv:2010.06563, 2020.



                                                   55
A     On Improving the Constant κ∗
In this section, we discuss how the constant κ∗ in Theorem 2.6 can be improved. We define a constant κ∗∗
as the solution to a maximin problem. We will show that κ∗∗ ≤ κ∗ and sketch how our proof of Theorem 2.6
can be lightly modified to improve the constant κ∗ to κ∗∗ . We heuristically argue that κ∗∗ < κ∗ , so that
this modification is an improvement. We also prove that κ∗∗ is bounded below by a constant larger than 1,
approximately 1.716. Further ideas will be needed to prove Theorem 2.6 for any κ smaller than κ∗∗ . Because
κ∗∗ remains bounded away from 1, and we believe 1 is the optimal constant in Theorem 2.6, we did not
attempt to rigorously evaluate κ∗∗ or optimize κ∗ .

A.1     A Maximin Problem
Let (Ξ, Pξ ) be an arbitrary probability space and let Q be the space of functions q : Ξ → [0, 1]. These
are abstractions of quantities in the proof of Proposition 5.7: ξ ∼ (Ξ, Pξ ) is an abstraction of the random
            (≤ℓ−1)                                                             (≤ℓ−1)
variables yI         where I ∼ unif([n]), and q(ξ) is an abstraction of φℓ (T|yI      ). We equip Q with the
metric d(q, q ′ ) = Eξ |q(ξ) − q ′ (ξ)|.
   For q ∈ Q, let D(q) be the law of u sampled by the following experiment. First, sample ξ ∼ (Ξ, Pξ ).
Then, set u = − log q(ξ) with probability q(ξ), and otherwise set u = − log(1 − q(ξ)). Clearly Eu∼D(q) u =
Eξ H(q(ξ)). Define

                                   1                          log 2 + k Eξ H(q(ξ))
                       F (q) =        ·                             hP                             i.
                                 log k P                         ⊗k
                                                                       k
                                                                           u i ≥ log k + log log k
                                              (u1 ,...,uk )∼D(q)       i=1


Let P be the set of functions p : Ξ × [0, 1] → [0, 1], such that p(ξ, 0) ∈ {0, 1} and p(ξ, 1) = 12 for all ξ ∈ Ξ,
and p(·, s) (which, for fixed s ∈ [0, 1], is an element of Q) is continuous in s with respect to the topology of
Q. Consider the maximin problem

                                         κ∗∗ = lim sup max min F (p(·, s)).                                 (A.1)
                                                     k→∞    p∈P s∈[0,1]


This has the following geometric interpretation: κ∗∗ is the smallest constant such that the sub-level set
{q ∈ Q : F (q) ≤ κ∗∗ } topologically disconnects the functions q ≡ 0 and q ≡ 12 in Q. (Note that Q is
symmetric under replacing q(ξ) with 1 − q(ξ) for any subset of the ξ ∈ Ξ, and F (q) = F (q ′ ) for any q, q ′
related by such a symmetry. Thus, equivalently κ∗∗ is the smallest constant such that this sub-level set
disconnects the function q ≡ 12 from any q ∈ Q with q(ξ) ∈ {0, 1} for all ξ ∈ Ξ.)
    First, we show that κ∗ is an upper bound on the solution to this maximin problem.
Proposition A.1. We have that κ∗ ≥ κ∗∗ .
Proof. Fix some p ∈ P. By continuity of p(·, s) in s, we can set s ∈ [0, 1] such that Eξ H(p(ξ, s)) = β ∗ logk k .
As in the proof of Proposition 5.7, we apply a Chernoff bound on the random variables min(u    i ,log k)
                                                                                             log k       to show
that, for any β > 1 and q : Ω → [0, 1] with Eξ H(q(ξ)) = β logk k , we have
                                              " k                          #
                                               X
                                P                    ui < log k + log log k ≤ βe−(β−1) + ok (1).            (A.2)
                       (u1 ,...,uk )∼D(q)⊗k
                                               i=1

In particular, for the s we chose,
                                                          2        ∗
                                                        log k + β
                               F (p(·, s)) ≤                                → ι(β ∗ ) = κ∗ .
                                                1 − β ∗ e−(β ∗ −1) − ok (1)



   Next, we sketch how the proof of Theorem 2.6 can be improved to replace κ∗ with κ∗∗ . The proof of
Theorem 2.13 can be modified similarly.


                                                              56
Proposition A.2. Theorem 2.6 holds for all κ > κ∗∗ .
Proof Sketch. Identically to the original proof of Theorem 2.6, we define the interpolation path Φ(0) , . . . , Φ(T )
and set x(t) = A(Φ(t) ) for 0 ≤ t ≤ T . We define Svalid as before. Sconsec and Sindep are analogous to before:
Sconsec is the event that consecutive x(t) are close in Hamming distance, and Sindep is the event that if
0 ≤ t0 ≤ t1 ≤ · · · ≤ tk ≤ T and tk ≥ tk−1 + km, then any ν-satisfying assignment to Φ(tk ) has large
conditional overlap entropy relative to x(t0 ) , . . . , x(tk−1 ) . We change the parameters quantifying “close” and
“large conditional overlap” slightly so that the below proof succeeds; we omit the details. Lower bounds on
P(Svalid ∩ Sconsec ) and P(Sindep) can be proved analogously to Proposition 4.7(a,b).
    The interesting change will be in the definition of Sogp . For 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, the conditional overlap profile
π(y (ℓ) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) determines the conditional probabilities2
                                                 h                                                 i
                                                    (ℓ)   (0)      (1)    (0)      (ℓ−1)    (0)
                             φℓ (b|ξ) =     P      yi ⊕ yi = b|(yi ⊕ yi , . . . , yi     ⊕ yi ) = ξ ,
                                i∼unif([n])

                                                                    (1)    (0)       (ℓ−1)     (0)
where ⊕ denotes XOR. Let (Ξ, Pξ ) be the sample space of (yi ⊕ yi , . . . , yi ⊕ yi ), and let q(ξ) = φℓ (T|ξ).
Let ε > 0 satisfy κ − ε > κ∗∗ . Sogp is now the event that there does not exist 0 ≤ t0 ≤ t1 ≤ · · · ≤ tk ≤ T
and assignments y (0) , . . . , y (k) ∈ {T, F}n such that
 (OGP-A) For all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, y (ℓ) ν-satisfies Φ(tℓ ) ;
                                                                                                
 (OGP-B) For all 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, the conditional overlap profile H π(y (ℓ) |y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) ) satisfies that F (q) ≤
         κ − ε for the q defined above.
                                                c
The key point is that our proof that P(Sogp          ) ≤ exp(−Ω(n)) requires precisely these properties. Using the
                                                     c
argument in Section 5, we readily prove P(Sogp          ) ≤ exp(−Ω(n)).
    By a union bound, this gives a positive lower bound on P(Svalid ∩Sconsec ∩Sindep ∩Sogp ), so Svalid ∩Sconsec ∩
Sindep ∩ Sogp 6= ∅. We will show (analogously to Proposition 4.6) that Svalid ∩ Sconsec ∩ Sindep ∩ Sogp = ∅,
yielding a contradiction. When Svalid , Sconsec , Sindep simultaneously hold, we will construct an example of
the structure forbidden by Sogp .
    We will set y (ℓ) = x(tℓ ) for all 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, for a sequence 0 ≤ t0 ≤ t1 ≤ · · · ≤ tk ≤ T we now construct.
We set t0 = 0. For 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k we set tℓ to be the smallest t > tℓ−1 such that (OGP-B) holds for y (ℓ) = x(t) .
We now sketch why tℓ exists and satisfies tℓ ≤ tℓ−1 + km. Note that this ensures all the tℓ are well defined
because T = k 2 m.
    By Sconsec , x(t) evolves by small steps. Thus, for fixed y (0) , . . . , y (ℓ−1) and varying y (ℓ) = x(t) (varying as
we increment t), the q defined above moves by small steps in Q. Let qt denote this q at time t. By Fact 4.5(c)
qtℓ−1 (ξ) ∈ {0, 1} for all ξ ∈ Ξ. Sindep ensures that qtℓ−1 +km is far from qtℓ−1 in Q. The evolution of qt from
t = tℓ−1 to t = tℓ−1 + km can be modeled essentially by a continuous path, and the definition of the maximin
κ∗∗ implies that for some t in this range, F (qt ) ≈ κ∗∗ ≤ κ − ε. (Although qt does not necessarily evolve
to the all- 12 function, Sindep implies that it ends far from where it started, and we can show that over this
evolution we already encounter qt such that F (qt ) is near the maximin value.) This shows the existence of
tℓ with tℓ ≤ tℓ−1 + km.
    Since, by Svalid , each y (ℓ) ν-satisfies Φ(tℓ ) , we have constructed an example of the structure forbidden by
Sogp . This gives the desired contradiction.

A.2     Suboptimality of κ∗
We believe that κ∗ > κ∗∗ due to the following heuristic argument. The Chernoff bound (A.2) is tighest
when most of the mass of the random variables min(u    i ,log k)
                                                     log k       is near 0 or 1. When this occurs, most of the the
                                                      Pk
mass of ui is near 0 or log k. Then, the event that i=1 ui ≥ log k + log log k is the event that one or two
of the ui attains a value near log k. This is a tail probability in a non-asymptotic regime – approximately,
the probability that a Poisson random variable is larger than 1 or 2 – so the Chernoff bound will not get the
correct probability.
  2 this is a rewriting of the argument in Subsection 5.3. The XORs arise because we no longer assume y (0) = Tn .




                                                             57
A.3     Proof that κ∗∗ > 1
In this subsection, we will show that κ∗∗ is bounded below by a constant larger than 1, approximately 1.716.
Thus our methods cannot improve the constant κ∗ in Theorems 2.6 and 2.13 to 1.
    We will first show a weaker lower bound on κ∗∗ . Define ψ1 : (0, +∞) → R by
                                                                 λ/2
                                                ψ1 (λ) =                  ,
                                                           1 − (1 + λ)e−λ
and let ψ1∗ = minλ>0 ψ1 (λ) ≈ 1.675.
Proposition A.3. We have κ∗∗ ≥ ψ1∗ .
Proof. We will prove this proposition by constructing a suitable function family p ∈ P.
   Let Ξ = [0, 1] equipped with the uniform measure. Let p : Ξ × [0, 1] → [0, 1] be defined by
                                                 (
                                                   min(s, 12 ) ξ ≤ s,
                                       p(ξ, s) =
                                                   0           ξ ≥ s.

Thus, for fixed s ∈ [0, 1], p(ξ, s) = min(s, 21 ) with probability s, and otherwise p(ξ, s) = 0. We will show that
for this p,
                                          lim sup min F (p(·, s)) ≥ ψ1∗ ,
                                               k→∞ s∈[0,1]

from which the proposition follows.
    Note that if s = ωk (k −1/2 ), then Eξ H(p(ξ, s)) = ωk (log k/k), and so F (p(·, s)) = ωk (1). Therefore it
suffices to consider s = Ok (k −1/2 ). Then,
                                                                            1
                                           E H(p(ξ, s)) = (1 + ok (1))s2 log .
                                           ξ                                s

We now analyze the behavior of the denominator of F (p(·, s)). Note that a sample u ∼ D(p(·, s)) equals log 1s
                           1      s
with probability s2 , log 1−s  ≤ 1−s with probability s(1 − s), and 0 with probability 1 − s. For i = 1, . . . , k,
define                                                                                
                             1            1                         s                1
                  vi = log 1 ui = log         ,    and      wi =       1 ui = log          .
                             s            s                       1−s              1−s
So, ui ≤ vi + wi . For u1 , . . . , uk ∼ D(p(·, s))⊗k , we have
                    " k                            #     " k            #    " k               #
                     X                                     X                  X
                  P     ui ≥ log k + log log k ≤ P            vi ≥ log k + P     wi ≥ log log k .
                     i=1                                   i=1                   i=1

                                                                                                  2
Let 1 + δ = log   log k
               k E w1 =
                          log log k
                            ks2 . Because s = Ok (k
                                                     −1/2
                                                          ), we have 1 + δ = ωk (1), and so 2+δδ
                                                                                                 ≥ 12 (1 + δ) for
sufficiently large k. By a Chernoff bound,
       " k                 #        " k                         #                            
        X                            X 1−s        1−s                         δ2
    P       wi ≥ log log k ≤ P               wi ≥      log log k ≤ exp −           · ks(1 − s)
        i=1                          i=1
                                           s       s                       2+δ
                                                                                                      
                                         1                           (1 − s) log log k
                              ≤ exp − (1 + δ)ks(1 − s) ≤ exp −                           ≤ exp −Ωk (k 1/2 ) .
                                         2                                  2s

To analyze the other probability, we consider cases s > k1 and s ≤ k1 . We first consider s > k1 . In order to
     Pk
have i=1 vi ≥ log k, at least two vi must be nonzero. This occurs with probability

                             1 − (1 − s2 )k − s2 k(1 − s2 )k−1 ≤ 1 − (1 + s2 k)(1 − s2 )k .

Thus,
                                             1          log 2 + (1 + ok (1))s2 k log 1s
                           F (p(·, s)) ≥        ·                                             .
                                           log k 1 − (1 + s2 k)(1 − s2 )k + exp(−Ωk (k 1/2 ))

                                                             58
If s2 k = ok (1), then 1 − (1 + s2 k)(1 − s2 )k = Ok (s4 k 2 ), and the right-hand side is ωk (1). So, this bound is
minimized at s = λk −1/2 for constant λ, in which case

             1          log 2 + (1 + ok (1))s2 k log 1s               λ/2
                ·          2         2 k                1/2
                                                            →                     = ψ1 (λ) ≥ ψ1∗ .
           log k 1 − (1 + s k)(1 − s ) + exp(−Ωk (k ))        1 − (1 + λ) exp(−λ)
                                             Pk
   We now consider s ≤ k1 . In order to have i=1 vi ≥ log k, at least one vi must be nonzero. This occurs
with probability
                                      1 − (1 − s2 )k = (1 + ok (1))s2 k,
and so
                                               1      log 2 + (1 + ok (1))s2 k log 1s
                             F (p(·, s)) ≥        ·                                     .
                                             log k (1 + ok (1))s2 k + exp(−Ωk (k 1/2 ))
The right-hand side is ωk (1) because s ≤ k1 .

   For any nonnegative integer N , we may further define

                                                        λ/(N + 1)
                                       ψN (λ) =       P        
                                                             λk
                                                   1−    k≤N k! exp(−λ)

       ∗                                                           ∗
and ψN   = inf λ>0 ψN (λ). Over positive integers N , the largest ψN is ψ2∗ ≈ 1.716. The following corollary
                           ∗∗
gives the lower bound on κ alluded to above.
Corollary A.4. We have that κ∗∗ ≥ ψ2∗ .
Proof. We will construct a suitable function family p. For any nonnegative integer N , we can define
                                                  (
                                                    min(s, 21 ) ξ ≤ sN ,
                                      pN (ξ, s) =                                                    (A.3)
                                                    0           ξ ≥ s.

By a similar analysis to Proposition A.3, we can show for this p that
                                                                      ∗
                                         lim sup min F (pN (·, s)) ≥ ψN .
                                             k→∞ s∈[0,1]

Taking N = 2 yields the result.
   Due to Corollary A.4, a proof of Theorem 2.6 improving the constant κ∗ below ψ2∗ will require new
conceptual insights. Finally, we conjecture that Corollary A.4 is in fact sharp.
Conjecture A.5. We have that κ∗∗ = ψ2∗ . In particular, Theorem 2.6 holds for all κ > ψ2∗ .
    The following evidence supports this conjecture. In the maximin problem (A.1), if we restrict the maxi-
mum over p to functions such that for every s, p(ξ, s) attains at most one nonzero value, then we can show
by explicit computation that the maximin problem has value ψ2∗ . The idea of this proof is that for each
such p, at the s minimizing F (p(·, s)), p(·, s) equals (up to isomorphism of the probability space (Ξ, Pξ ))
pN (·, s′ ) for some s′ and some (possibly fractional) N . We can show that fractional N do not maximize
mins∈[0,1] F (pN (·, s)). Thus the candidate maxima are pN for integer N , and of these p2 is maximal, attain-
ing value ψ2∗ . We believe that the maximum of (A.1) over p ∈ P is attained by p with this property.




                                                           59
