     The Complexity of
Meta-Computational Problems




              Ninad Rajgopal
              Magdalen College
            University of Oxford




     A thesis submitted for the degree of
            Doctor of Philosophy

                Trinity 2020
This thesis is dedicated to my parents, Soumya and Rajgopal, and my
                          grandfather Ramanna.
                       Acknowledgements


First and foremost, I would like to thank my advisor Rahul Santhanam for
his dedicated guidance throughout my D.Phil. I am very grateful for his
enlightening advice, for sharing his deep insights in the field, and for his
encouragement and support. This thesis would not be possible without his
guidance, and it has been a privilege to be advised by him during this journey
as a doctoral student.
I am thankful to the University of Oxford and Magdalen College for providing
a supportive environment for my research. I am grateful to Rahul’s ALUnif
grant from the European Research Council (ERC) and the Department of
Computer Science at the University of Oxford for funding me for most part
of my doctoral studies. I am also very thankful to Magdalen College for
generously providing financial support during the last year of my degree, and
specially ensuring that I did not have to struggle during the difficult times
caused by the pandemic.
I would like to thank Igor Oliveira and Ján Pich for their encouraging presence
and the stimulating discussions, which helped me understand and build many
of my interests in complexity theory. During my graduate studies, I had
the good fortune to work with Rahul, Igor, Ján and several researchers like
Srikanth Srinivasan, Lijie Chen, Shuichi Hirahara, Georgios Birmpas, Jiarui
Gan, Alexandros Hollender, Francisco Marmolejo and Alexandros Voudouris.
I thank them for everything I have learnt during these collaborations and for
ensuring that research was a more enjoyable activity. Special thanks are due
to Nikhil Balaji, Varun Kanade, Dimitrios Myrisiotis and Marco Carmosino
for many helpful conversations during these last few years.
I also wish to thank my transfer and confirmation assessors Leslie Goldberg,
Varun Kanade and Standa Zivný for their constructive feedback and advice.
Thanks also to the staff at Magdalen and the CS department, particularly
Julie Sheppard and Sarah Retz-Jones for their constant help with the admin
processes.
I would like to thank N.R.Prashanth and Arnab Bhattacharyya for spurring
me to pursue further study in theoretical computer science. I also want to
thank Chandan Saha for introducing me to computational complexity theory
through his graduate course at IISc.
Many thanks to the organisers of the St.Petersburg Complexity Semester, the
Dagstuhl workshop on “Proof Complexity” and the Lower Bounds Semester
at the Simons Institute, for providing me an opportunity to attend them. It
has been very inspiring to listen and talk to other researchers in complexity
theory.
Massive thanks to all those who have made my journey in Oxford unforget-
table with their much valued friendships. To my fellow inhabitants of room
224: Francisco, Alex, Philip, Aris, Georgios, Edwin and Christian – for all the
great times and your support. To Andrius, Nikola, Abhishek, and Subhayan
– for making the department a great place to work in. To my housemates
over the years: Rishika, Matthew, Shai, George, Adam and Josh – for making
Longwall House a wholesome place to live in. To Vikranth, Urmi, Mikesh,
Nikita, and Rhea – for ensuring that I was well-fed and had a home away
from home. And finally, to Vikaran, Bhagya, Swaraj, Mike, Madhav, Andrea,
Citlali, Poncho, Sneha, Ashwin, Mariyam, Zoe, Miriam, Kalpana, Radhika,
and Akshay, for their friendship over the years.
Finally, thanks to Arushi for her patience, her support, and for her steadfast
presence throughout my D.Phil. Lastly, I would like to thank my parents
Soumya and Rajgopal, and my grandfather, Ramanna, for their unwavering
support. I owe everything in this thesis to them.




                                       4
                                 Abstract


This thesis focuses on problems which themselves encode questions about
circuits or algorithms, also called meta-computational problems. The thesis
is centered on meta-computational problems like C-MCSP (minimum circuit
size problem), C-Learnability and C-Satisfiability, for some circuit class C. We
study mathematical questions pertaining to such problems, and their deep
connections to the theory of lower bounds, which is a general theme that has
attracted a lot of interest in recent years among complexity theorists.
We first study non-uniform lower bounds for MCSP (and its variants) mo-
tivated by its importance for the theory of Hardness Magnification. This
phenomenon reduces major complexity separations (such as NP 6⊆ NC1 ) to
proving “barely” non-trivial lower bounds for natural problems like MCSP
against weak circuit classes. In most interesting cases, we already have such
required lower bounds, but for a different, seemingly easier problem. Firstly,
we establish that instantiations of magnification for certain variants of MCSP
provably refute the existence of natural proofs against P/poly, which indicates
that the natural proofs barrier by Razborov-Rudich may not be relevant to
this approach. This is done by establishing a connection from hardness mag-
nification to hardness of efficiently learning polynomial-sized circuits. Next,
we investigate the future prospects of proving new lower bounds using magni-
fication. We identify a new source of difficulty called the locality barrier, when
trying to adapt existing lower bound techniques to prove strong separations
via magnification. We show that this barrier applies to many current in-
stantiations of hardness magnification, that involve a wide range of restricted
computational models.
Next we consider learnability, and initiate a top-down study of hardness of
learning circuit classes, i.e. we consider hardness of learning circuit classes
more powerful than P/poly. Our goal is to understand the power and lim-
itations of current complexity theoretic techniques in showing unconditional
results for learning. We show unconditional hardness results for efficiently
learning classes like BPE/poly, EXP/poly and PSPACE/poly on one hand, and
on the other, show that it is implausible that one can extend these ideas to
prove the NP-Hardness of learning classes like non-deterministic polynomial-
sized circuits, i.e. NP/poly.
Finally, we consider the algorithmic question of counting the number of sat-
isfying assignments of an input AC0 [2]-circuit. We construct a deterministic
                                                            1/d
#SAT-algorithm for AC0 [2] circuits of depth d and size 2O(n ) , which beats
brute-force running time non-trivially. The algorithm is designed using the
Razborov-Smolensky polynomial method, whose original motivation was to
prove AC0 [2] lower bounds. We then show a lower bound for ENP against
                             1/d+1 )
AC0 [2]-circuits of size 2Ω(n        , which was the best known lower bound against
this class until very recently.




                                        6
Contents

1 Introduction                                                                                    1
  1.1   Meta-Computational Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                  2
  1.2   Main Contributions and Outline of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                10
  1.3   List of Papers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          13

2 Preliminaries                                                                                   14
  2.1   Boolean Function Complexity - Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                14
  2.2   Learnability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          15
  2.3   Minimum Circuit Size Problem (MCSP)                 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16
  2.4   Kolmogorov Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               17
  2.5   Fourier Expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           17
  2.6   Concentration Inequalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            18

3 Hardness Magnification and Meta-computational Problems                                          19
  3.1   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          19
  3.2   Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           26
  3.3   Equivalences in Theorem 3.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             27
  3.4   Towards a More Robust Theory of Magnification                 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
                                     0
  3.5   Upper Bounds for THR-AC -MCSP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                   31
  3.6   Open Problems and Future Directions               . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   36

4 The Locality Barrier for Hardness Magnification                                                 37
  4.1   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          37
  4.2   Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           44
                                                  0
  4.3   HM Frontier for Gap MKtP and AC -XOR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                    49
  4.4   HM Frontier for Gap MCSP and Formula-XOR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                    57
  4.5   HM Frontier for Gap MCSP and Almost-Formulas . . . . . . . . . . . . .                    65
  4.6   HM Frontier for Gap MCSP and One-sided Error Randomised Formulas .                        73
                                                      0
  4.7   HM Frontier for (n − k)-Clique and AC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 79
  4.8   Locality Barrier for Lower Bounds Below the Threshold . . . . . . . . . .                 81

                                              i
  4.9   Concluding Remarks and Open Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            94

5 The Structure of Learnability beyond P/poly                                               96
  5.1   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    96
  5.2   Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    105
  5.3   Unconditional Results for Hardness of Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         107
  5.4   Robustness of learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     110
  5.5   Reducing Succinct Search to Decision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       115
  5.6   Barriers for Conditional Hardness of Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        118
  5.7   Open Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     123

6 Deterministic #SAT Algorithm for AC0 [2]                                                 125
  6.1   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   125
  6.2   Proof Outline for the Main Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         127
  6.3   Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    129
  6.4   The #SAT algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       133
  6.5   Future Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    141

7 Concluding Remarks                                                                       142

Bibliography                                                                               144




                                             ii
Chapter 1

Introduction

One of the main roles of complexity theory is to formally study the power and limita-
tions of various models designed to understand computation in an abstract sense, like
Turing machines or Boolean circuits. In particular, studying the limits, or lower bounds
of such computational models is an important endeavour. This is done by associating
natural complexity measures (like running time, space, circuit size/depth, number of
queries or the amount of randomness) for these models and then proving that certain
problems cannot be computed within a model when its associated complexity measures
are constrained. Proving a lower bound provides us with a deeper insight into the na-
ture of computation; it says something new about the computational model and thus,
algorithms in general. From a more practical viewpoint, complexity lower bounds create
boundaries for the efficiency of problems and save us from superfluous attempts to come
up with solutions for these problems beyond these boundaries.
   Of particular importance is the question of lower bounds against non-uniform models
of computation, i.e. models where different algorithms can be used to solve the problem on
different input lengths (unlike uniform models like Turing machines where one algorithm
solves the problem on all input lengths). Non-uniform models are generally represented as
Boolean circuits – computational devices obtained by forming a directed acyclic graph of
logical gates connected to each other by wires. Typically, the gates compute elementary
functions like AND, OR and NOT. In a very natural way, non-uniform models represent
computations which can be performed by hardware. These circuit models are further
refined by introducing structural constraints on them like the number of gates, depth of
the circuit or types of the gates allowed.
   Questions about the power of Boolean circuits are more combinatorial in nature and
thus, are more amenable to be tackled by different mathematical techniques. Further-
more, lower bounds on Boolean circuit models also resolve questions about uniform com-
putation, such as the P vs NP problem, or the BPP vs P problem, in addition to answering
fundamental questions in pseudorandomness, cryptography and learning theory.

                                             1
   An interesting class of problems to consider are meta-computational problems, which
themselves encode questions about circuits or algorithms. As we shall see, progress in
complexity theory is very intimately connected to studying these questions. Typically,
the inputs to these problems are Boolean functions, represented using some computational
object like a Turing machine/Boolean circuit, or as a truth table. Some famous examples
of such problems include the Halting Problem, Circuit Satisfiability, or the problem of
finding the Kolmogorov complexity of an input string. Furthermore, algorithmic solutions
for problems like Satisfiability have also found widespread use in practice.
    In this thesis, we study computational questions on meta-computational problems.
This includes designing algorithms and exploring computational limits of such problems.
As part of this process, we also make contributions to the ongoing attempts of establishing
connections between the complexity of these problems and lower bounds.


1.1      Meta-Computational Problems
To define some meta-computational problems formally, we first need to fix a circuit class
C, which is a set of functions that can be computed by a sequence of Boolean circuits of a
certain kind, one for each input length, with refinements obtained by placing constraints
on their structure and size (note that the size is measured as a function of the number of
inputs). In this thesis, our main focus is on the following meta-computational problems.

   • C-SAT : Given a C-circuit C as input, does there exist an input that is accepted by
      (or satisfies) C?

   • C-#SAT : Given a C-circuit C as input, how many inputs are accepted by C?

   • C-Minimum Circuit Size Problem (C-MCSP[s]) : Given the truth table of a
      Boolean function f and a number s, is there a C-circuit of size at most s which
      computes f ?

   • C-Learning : Given only query access to a function f ∈ C, can we output a
      small-sized circuit which approximates it?

It is worth noting that for each of these problems, although the method in which a
function is presented as input may differ, i.e. as a circuit, a truth table or an oracle, the
function is guaranteed to be from C.
   An intuitive reason for the deep connections between C-circuit lower bounds and C-
meta-computational problems is that both tasks need an intricate understanding of all
C-circuits, either to show that a “hard” function can not be computed by them, or to
obtain a better analysis of the algorithmic task.

                                             2
      Other important meta-computational questions pertain to the theory of derandomi-
sation and include, the C-Circuit Acceptance Probability Problem (C-CAPP), pseudoran-
dom generators (PRGs) for C and hitting set generators (HSGs) for C. Note that the
construction of PRGs and HSGs differ from typical meta-computational questions, in the
sense that no function is provided as an input. Rather, we broadly consider these as
algorithmic questions about C, e.g. can we construct an algorithm whose output appears
almost uniformly random to any function in C?
    We briefly mention some well known circuit classes that have been studied so far. One
of the most commonly agreed upon notions of easiness for non-uniform classes is the class
P/poly, which contains functions computable by a family of circuits with polynomially
many gates (called its size - measured as a function of the number of inputs), one for
each input length. Another standard class is NC1 , where each function is computable by a
sequence of polynomial-sized De Morgan formulas. A De Morgan formula is a binary tree
where each leaf is a literal and each internal node is an AND or OR gate. The formula size
is given by the number of leaves in the tree.1 Furthermore, we also look at constant-depth
polynomial-sized circuit classes like AC0 , AC0 [2] and ACC0 , which have unbounded fan-in
AND, OR, Mod2 (in case of AC0 [2]) or Modk for every integer k (in case of ACC0 ), and
NOT gates. We refer to [AB09, Juk12] for more details.
      Before stating the main contributions of this thesis, we summarise the myriad con-
nections between meta-computational problems and complexity lower bounds.

Circuit Satisfiability
Circuit Satisfiability (or C-SAT) is the canonical meta-computational problem, whose
study (or the study of its variants) has led to major advances in complexity theory like
the Cook-Levin theorem [AB09] which showed that CNF-SAT is NP-Complete, and the
PCP theorem [ALM+ 98, AS98] which showed that CNF-SAT is NP-Hard to approximate
(here, C is the class of functions computable by CNFs of polynomial size). In its most
general form, C = P/poly and the problem is denoted as Circuit-SAT.
   Designing C-SAT algorithms for various circuit classes C has been a serious research
endeavour on its own, from both theoretical and practical standpoints. However, the
last decade has seen the addition of another dimension to the study of SAT algorithms
– its connections to circuit lower bounds. It turns out that these connections can be
used to show lower bounds which have resisted the use of direct approaches so far. Some
forms of these connections have been known for a while now. Indeed, a collapse theorem
from [KL80] (attributed to Meyer) can be used to show that if CNF-SAT has polynomial
time algorithms, then EXP (deterministic exponential time) is not in P/poly. Another
  1
      A Boolean formula can be viewed as a Boolean circuit where each gate has fan-in 2 and fan-out 1.


                                                   3
well-known connection is via the “Satisfiability coding lemma”, which was established
by [PPZ97] to analyse their k-CNF-SAT algorithm. This lemma is then used by them to
show lower bounds against AC0 -circuits of depth 3.
   In more recent developments, Williams gave a refined version of this connection
[Wil13a, Wil14c], where a non-trivial algorithm2 for C[poly]-SAT implied that NEXP 6⊆
C[poly], where C[poly] is the class of functions computable by polynomial-sized C-circuits
and NEXP is non-deterministic exponential time. Additionally, he used this framework to
show that NEXP 6⊆ ACC0 , by designing a non-trivial ACC0 -SAT algorithm.3 Interestingly,
all known ACC0 -lower bounds are proved via this framework. Other approaches that have
been proposed are also based on the design of new meta-computational algorithms for
ACC0 ([CKK+ 15]). This framework has been called the algorithmic paradigm for proving
new circuit lower bounds. These connections have also been termed as transference the-
orems ([Oli13]), as they connect two seemingly different lines of research and show that
algorithmic results can be “transferred” to results on circuit lower bounds. For a gentle
introduction to these connections, see the surveys [San13, Oli13, Wil14a].
   Subsequently, many more circuit lower bounds have been proved using this paradigm,
by either strengthening the connection between SAT algorithms and lower bounds [Oli13,
Wil13b, Wil14b, Wil16, BSV14, MW18, CW19, VW20] and/or introducing new C-SAT or
C-#SAT algorithms [Wil14b, Tam16, ACW16, Wil18]. This approach has also contributed
towards proving average-case lower bounds for ACC0 [COS18, Che19, CR20, CLW20]. For
example, using a strengthened connection [MW18] show that non-deterministic quasi-
polynomial time cannot be computed by polynomial sized ACC0 -THR circuits, via a #SAT
algorithm for ACC0 -THR[poly] from [Wil14b].4
    On the other hand, the theory of circuit lower bounds has also contributed to advances
in the design of C-SAT algorithms. Broadly speaking, the lower bound for a weak circuit
class C (like constant-depth circuits) exposes some combinatorial or algebraic “weakness”
(i.e. a structural property) specific to all functions in C. Since the input instances to C-
SAT are also C-circuits, having such structure over all the input instances can be exploited
for algorithm design. In this vein, many recent SAT and #SAT algorithms for classes like
AC0 [BIS12, IMP12], formulas of sub-cubic size [San10, ST13, CKK+ 15, CKS16, Che15,
Tal15, KRT17], and linear-sized general circuits [CK15, GKST16] were developed by
adapting the techniques originally intended for their corresponding lower bounds. This
   2
     A C-SAT algorithm is non-trivial if it runs in 2n /nω(1) time, i.e. it is “just” better than brute-force.
   3
     ACC0 is the class of functions computed by polynomial-sized constant-depth circuits consisting of
unbounded fan-in AND, OR, NOT and MODm gates (modulus gates), for any positive integer m.
   4
     ACC0 -THR is the class of functions computable by ACC0 circuits, with a layer of weighted threshold
gates at the bottom.




                                                      4
template has also been extended to design non-trivial algorithms for variants like MAX-
SAT [CS15] (when the input CNFs are sparse), where the goal is to find an assignment
that maximises the number of satisfied clauses of the input CNF.
   Interestingly, a careful analysis of many of these SAT algorithms also gives us a con-
verse connection to circuit lower bounds. Most works above use the analysis of the re-
spective C-SAT (or C-#SAT) algorithms to show strong average-case lower bounds against
C. It must be noted that these connections from lower bounds to SAT algorithms are not
generic like Williams’ framework and are inspired by the specific lower bound proof for
the model in question.


C-Minimum circuit size problem (C-MCSP)
While unconditional circuit lower bounds have been known in many restricted settings (cf.
[Juk12]), extending this to stronger models has been fruitless so far. In their iconic paper
on the theory of natural proofs, Razborov and Rudich [RR97] proposed a conditional
explanation to address the reason for this difficulty.
      A natural property R is a subset of all Boolean functions, such that there is an efficient
algorithm (with respect to the truth table size of f ) that can check if f ∈ R (constructivity
condition). In addition, it is required that a non-trivial fraction of all functions belong to
R (density condition). [RR97] noted that most known circuit lower bound proofs (until
then) for classes C like AC0 and AC0 [2], used the following template: identify a natural
property R, such that no functions from C satisfy R and for some “explicit” hard function
h, show that h ∈ R (R is useful against C). For example, the lower bound for Parity
against AC0 [Ajt83, FSS84, Yao85, Hås86], identifies R as the subset of functions which
do not collapse to a constant under a suitable random restriction and observes that, while
any AC0 function does simplify, Parity does not.
    [RR97] show that under widely accepted cryptographic assumptions (existence of
strong one-way functions), there exists no efficient natural property useful against P/poly.
They argued that natural proofs are almost self-defeating: any lower bound proof using a
natural property provides an efficient algorithm (via constructivity), which would in turn
refute stronger lower bounds that are believed to hold. The moral of the story is that,
techniques successful for proving lower bounds against weak classes5 do not help us for
classes like P/poly or NC1 , as they provide such efficient algorithms. Informally speaking,
circuit lower bound proofs which use sufficiently constructive combinatorial arguments,
and apply not just to a specific function like Parity, but also to a dense subset of all
functions, cannot be hoped to extend to stronger classes. [NR04] showed that assuming
  5
      We refer to the preliminaries (Chapter 2) for inclusion of the circuit classes.



                                                      5
the existence of certain hard number-theoretic problems, there exists no natural property
useful against even depth-4 TC0 -circuits.6 It is still unknown whether classes like ACC0
or depth-2 TC0 , which are between depth-4 TC0 and AC0 [2], have any natural properties
as there is no known cryptographic barrier against this.
    This theory indicates that proving stronger circuit lower bounds might be tightly
related to studying meta-computational problems which refer to the computational com-
plexity of strings or truth tables. This has led to the study of MCSP, which put simply,
is the problem of deciding the circuit complexity of an input function. The input to C-
MCSP is the truth table tt(f ) of a Boolean function f on n variables and a size parameter
s = s(n), and the problem is to determine if f can be computed by C-circuits of size at
most s. It is worth noting that [HS17] show that a zero-error average-case version of
C-MCSP is equivalent to a natural property against C.
   For the most general case where C = P/poly, what do we know about the complexity of
MCSP? The short answer is – very little. On one hand, under reasonable cryptographic
assumptions, Kabanets-Cai [KC00] show that MCSP ∈
                                                / P. To lend further evidence
to this, problems like factoring and discrete logarithm which are not believed to be
solvable in polynomial time, reduce to MCSP [ABK+ 06]. Even for restricted circuit
classes, unproven explicit circuit lower bounds against C are necessary for the existence
of any sufficiently constructive natural properties against C [IKW02, OS17, IKV18]. In
fact, [Wil16] shows that even properties against C which are just constructive and useful
(but are not necessarily large), are equivalent to proving NEXP lower bounds against C.
On the other hand, MCSP belongs to NP, as a non-deterministic Turing machine can
guess a circuit of size at most s and check if it computes the input truth table, in time
polynomial in its input size 2n .
   One of the most important questions surrounding MCSP is its NP-Completeness (when
the size parameter is large). In fact, this question has been open since the discovery of the
theory of NP-Completeness and despite numerous works since, we don’t even have formal
evidence supporting or refuting the NP-Hardness of MCSP. Despite this, there has been
some success for special variants of C [AHM+ 08, HOS18, Ila20a, ILO20, Ila20b]. For the
general case, all we have is evidence that no proof of its NP-Completeness will be found
anytime soon. Indeed, [KC00, HP15, MW17, AHK17, SS20] show that the NP-Hardness
of MCSP under different kinds of reductions, most of which have been commonly used,
would imply lower bounds which are beyond the reach of current techniques. Switching
perspectives, one can think of these results as connecting uniform hardness results of a
meta-computational problem (NP-hardness in this case) to lower bounds in complexity.
   6
    TC0 is the class of functions computable by Boolean circuits of polynomial size and constant depth
with unbounded fan-in AND, OR, NOT and weighted threshold gates.



                                                  6
      Moving on to non-uniform hardness, MCSP (for certain parameter ranges) cannot be
computed by most standard restricted circuit classes [ABK+ 06, HS17, GII+ 19, CKLM19,
CJW20, CHMY20, KKL+ 20]. What makes further analysis of MCSP circuit lower bounds
interesting, is the striking phenomenon termed as hardness magnification by [OS18a].
They show that in several scenarios, even slightly super-linear (i.e. “barely” non-trivial)
lower bounds for some variants of MCSP against circuit classes like formulas or AC0 , imply
strong circuit lower bounds.
   For example, [OS18a] show that if an approximate variant of MCSP cannot be com-
puted by barely super-linear formulas, then NP is not in NC1 . Optimistically speaking,
we know that Parity cannot be computed by sub-quadratic formulas [Hås98], and worst-
                 o(1)
case MCSP[2n            ] cannot be computed by sub-quadratic formulas [HS17]. If any of these
lower bound ideas could be extended to approximate MCSP, then [OS18a] would show
that NP 6⊆ NC1 . For the pessimist, such results indicate that for some problems, weak
lower bounds are harder than previously imagined. If we believe that circuit lower bounds
such as NP 6⊆ NC1 are very hard to prove, then hardness magnification suggests there
should be other deep reasons why we cannot even prove weak lower bounds for MCSP
and other variants.
      Another related meta-computational problem which also leads to magnification phe-
nomena, is the minimum time-bounded Kolmogorov complexity problem or MKtP. Kt
complexity was first defined by Levin [Lev84] as: For any arbitrary universal Turing ma-
chine U , Kt(x) = min{|D| + log t | U (D) = x in at most t steps}. MKtP takes as input x
of length n and a parameter s ≤ n, and decides if Kt(x) ≤ s. This problem is also very
well studied from the perspective of meta-complexity and is known to be EXP-Complete
under P/poly reductions [ABK+ 06]. There are many variants of resource-bounded Kol-
mogorov complexity which are related to MCSP and MKtP. We refer the reader to the
papers [All01, ABK+ 06, All17] for further explanation of these variants.
      In some sense, where the theory of natural proofs creates a dichotomy between strong
and weak circuit classes, magnification indicates cases where this can be bridged. Where
earlier attempts at proving circuit lower bounds for restricted classes presumably served as
a natural starting point towards proving stronger lower bounds, magnification suggests
that it is sufficient to study such lower bounds for certain problems to prove strong
lower bounds.7 In any case (quoting [OS18a]), studying magnification leads to a win-
win situation: either we get strong lower bounds or we gain a better understanding
of barriers for proving circuit lower bounds. Put together, this has led to a spurt of
magnification results of various kinds over the last couple of years [Oli19, OPS19, CT19,
  7
      Certain people have also started to expand MCSP as “Makes Complexity Separations Possible”.




                                                  7
MMW19, CMMW19, CJW19, CJW20, CHMY20] (See [Sri03, AK10, LW13, MP20] for
some previous ones).
   MCSP and MKtP (and their variants) also offer philosophical insight into the age-old
question of how random a string is. Indeed, these problems equate a string which has a lot
of structure, so much so that it can be generated by an efficient algorithm (non-uniform or
uniform), to not being random. In addition to its connections to circuit lower bounds, the
study of MCSP and MKtP is also related to other areas in theoretical computer science
like cryptography [San20, LP20], worst-case to average-case reductions for NP [Hir18],
proof complexity [PS19] and learning theory [CIKK16] to name a few. We refer to the
recent survey by [All20] for further details of these connections. Considering its potential
impact, MCSP has of late emerged as the “new” canonical meta-computational problem.

Circuit Learnability
Understanding what classes of functions can be efficiently learned has been a major
research direction in computational learning theory since efficient learning was formalised
by Valiant [Val84].
   To make the following discussion clearer, we informally define the model of learning a
class C using membership queries over the uniform distribution. In this model, the learner
is given oracle access to any target Boolean function from C, and its aim is to produce,
with high probability, a hypothesis that approximates the target function well on the
uniform distribution. Note that, the hypothesis h is not required to be from the same
class C. Furthermore, we say that the learner is distribution independent, if the learner
outputs a correct hypothesis over any fixed target distribution over the inputs. A related
model is to learn using only random examples, where queries made to the oracle are also
drawn independently at random from the fixed target distribution. Precise definitions of
the learning models can be found in Chapter 2.
   Like SAT algorithms, lower bound techniques have been useful in designing learning
algorithms. Linial et al. [LMN93] designed a quasi-polynomial time learning algorithm for
AC0 using random examples over the uniform distribution, by adapting the technique used
to show AC0 lower bounds (i.e. random restrictions and the switching lemma [Hås86]).
[ST17] use lower bound techniques like random restrictions and Nečiporuk’s method,
to obtain distribution independent, exact (no error), non-trivial learning algorithms for
many classes including MAJ-AC0 and full-basis formulas of sub-quadratic size.
   Recall from the last section that natural properties against C are examples of meta-
computational problems which decide the circuit complexity of input truth tables. While
the above learning algorithms for C adapted the respective lower bound techniques, in




                                             8
a major development, [CIKK16] showed an important connection between two meta-
computational problems: any natural proof against C (C satisfies a mild technical con-
dition) implies a learning algorithm for C using membership queries over the uniform
distribution. This provides a rare example of a generic connection from circuit lower
bounds to learning algorithms. They used this framework to get a quasi-polynomial time
learning algorithm for AC0 [2] using membership queries over the uniform distribution. In
the converse direction, [OS17] show that any non-trivial learners for C can be used to
construct certain kinds of natural properties against C.
   A related problem is that of C-Compression: Given the truth table of a Boolean
function f ∈ C, print a non-trivial circuit that computes f , in polynomial time in the
size of the truth table, i.e. in 2O(n) time, print a circuit of size less than 2n /n which
computes f .8 Like SAT and learning algorithms, specific lower bound techniques have
been adapted to construct deterministic compression algorithms for classes like AC0 , sub-
cubic formulas and sub-quadratic full-basis formulas [CKK+ 15] and for AC0 [2] [KS18].
[ST17] also obtain deterministic compression algorithms for many other classes like span
programs, by adapting a different lower bound technique by Nečiporuk. [CIKK16] also
provide a generic connection from natural proofs against C to randomised compression
algorithms for C, building on their previously stated result.
      For any stronger circuit classes like ACC0 , we do not have any learning or compression
algorithms. One reason for this is that obtaining unproven lower bounds against C are
necessary for the existence of C-learners. Indeed, a sequence of results by [FK09, HH13,
KKO13, Vol14, OS17, COS18], showed that deterministic or randomised learning algo-
rithms for C in various models of learning imply unproven lower bounds for classes like
EXP, PSPACE or BPEXP against C. In particular, [OS17] showed an analogue of Williams’
connection, where non-trivial learners for C[poly] imply lower bounds for BPEXP (two-
sided bounded-error probabilistic exponential time) against C[poly]. In a similar vein,
[CKK+ 15] showed that polynomial time deterministic compression algorithms for C[poly]
also imply NEXP lower bounds against C.
    Stronger classes like P/poly or even depth-4 TC0 cannot be efficiently learnt using
membership queries, under widely acknowledged cryptographic assumptions [KV94a,
NR04]. However, we do not have such hardness results from weaker, complexity the-
oretic assumptions. Even showing the NP-hardness of PAC-learning P/poly is still out
of reach; [ABX08] rule out certain kinds of black-box reductions from SAT to learning
P/poly.9
  8
     Note that every Boolean function can be computed by a circuit of size 2n /cn, for some constant
c > 1 [Sha49].
   9
     They also show that certain other kinds of black-box NP-Hardness reductions would have major
cryptographic consequences.


                                                 9
       For other meta-computational tasks, well-known connections include the hardness vs
randomness paradigm [NW94, IW97] which connects circuit lower bounds to pseudo-
random generator/hitting set generator constructions, and the non-trivial C-CAPP algo-
rithms to circuit lower bounds framework [Wil13a, CW19, CR20, CLW20].


1.2         Main Contributions and Outline of the Thesis
The thesis is thematically composed of two parts. In Chapters 3, 4 and 5 we study
the hardness of meta-computational problems like C-MCSP and C-learning, their inter-
connections and their implications to complexity lower bounds. Following this, in Chapter
6, we study algorithmic results for C-#SAT obtained from lower bound proofs against C.
We also provide conclusions and open problems at the end of each chapter, and end the
thesis with concluding remarks in Chapter 7.

Chapter 2: Preliminaries
In this chapter, we establish notation that is used over the thesis. Notation which is
chapter specific is stated in appropriate places.

Chapter 3: Hardness Magnification and Meta-Computational Problems
Hardness magnification is a phenomenon which reduces major complexity separations
(such as EXP * NC1 ) to proving lower bounds for some natural problem Q against weak
circuit models. In the most intriguing cases, the required lower bound is known for
problems that appear to be significantly easier than Q, while Q itself is susceptible to
lower bounds but these are not yet sufficient for magnification.
       In this chapter, we consider the following essential question associated with the pro-
gram: Does hardness magnification avoid the natural proofs barrier of Razborov and
Rudich [RR97]?
       We establish that some instantiations of hardness magnification avoid the natural
proofs barrier in the following sense: slightly superlinear-size circuit lower bounds for
certain versions of MCSP imply the non-existence of natural proofs. We prove this result
by establishing that certain magnification theorems not only imply strong worst-case
circuit lower bounds, but also rule out the existence of efficient learning algorithms.
       In addition, we observe that this reduction naturally offers a refined connection be-
tween a variant of C-MCSP and self-learning algorithms for C.10 Using this connection,
  10
     C is self-learnable if C[s(n] can be learnt using C-circuits of size t(n) (typically, 2n /nω(1) ≥ t(n) ≥
s(n)), such that the learner outputs descriptions of C-circuits as hypotheses which can be interpreted and
efficiently evaluated by C-circuits (cf. [OS18b]). Contrast this with proper learning where the learner is
also expected to output C-hypotheses, but the learner can belong to any circuit class.



                                                     10
we prove that an approximate variant of (THR-AC0 )-MCSP for suitable size parameters,
is computable by super-linear TC0 circuits. This is obtained by showing that the learning
algorithm for THR-AC0 by [GS10] is in fact a self-learner.

Chapter 4: The Locality Barrier for Hardness Magnification
In this chapter, we continue our study of hardness magnification and reflect on the po-
tential of using current lower bound techniques to establish strong lower bounds via this
program. To this end, we formulate scenarios which make an instantiation of magnifi-
cation interesting; a situation where we are at the cusp of proving strong lower bounds
using magnification. We call such scenarios as HM Frontiers. We establish these HM
frontiers via a mix of existing and new magnification theorems, and circuit lower bounds.
   We then study another important question associated with the hardness magnification
program: Can we adapt known lower bound techniques to establish the desired lower
bound for Q? Continuing from Chapter 3, we observe that hardness magnification might
sidestep natural proofs, but we identify a source of difficulty when trying to adapt existing
lower bound techniques to prove strong lower bounds via magnification.
   This is captured by a locality barrier : existing magnification theorems uncondition-
ally show that the problems Q considered above admit highly efficient circuits extended
with small fan-in oracle gates, while lower bound techniques against weak circuit models
quite often easily extend to circuits containing such oracles. This explains why direct
adaptations of certain lower bounds are unlikely to yield strong complexity separations
via hardness magnification.

Chapter 5: Structure of Learnability beyond P/poly
We now turn our attention to studying lower bounds for the complexity of C-learning.
Motivated by the goal of showing stronger structural results about the complexity of
learning, we study the learnability of strong concept classes beyond P/poly, such as
PSPACE/poly and EXP/poly. We show the following:

   1. (Unconditional Lower Bounds for Learning) Building on [KKO13], we prove un-
       conditionally that BPE/poly cannot be weakly learned in polynomial time over the
       uniform distribution, even with membership and equivalence queries.

   2. (Robustness of Learning) For the concept classes EXP/poly and PSPACE/poly, we
       show unconditionally that worst-case and average-case learning11 are equivalent,
       that PAC-learnability and learnability over the uniform distribution are equivalent,
       and that membership queries do not help in either case.
  11
    Informally, an average-case C-learner outputs a good hypothesis (say, over the uniform distribution
on the inputs) for any target function sampled with respect to some fixed distribution over C.


                                                  11
   3. (Reducing Succinct Search to Decision for Learning) Let RKt (respectively RKS ) be
      the set of strings with high Kt complexity (respectively space-bounded Kolmogorov
      complexity, KS complexity). For the decision problems RKt and RKS capturing the
      complexity of learning EXP/poly and PSPACE/poly respectively, we show a succinct
      search to decision reduction: for each of these problems, the problem is in BPP iff
      there is a probabilistic polynomial-time algorithm computing circuits which encode
      proofs for positive instances of the problem. This is shown via a more general result
      giving succinct search to decision results for PSPACE, EXP and NEXP, which might
      be of independent interest.

   4. (Implausibility of Oblivious Strongly Black-Box Reductions showing NP-hardness of
      learning NP/poly) We define a natural notion of hardness of learning with respect
      to oblivious strongly black-box reductions. We show that learning PSPACE/poly is
      PSPACE-hard with respect to oblivious strongly black-box reductions. On the other
      hand, if learning NP/poly is NP-hard with respect to oblivious strongly black-box
      reductions, the Polynomial Hierarchy collapses.


Chapter 6: Deterministic #SAT Algorithm for AC0 [2]
The previous chapters have studied (uniform and non-uniform) hardness of problems like
C-MCSP and C-learning, and their implications to lower bounds. In this chapter, we
take a dual approach and study algorithmic upper bounds for C-#SAT algorithms, using
C-lower bound methods.
    Our main result of this chapter is a deterministic algorithm for counting the number of
satisfying assignments of any AC0 [2] circuit C of size s and depth d over n variables in time
                                                                            1/d )
2n−f (n,s,d) , where f (n, s, d) = n/O(log(s))d−1 , whenever s = 2o(n               . The algorithm falls
within the general framework of using the polynomial method in circuit complexity [Raz87,
Smo87] for algorithm design, particularly C-SAT algorithms [Wil14c, Wil14b, CW16,
ACW16, LPT+ 17]. Our algorithm is obtained via a derandomisation of Razborov and
Smolensky’s probabilistic polynomial construction for AC0 [2]-circuits, which was initially
used by them to show AC0 [2] lower bounds.
   As a consequence, we get that for each d, there is a language in ENP that does not
                                 1/(d+1) )
have AC0 [2] circuits of size 2o(n           . This is the first lower bound in ENP against AC0 [⊕]
                                                    1/2(d−1) )
circuits that beats the lower bound of 2Ω(n                      due to Razborov and Smolensky for
large d. Both our algorithm and our lower bounds extend to AC0 [p] circuits for any prime
p.




                                                   12
1.3     List of Papers
The majority of results in this thesis are from the following series of papers:

   • Ninad Rajgopal, Rahul Santhanam, and Srikanth Srinivasan
      Deterministically Counting Satisfying Assignments for Constant-Depth
      Circuits with Parity Gates, with Implications for Lower Bounds [RSS18]
      Proceedings of 43rd International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Com-
      puter Science, (MFCS 2018).
      The results from this paper appear in Chapter 6.

   • Lijie Chen, Shuichi Hirahara, Igor Carboni Oliveira, Ján Pich, Ninad Rajgopal, and
      Rahul Santhanam
      Beyond Natural Proofs: Hardness Magnification and Locality [CHO+ 20]
      Proceedings of 11th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference, (ITCS
      2020).
      To Appear in Journal of the ACM (JACM).
      Most results in Chapters 3 and 4 appear from this paper.

   • Ninad Rajgopal, and Rahul Santhanam
      On the Structure of Learnability Beyond P/poly [RS21]
      Proceedings of Approximation, Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization,
      (APPROX/RANDOM 2021).
      The results from this paper appear in Chapter 5.




                                            13
Chapter 2

Preliminaries

2.1         Boolean Function Complexity - Basics
Let F = {Fn }, where Fn is the set of all Boolean functions fn : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}.
Any function f defines a corresponding language L ⊆ {0, 1}∗ , where for each n ≥ 1,
Ln = {0, 1}n ∩ L = fn−1 (1).
    For any fn ∈ Fn , define tt(fn ) as its truth table of length 2n . On the other hand,
                         n
given a string x ∈ {0, 1}2 , define fn(x) as the function on n inputs whose truth table is
x. Throughout this thesis, we use N = 2n as the length of the truth table of any function
in Fn .
    Let C = {Cn } be a class of Boolean functions, where each Cn ⊆ Fn . In this thesis,
we are mostly concerned with classes C computable by Boolean circuits and its variants.
For any circuit class C, we say that any function f ∈ C[s(n)], if there exists a sequence
of s(n)-sized (according to some predefined measure for size) C-circuits {Cn }n∈N , one
for each input length, such that, for every n large enough, Cn computes fn . Moreover,
any class D is contained in C[poly(n)] if for every f ∈ D, there exists k ≥ 1 such that
f ∈ C[nk ].
   In particular, SIZE[s] denotes functions computable by Boolean circuits with AND,OR
and NOT gates of fan-in 2 and size at most s, where the number of gates is defined
as the size. SIZE[poly(n)] is defined as P/poly. Similarly, Formula[s] denotes functions
computable by Boolean formulas over the De Morgan basis (ANDs and ORs) of size at
most s, where input leaves are labelled by literals or constants, and gates have fan-in two
and fan-out is restricted to be one. Here, we count the number of leaves of a formula as
its size.
  We also consider standard constant-depth circuit classes like AC0 , AC0 [p], ACC0 and
TC0 . Wherever it is clear by context, we will also use the notation Cd to refer to circuit
classes of constant depth d. We also consider circuit classes of logarithmic depth like



                                            14
NC1 . Note that, Formula[poly(n)] is equivalent to NC1 . For size poly(n), the inclusion of
these circuit classes is given by -

                  CNF, DNF ( AC0 ( AC0 [p] ( ACC0 ⊆ TC0 ⊆ NC1 ⊆ P/poly

We use a few other standard notions and complexity classes. We refer to textbooks in
computational complexity and circuit complexity [AB09, Juk12] for more details.
      Given a sequence of Boolean functions {Om } with Om : {0, 1}m → {0, 1}, we let C O
denote the extension of C that consists of functions computable by a sequence {Cn } of
oracle C-circuits, which have access to oracle gates Om , for some m.
   For every n ∈ N, define Un as the uniform distribution over {0, 1}n . For any distri-
bution W , we use w ∼ W to denote an element sampled according to W . A function
f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} is γ-approximated by a circuit C on n inputs, if Prx∼Un [C(x) =
f (x)] ≥ γ. Further, we say that for any f, g over n inputs, f is γ-approximated by g, if
Prx∼Un {f (x) = g(x)} ≥ γ.


2.2        Learnability
We first define the notion of PAC-learning using random examples, introduced in [Val84].
Let C = {Cn } be a class of functions and D = {Dn } be a distribution family over {0, 1}∗ ,
where Dn is a distribution over {0, 1}n . We call ε as the error parameter and δ as the
confidence parameter.

Definition 2.1 (Worst-case PAC-learning using random examples). For any 0 ≤
ε, δ < 1/2, a class C is (ε, δ)-PAC-learnable in the worst-case using random examples in
time T (n), if there exists a randomised algorithm A such that

   • For every n ∈ N , for every f ∈ Cn , for every Dn over {0, 1}n , A takes as inputs
     1n , ε, δ, a set of m = m(n) labeled samples (x1 , f (x1 )), . . . , (xm , f (xm )) where each
        xi ∼ Dn , and w ∈ {0, 1}r(n) as internal randomness. A then outputs the description
        of a circuit h such that
                                                                                   
                                 Pr                     Pr {h(y) = f (y)} ≥ 1 − ε       ≥1−δ
                      w∈{0,1}r(n) ,x1 ,...,xm ∼Dn   y∈Dn


   • A runs in time at most T (n).1

      We can also restrict the learnability to a fixed distribution like the uniform distribution
Un , where the learner takes random examples chosen over Un and hypothesis error is also
measured over Un .
  1
      Note that this immediately implies that m(n) ≤ T (n)


                                                          15
   Furthermore, we can extend this definition to PAC-learning over membership queries
by giving A oracle access to the target function f ∈ Cn , in addition to the random
examples drawn from some fixed distribution Dn .
   We also find it useful to define C-learning, where the learning algorithm is now non-
uniform.

Definition 2.2 (Non-uniform learners using membership queries). For any 0 ≤ ε, δ <
1/2 and size function t : N → N, a circuit class C is (ε, δ)-learnable over the uniform
distribution by D[t(n)]-circuits, if there exists a sequence of randomised oracle D-circuits
{A(.)n }n∈N , such that for every f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} computable by a C-circuit, when A(.)n
is given oracle access to f and an input random string w ∈ {0, 1}t(n) , Afn (w) outputs the
description of a circuit such that

                       Pr{Afn (w) (1 − ε)-approximates f } ≥ 1 − δ.
                          w

   A(.)n uses non-adaptive membership queries if the set of queries which A(.)n makes to
the oracle does not depend on the answers to previous queries.

We refer to [KV94b] for more details on PAC-learning.


2.3      Minimum Circuit Size Problem (MCSP)
Recall that N = 2n . For any n ≤ s(n) ≤ 2n /n, the minimum circuit size problem with
parameter s(n) or MCSP[s(n)], takes a truth table w ∈ {0, 1}N as input and accepts it iff
there exists a circuit of size s(n) which computes fn(w). For any circuit class Cd , consider
a natural variant of this problem Cd -MCSP[s(n)] which checks if the input string can be
compressed to a Cd -circuit of size at most s(n).

Definition 2.3 (Generalisation of MCSP). Let s, t : N → N, where s(n) ≤ t(n) and
0 ≤ ε, σ < 1/2. Define MCSP[(s, σ), (t, ε)] on inputs of length N = 2n , as the following
promise problem:

   • YES instances: y ∈ {0, 1}N such that there exists a circuit of size s(n) that (1 − σ)-
      approximates fy .

   • NO instances: y ∈ {0, 1}N such that no circuit of size t(n) (1 − ε)-approximates fy .

   We refer to MCSP[(s, 0), (t, 0)] as MCSP[s, t]. Informally, if ε > 0, we say that
MCSP[(s, 0), (t, ε)] is an approximate version of MCSP. If ε = 0, we refer to it as the
worst-case version of MCSP or just Gap MCSP (when s < t).

Remark 2.4. In Definition 2.3, if s(n) = t(n), we also require that σ ≤ ε for the yes
and no instances to be disjoint.

                                             16
2.4     Kolmogorov Complexity
Fix a universal Turing machine U . Levin [Lev84] defined the following notion of time-
bounded Kolmogorov complexity: The Kt complexity of a string x or Kt(x), is the min-
imum over |p| + log(t), where p is a program and |p| is its description length, such that
U (p) = x in at most t steps. It is known from [All01] that Kt(x) is polynomially related
to the size of the smallest EXP-oracle circuit computing the function with truth table x
(truncating x to its longest initial segment with length a power of two).
  The problem MKtP[s] takes a string x ∈ {0, 1}N as input and accepts it iff Kt(x) ≤ s.
We also define the promise version of this problem MKtP[s, t], called as Gap MKtP, where
the YES instances are those with Kt complexity at most s and NO instances are those
with Kt complexity larger than t (cf. [OPS19]).
    Similarly, KS(x) is the minimum over |p| + s such that U (p) = x in at most space s.
It is known from [All01] that KS(x) is polynomially related to the size of the smallest
PSPACE-oracle circuit computing the function with truth table x (truncating x to its
longest initial segment with length a power of two).
   Define RKt as the language consisting of strings x such that Kt(x) ≥ |x|/2 [ABK+ 06].
Similarly, define RKS as the language consisting of strings x such that KS(x) ≥ |x|/2
[ABK+ 06].


2.5     Fourier Expansion
For convenience, we use the {−1, 1} realisation of the Boolean domain (i.e. −1 represents
True and 1 represents False) in this section. We also assume that the output of the
Boolean function is a real value.
   Any function f : {−1, 1}n → R has a unique multilinear polynomial representation:
                                      X
                              f (x) =     fb(S) · χS (x)
                                            S⊆[n]
                              Q
where the monomial χS (x) = i∈S xi is the parity of x over the subset S, and the Fourier
coefficients fb(S) ∈ R are given by

                                    fb(S) = Ex [f (x) · χS (x)]

   In particular, any Boolean function f : {−1, 1}n → {−1, 1} can be represented by a
multilinear polynomial of degree at most n where each coefficient is between [−1, 1].
  The Fourier weight of f : {−1, 1}n → R on a set S is defined to be fb(S)2 . For any
function f : {−1, 1}n → R, we say that the Fourier weight of f is (1 − ε)-concentrated
on degree t, if S⊆[n],|S|≤t fb(S)2 ≥ 1 − ε. See [O’D14] for more details about the Fourier
               P

expansion and proofs.

                                                17
2.6        Concentration Inequalities
We use the following concentration bounds in the thesis.

Lemma 2.5 (Markov’s inequality). If X is a non-negative random variable and a > 0,
then
                                                  E[X]
                                    Pr{X ≥ a} ≤
                                                   a
   Another concentration inequality we use is Chebyshev’s inequality, which is a conse-
quence of Markov’s inequality.

Lemma 2.6 (Chebyshev’s inequality). Let X be a random variable. Then, for any t > 0,

                                                      Var(X)
                              Pr{|X − E[X]| > t} ≤
                                                        t2
where Var(X) is the variance of X.
   Finally, we make use of Hoeffding’s inequality which provides a stronger tail bound.

Lemma 2.7 (Hoeffding’s inequality). Let X1 , . . . , Xn be independent random variables
such that 0 ≤ Xi ≤ 1 for every i ∈ [n]. Let X = ni=1 Xi . Then, for any ε > 0, we have
                                               P


                           Pr{|X − E[X]| ≥ t} ≤ 2 exp(−2t2 /n)

   As an application of Lemma 2.7, we show the existence of functions which cannot be
approximated by polynomial-sized circuits.

Lemma 2.8 (cf. Lemma 4 in [OS17]). For any s(n) ≥ n and δ ∈ [0, 1/2], we have

       Pr {∃ circuit of size ≤ s(n) computing f on ≥ (1/2 + δ)-fraction of the inputs}
   f ∼Fn

                                   ≤ exp(−δ 2 2n + 10s log s)




                                            18
Chapter 3

Hardness Magnification and
Meta-computational Problems

3.1     Introduction
Proving circuit size lower bounds for explicit Boolean functions is a central problem in
complexity theory. Unfortunately, it is also notoriously hard, and arguments ruling out
a wide range of approaches have been discovered. The most prominent of them is the
natural proofs barrier of Razborov and Rudich [RR97].
   A candidate approach for overcoming this barrier was investigated recently by Oliveira
and Santhanam [OS18a]. Hardness Magnification identifies situations where strong circuit
lower bounds for explicit Boolean functions (e.g. NP 6⊆ P/poly) follow from much weaker
(e.g. slightly superlinear) lower bounds for specific natural problems. As discussed in
[OS18a] (and Section 1.1), in some cases the lower bounds required for magnification
are already known for explicit problems, but not yet for the problem for which the
magnification theorem holds. This approach to lower bounds has attracted the interest
of several researchers, and a number of recent works have proved various magnification
results. We provide a concise review of existing results next, to put magnification in
perspective.

3.1.1    Previous Work
We focus on some representative examples. For definitions and more details, we refer to
Section 2 or the original papers.

Srinivasan [Sri03] (Informal). If there exists ε > 0 such that n1−o(1) -approximating
MAX-CLIQUE requires Boolean circuits of size at least m1+ε (where m = Θ(n2 )), then
NP * SIZE[poly].



                                           19
Allender-Koucký [AK10] and Chen-Tell [CT19]. Let BFE be the Boolean formula
evaluation problem, WS5 be the monoid problem on symmetric group S5 and W5-STCONN
be the s-t connectivity problem on directed graphs of width 5.
The following results hold.

   • Let Π ∈ {BFE, WS5 , W5-STCONN}. Suppose that for each c > 1, there exist in-
                                                                                          −d
     finitely many d ∈ N, such that TC0 circuits of depth d require more than n1+c
     wires to solve Π. Then, NC1 * TC0 .

   • Suppose that for each c > 1, there exist infinitely many d ∈ N, such that Majority
                                                              −d
     cannot be computed by ACC0 circuits of depth d with n1+c wires. Then Majority ∈  /
     ACC0 , and consequently TC0 * ACC0 .

Lipton-Williams [LW13]. Let CircEval be the Circuit Evaluation Problem. If there is
                                                  / Size-Depth[n1+ε , n1−δ ], then for every
ε > 0, such that for every δ > 0 we have CircEval ∈
                                 / Size-Depth[nk , n1−γ ] (in particular P * NC1 ).
k ≥ 1 and γ > 0 we have CircEval ∈


Oliveira-Santhanam [OS18a]. The following results hold.

   • Let s(n) = nk and δ(n) = n−k , where k ∈ N. If MCSP[(s, 0), (s, δ)] ∈
                                                                         / Formula[N 1+ε ]
     for some ε > 0, then there is L ∈ NP over m-bit inputs, where m = poly(s), and
                                       γ
                       / Formula[2m ].
     γ > 0 such that L ∈

   • Suppose there exists k ≥ 1, such that for every d ≥ 1 there is εd > 0 for which
                          / AC0d [N 1+εd ], where s(n) = nk and δ(n) = n−k . Then NP *
     MCSP[(s, 0), (s, δ)] ∈
     NC1 .

   • Let k(n) = no(1) . If there exists ε > 0 such that k-Vertex-Cover ∈
                                                                       / DTISP[m1+ε , mo(1) ]
     (deterministic time-space), where the input is an n-vertex graph represented by an
     adjacency matrix of bit length m = Θ(n2 ), then P 6= NP.

   • Let k(n) = (log n)C , where C ∈ N is arbitrary. If for every d ≥ 1 there exists ε > 0
     such that k-Vertex-Cover ∈/ AC0d [m1+ε ], then NP * NC1 .

Oliveira-Pich-Santhanam [OPS19] and McKay-Murray-Williams [MMW19]
(Informal). If there exists ε > 0 such that for every small enough β > 0,

   • MCSP[2βn ] ∈
                / SIZE[N 1+ε ], then NP * P/poly.

                / TC0 [N 1+ε ], then EXP * TC0 [poly].
   • MKtP[2βn ] ∈

                / U2 -Formula[N 3+ε ], then EXP * NC1 .
   • MKtP[2βn ] ∈

                                            20
                / B2 -Formula[N 2+ε ], then EXP * NC1 .
   • MKtP[2βn ] ∈

                / Formula-XOR[N 1+ε ], then EXP * NC1 .
   • MKtP[2βn ] ∈

   • MKtP[2βn ] ∈
                / BP[N 2+ε ], then EXP * BP[poly].

                / (AC0 [6])[N 1+ε ], then EXP * AC0 [6].
   • MKtP[2βn ] ∈
Many magnification results for MKtP admit analogues for MrKtP, introduced by [Oli19],
which considers a randomised version of Kt complexity. An advantage of MrKtP is that
strong unconditional lower bounds against uniform computations are known, while such
hardness for problems such as MCSP and MKtP currently relies on cryptographic assump-
tions.
    [MMW19] also show magnification from weak lower bounds against one-pass streaming
algorithms to separating P and NP, which was later observed to extend to weak lower
bounds against one-tape Turing machines by [CHMY20].

Chen-McKay-Murray-Williams [CMMW19] and Chen-Jin-Williams [CJW19]
(Informal). The following results hold.
   • If there is ε > 0, c ≥ 1, and an nc -sparse language L ∈ NP such that L ∈
                                                                             / SIZE[n1+ε ],
      then NE * SIZE[2δ·n ] for some δ > 0.
                                                                        β
   • If there is ε > 0, such that for every β ∈ (0, 1), there exists a 2n -sparse language
     Lβ ∈ NP, where Lβ ∈  / SIZE[n1+ε ], then for every k > 0, NP 6⊆ SIZE[nk ].
[CJW19] established that many hardness magnification theorems for problems such as
MCSP hold in fact under the assumption that a sufficiently sparse and explicit family
of languages in NP admits weak lower bounds in many models previously considered,
leading to arbitrary fixed-polynomial NP lower bounds. We refer to their work for more
details.

[CJW20] (Informal). If there exists ε > 0 such that for every small enough β > 0,
   • MCSP[2βn ] does not have N 2+ε -size probabilistic formulas, then ⊕P 6⊆ NC1 .

   • MKtP[2βn ] does not have N 2+ε -size probabilistic formulas, then EXP 6⊆ NC1 .
Interestingly, [CJW20] also show an unconditional lower bound for MCSP and MKtP
against N 2−ε -sized probabilistic formulas (with the same size parameter). In other words,
they show an arbitrarily small gap between the magnification threshold and known lower
bounds for probabilistic formulas, which is known for very few other magnification results.
   Hardness Magnification results have also been established in related areas, such as
extended-Frege lower bounds in proof complexity [MP20] and non-commutative arith-
metic circuit lower bounds [CILM18].

                                              21
3.1.2        Our Results
The theory of natural proofs [RR97] suggests that proving strong unconditional circuit
lower bounds might be tightly related to the study of meta-computational problems which
decide the computational complexity of strings or truth tables. The theory of hardness
magnification provides further motivation to study such problems, and in fact, builds off
the natural proofs barrier, which indicates the hardness of MCSP, to attack strong circuit
lower bounds.
   A glance at the various magnification results in Section 3.1.1 suggests a striking phe-
nomenon associated with such problems. For models like De Morgan formulas ([OPS19,
MMW19]), if we could establish lower bounds for problems like MCSP or MKtP (in cer-
tain parameter ranges) that even marginally improve the current state of art (which is
N 3−o(1) ), then super-polynomial explicit lower bounds (like EXP 6⊆ NC1 ) would follow.
   More intriguingly, for certain models like Formula-XOR (formulas with a bottom
layer of XOR gates), even a super-linear lower bound for MKtP, which is below the
best-known, quadratic lower bound against this model (but for another problem Inner-
Product), implies that EXP 6⊆ NC1 . In another interesting case, [OPS19] show that if
         1/3  2/3
MCSP[2n , 2n ] ∈  / SIZE[N 1+ε ], then NP 6⊆ P/poly. On the other hand, [HS17] show sub-
quadratic formula size lower bounds for MCSP in the same parameter range. Thus, if the
[OPS19] magnification theorem could be made to work for formulas instead, NP 6⊆ NC1
would follow unconditionally! Such examples inspire further exploration of MCSP lower
bounds, as well as associated hardness magnification phenomena. We study these instan-
tiations in more detail in Chapter 4.
       As such, most results in this program are still centered on proving weak lower bounds
for problems like MCSP or MKtP. Magnification for such meta-complexity problems
crucially exploits the difference between their feasible (succinct inputs) and infeasible
(truth table inputs) formulations. Notwithstanding this, there are a few examples of
magnification from weak lower bounds for other problems like k-Vertex Cover [OS18a], or
even the existence of a sufficiently sparse and explicit family of languages in NP [CJW19].1
   In this chapter, we attempt to expand our intuition on magnification phenomena for
MCSP (and variants), by studying the following question: Is hardness magnification a
non-naturalising approach to circuit lower bounds? If we accept standard cryptographic
assumptions, non-naturalisability is a necessary property of any successful approach to
strong circuit lower bounds [RR97].
       The initial hardness magnification theorem of Oliveira and Santhanam [OS18a] pro-
poses to approach NP 6⊆ P/poly by deriving slightly super-linear circuit lower bounds
   1
    For example, MCSP[s(n)] is a sparse language in NP: On inputs of length N , the language contains
at most 2O(s(n) log s(n)) truth tables of length N , computable by circuits of size s(n).


                                                 22
for specific problems such as approximate MCSP (with appropriate parameters), which
asks to distinguish truth-tables of Boolean functions computable by small circuits from
truth-tables of Boolean functions which are hard to approximate by small circuits. In-
terestingly, this approach does not seem to naturalise, as it appears to yield strong lower
bounds only for certain problems, and not for most of them (the same heuristic argument
appears in [AK10]). However, this is only an informal argument, and we would like to
get stronger evidence that the natural proofs barrier does not apply here.
   One way of avoiding the natural proofs barrier is to prove that there are no natural
proofs. We show that hardness magnification for approximate MCSP can be used to con-
clude the non-existence of natural proofs against polynomial-size circuits. More precisely,
we prove that if approximate MCSP requires slightly super-linear-size circuits, then there
are no P/poly-natural properties against P/poly. This suggests that the natural proofs
barrier isn’t relevant to the magnification approach. Indeed, there remains the possibility
that the weak circuit lower bound for approximate MCSP in the hypothesis of the result
can be shown using naturalising techniques (as there aren’t any strong enough plausible
cryptographic conjectures known that rule this out), and yet by using magnification to
“break” naturalness, we could get strong circuit lower bounds and even conclude the
non-existence of natural proofs!
   The core of our proof is the following new hardness magnification theorem: if approx-
imate MCSP requires slightly super-linear-size circuits, then not only NP 6⊆ P/poly but
it is impossible even to learn efficiently. In other words, we establish a highly efficient
reduction between two well-studied meta-computational tasks – from approximate MCSP
to efficiently learning P/poly. We can then refute the existence of natural proofs by
applying the known translation of natural properties to learning algorithms [CIKK16].
Similar implications hold with a worst-case gap version of MCSP instead of approximate
MCSP, following an idea from [Hir18].
   Interestingly, all the implications above are actually equivalences. In particular, the
existence of natural properties is equivalent to the existence of highly efficient circuits
for computing approximate MCSP and worst-case gap MCSP with certain parameters
(cf. Theorem 3.1). This extends a known characterisation of natural properties: [CIKK16]
showed that P/poly natural proofs against P/poly are equivalent to learning P/poly by
subexponential-size circuits, which was in turn shown to be equivalent by Oliveira and
Santhanam [OS17] to the non-existence of non-uniform pseudorandom function families
of sub-exponential security. The connection of hardness magnification to learning and
pseudorandom function generators might be of independent interest, since it extends the
consequences of magnification into two central areas in Complexity Theory.



                                            23
      Theorem 3.1 (Equivalences for Hardness Magnification). The following statements are
      equivalent2 :

       (a) Hardness of approximate MCSP against almost-linear size circuits.
                                                                               γ
           There exist c ≥ 1, 0 < γ < 1, and ε > 0 such that MCSP[(nc , 0), (2n , n−c )] ∈
                                                                                         /
              SIZE[N 1+ε ].

       (b) Hardness of worst-case MCSP against almost-linear size circuits.
              There exists c ≥ 1 and ε > 0 such that MCSP[nc , 2n /nc−2 ] ∈
                                                                          / SIZE[N 1+ε ].

       (c) Hardness of sub-exponential size learning using non-adaptive queries.
           There exist ` ≥ 1 and 0 < γ < 1 such that SIZE[n` ] cannot be learned up to
              error O(1/n` ) with confidence 1/n under the uniform distribution, by circuits of
                         γ
              size 2O(n ) using non-adaptive membership queries.

       (d ) Non-existence of natural properties against polynomial size circuits.
              For some d ≥ 1 there is no SIZE[poly(N )]-natural property useful against SIZE[nd ].

       (e) Existence of non-uniform PRFs secure against sub-exponential size
              circuits.
              For every constant a ≥ 0, there exists d ≥ 1, a sequence F = {Fn }n≥1 of families Fn
              of n-bit Boolean functions fn ∈ SIZE[nd ], and a sequence of probability distributions
              D = {Dn }n≥1 supported over Fn such that, for infinitely many values of n, (Fn , Dn )
              is pseudo-random function family that (1/N ω(1) )-fools (oracle) circuits of size 2a·n .

      The proof of this result appears in Section 3.3. Our main technical contributions in this
      proof are the connections from Items (a) to Item (c) (and Item (b) to Item (c)). We
      highlight below the most interesting implications of Theorem 3.1. (Note that some of
      them have appeared in other works in similar or related forms (like [CIKK16, OS17])).

(a) → (d ): The initial hardness magnification result from [OS18a, Theorem 1] (stated for cir-
              cuits) implies the non-existence of natural proofs useful against polynomial-size
              circuits, indicating that the natural proofs barrier might not be relevant to the
              magnification approach. Additionally, this indicates that magnification instanti-
              ations from certain variants of MCSP could be “special”, in the sense that they
              provably refute the existence of natural properties against P/poly.
        2
            See Preliminaries (Sections 2 and 3.2) for definitions.




                                                           24
(a), (b) ↔ (d ): Any P/poly natural property useful against P/poly can be transformed into an
                                                                                               γ
                  almost-linear size natural property which is simply MCSP[(nc , 0), (2n , n−c )] or worst-
                  case gap MCSP[nc , 2n /nc−2 ]. (Note the different regime of circuit size parameters
                  for these problems.)

(a), (b) ↔ (c): A weak-seeming hardness assumption for worst-case gap and approximate versions
                  of MCSP implies a strong non-learnability result: polynomial-size circuits cannot be
                  learned over the uniform distribution even non-uniformly in sub-exponential time.

(a), (b) ↔ (e) Hardness magnification for MCSP also yields cryptographic hardness in a certain
                  regime.

                We note that the use of non-adaptive membership queries in Theorem 3.1, Item (c) is
         not essential. It follows from [CIKK16] that, in the context of learnability of polynomial
         size circuits under the uniform distribution in sub-exponential time, adaptive queries are
         not significantly more powerful than non-adaptive queries.3
         Towards a more robust theory of magnification:                        While Theorem 3.1 formally
         connects hardness magnification and natural properties, it would be very interesting to
         understand to what extent different hardness magnification theorems provably refute
         the existence of natural properties. This would provide a more complete answer to the
         question on naturalisability asked above.
                For instance, Theorem 3.1 leaves open whether hardness magnification for worst-
                                                             ε
         case versions of MCSP such as MCSP[nc , 2n ] refutes natural proofs as well. Note that
         one way of approaching this question would be to study highly efficient reductions from
                     γ                                     0         γ0    0
         MCSP[nc , 2n ] to its approximate version MCSP[(nc , 0), (2n , n−c )].4 In Section 3.4, we
         observe that this question is strongly related to the problem of basing hardness of learning
         on worst-case assumptions such as P 6= NP (cf. [ABX08]).
         Upper Bounds for C-MCSP: For any circuit class C, define MAJ-MAJ-C as the circuit
         class defined by the top two layers being Majority gates, whose inputs are fed by outputs
         of C-circuits. Similarly, THR-C is the circuit class C with a weighted threshold gate as
         the output gate.
                The proof of the connection between hardness magnification for approximate MCSP
         and hardness of learning in Theorem 3.1 lends itself to the following generalisation: For
            3
             In a bit more detail, one can easily extract a natural property from a learner that uses adaptive
         queries. In turn, closer inspection of the technique of [CIKK16] shows that a non-adaptive learner can
         be obtained from a natural property.
                                                                           γ              0        γ0    0
            4
             More precisely, the existence of a reduction from MCSP[nc , 2n ] to MCSP[(nc , 0), (2n , n−c )] shows
         that lower bounds for the former problem yield lower bounds for the latter. Since any such lower bound
                                                                                                           γ
         must be non-naturalisable by Theorem 3.1, we obtain the same consequence for MCSP[nc , 2n ] (note
         that in the context of hardness magnification it is also important to have highly efficient reductions.).


                                                            25
a standard circuit class C, if approximate C-MCSP requires super-linear circuits of the
form MAJ-MAJ-C, then there exists no self-learners for C, where C has a self-learner if
it can be learnt by non-uniform C-circuits using C-circuits as hypotheses. Self-learners
were introduced by [OS18b] in the context of pseudo-deterministic derandomisation of
learning algorithms.
   We show that approximate THR-AC0 -MCSP has a super-linear TC0 upper bound. This
is done by proving that the learning algorithm for THR-AC0 by [GS10] is actually a self-
learner, and using this in the connection stated above. Note that, the observation about
self-learning THR-AC0 was first made by [OS18b] (cf. Section 3.3) and we provide a proof
of this statement. Such a result indicates that one must be careful while trying to show
a lower bound for approximate C-MCSP towards the goal of magnification, and that the
class C plays an important role in the hardness of C-MCSP.


3.2      Preliminaries
3.2.1     Natural Properties
Definition 3.2 (Natural property [RR97]). Let R = {Rn ⊆ Fn }n∈N be a combinatorial
property of Boolean functions, C be a circuit class and Γ be a complexity class. Then,
R is a Γ-natural property useful against C[s(n)], if there exists an n0 ∈ N such that the
following hold:
                                                                       ?
   • Constructivity : For any function fn ∈ Fn , the predicate fn ∈ Rn is computable
      in Γ, in the size of the truth table of fn .
                                                            1        1
   • Largeness : For every n ≥ n0 , Prfn ∼Fn {fn ∈ Rn } ≥ 2O(n) = poly(N )
                                                                           .

   • Usefulness : For every n ≥ n0 , Rn ∩ C[s(n)] = ∅.

   The following result which follows from [CIKK16] connects the existence of natural
properties useful against a class C to designing learning algorithms for C.

Theorem 3.3 (From Theorem 5.1 of [CIKK16] and Lemma 14 of [IW01]). Let R be a
P/poly-natural property useful against SIZE[nd ] for some d ≥ 1. Then, for each γ ∈ (0, 1),
                                                             γ
there are randomised, oracle circuits {Dn }n≥1 ∈ SIZE[2O(n ) ] that learn SIZE[nk ] up to
error n1k and confidence 1/n using non-adaptive oracle queries to fn , where k = dγ
                                                                                  a
                                                                                    and
a is a universal constant that does not depend on d and γ.




                                              26
3.2.2    PRFs
Definition 3.4 (Pseudorandom function families). For any circuit class C, size functions
s(n), t(n) ≥ n, family Gn of n-bit Boolean functions and distribution Dn over Gn , we say
that a pair (Gn , Dn ) is a (t(n), ε(n))-pseudorandom function family (PRF) in C[s(n)], if
each function in Gn is in C[s(n)] and for every randomised circuit AO ∈ SIZEO [t(n)],
where O denotes oracle access to a fixed Boolean function over n inputs, we have

                      Pr {Ag (w) = 1} −      Pr {Af (w) = 1} ≤ ε(n)
                    g∼Dn ,w                f ∼Fn ,w


   [OS17] state an equivalence between the non-existence of PRFs in a circuit class C
and learning algorithms for C. In particular, we use the following direction which they
prove using a small-support version of Von-Neumann’s Min-max Theorem.

Theorem 3.5 (No PRFs in C implies Learning Algorithm for C [OS17] (Proposition
35)). Let t(n) ≤ 2O(n) . Suppose that for every k ≥ 1 and large enough n, there exists no
(poly(t(n)), 1/10)-pseudorandom function families in C[nk ]. Then, for every ε > 0, k ≥
                                                                                    ε
1 and large enough n, there is a randomised oracle circuit family in SIZEO [2n ] that
learns every function fn ∈ C[nk ] up to error 1/nk with confidence 1/n, where O denotes
membership query access to fn .

   We refer the reader to Chapter 2 for any other relevant definitions.


3.3     Equivalences in Theorem 3.1
The main contribution of this section is a new hardness magnification result showing non-
learnability of circuit classes from slightly super-linear lower bounds for the approximate
version of MCSP and the gap version of MCSP. We then use these magnification results
to establish a series of equivalences.

Lemma 3.6 (Hardness Magnification for Learnability from Lower Bounds for Approx-
imate MCSP). Let s, t : N → N be size functions such that n ≤ s(n) ≤ t(n) and ε, δ
be parameters such that ε < 1/2, 0 ≤ δ < 1/2. If for infinitely many input lengths
N = 2n , MCSP[(s, 0), (t, ε)] ∈
                              / SIZE[N · poly(s(n), t(n))], then for infinitely many inputs
n, SIZE[s(n)] cannot be learnt up to error ε with confidence δ by t(n)-size circuits using
non-adaptive membership queries over the uniform distribution.

   We also show a related result which gives lower bounds for learnability of P/poly by
assuming a lower bound against worst-case MCSP instead.



                                            27
Lemma 3.7 (Hardness Magnification for Learnability from Lower Bounds for Gap MCSP).
Let c ≥ 1 be an arbitrary constant. If there is ε < 1/2, such that for infinitely many in-
put lengths N = 2n , MCSP[nc , 2n /nc−2 ] ∈
                                          / SIZE[N 1+ε ], then for every γ ∈ (0, 1), for
infinitely many inputs n, SIZE[nc ] cannot be learnt up to error 1/nc with confidence 1/n
             γ
by SIZE[2O(n ) ]-circuits using non-adaptive membership queries over the uniform distri-
bution.

Proof of Theorem 3.1. The following implications establish the desired equivalences.

(a) =⇒ (c): For the parameters c, γ, ε given by (a), we apply Lemma 3.6 for s(n) = nc
                γ
and t(n) = 2n , to see that for some γ 0 > 0, SIZE[nc ] cannot be learned by circuits of size
    γ0
2O(n ) via non-adaptive queries up to an error O(1/nc ) and confidence 1/n.

(c) =⇒ (d): We show the contrapositive of this implication. Suppose that for every d ≥ 1,
there exists a SIZE[poly(n)]-natural property that is useful against SIZE[nd ] for all large
enough n. By Theorem 3.3, for every c ≥ 1 and every γ > 0, we can learn SIZE[nc ] by
                                  γ
a sequence of oracle SIZE[2O(n ) ]-circuits up to an error of n−c and confidence 1/n, by
choosing d = ac/γ for the constant a from Theorem 3.3.

(d) =⇒ (a), (d) =⇒ (b): Trivial, using the fact that random functions are hard.

(c) =⇒ (e): Follows from the contrapositive of Theorem 3.5.

(e) =⇒ (c): Follows from the non-uniform version of Proposition 29 in [OS17], using
essentially the same proof.

(b) =⇒ (c): For the parameter c given by (b), we apply Lemma 3.7 to see that SIZE[nc ]
                                           γ
cannot be learned by circuits of size 2O(n ) via non-adaptive queries up to an error O(1/nc )
and confidence 1/n, for any γ ∈ (0, 1).

   We now complete the proof of Theorem 3.1 by proving Lemmas 3.6 and 3.7.

Proof of Lemma 3.6. For the promise problem MCSP[(s, 0), (t, ε)] over N inputs, define

          Πyes = {z ∈ {0, 1}N | ∃ circuit of size ≤ s(n) that computes fy }
          Πno = {z ∈ {0, 1}N | no circuit of size ≤ t(n) can (1 − ε)-approximate fy }

   We prove the contrapositive of the statement. For a fixed 0 ≤ ε < 1/2 and 0 ≤ δ <
1/2, let {D(.)n }n≥1 ∈ SIZE[t(n)] be the corresponding sequence of (randomised) oracle
circuits which (ε, δ)-learns SIZE[s(n)], where D(.)n makes non-adaptive queries to some
function f ∈ SIZE[s(n)] over n inputs. The input to D(.)n is a string of length t(n) which
serves as its source of randomness.



                                               28
   We first transform the learner D(.)n to a deterministic non-uniform “list” learner E (.)n ,
which is a learner that has non-adaptive access to f and outputs a list of R hypotheses cir-
cuits, such that there exists at least one hypothesis in this list which (1 − ε)-approximates
f . This algorithm is simple: E (.)n (w1 , . . . , wR ) runs R = s(n)2 independent copies of the
learner D(.)n (using fresh randomness wi each time) to learn f , and outputs R hypotheses
h1 , . . . , hR . The probability that none of these hypotheses approximate fn on at least
(1 − ε)-fraction of the inputs is at most δ R . Considering each function in SIZE[s(n)]
as a fixed “input”, based on our choice of R, we use Adelman’s trick to non-uniformly
fix a “good” random string w∗ such that for every f ∈ SIZE[s(n)], E (.)n (w∗ ) outputs a
list of hypothesis such that there exists one of them that approximates fn on at least
(1 − ε)-fraction of the inputs.
   We now construct a circuit CN which computes MCSP[(s, 0), (t, ε)] by reducing it to
the list learner. On input z ∈ {0, 1}N , CN runs E fz (w∗ ) by answering its oracle queries to
fz using its truth table z. Let h1 , . . . , hR be the R hypotheses output by the list learner.
If the output string of the learner can be interpreted as a t(n)-sized circuit, FN computes
the truth tables tt(h1 ), . . . , tt(hR ) ∈ {0, 1}N . It then compares z with each of these truth
tables and outputs 1 if and only if there exists an i ∈ [R], such that hi can be interpreted
as a t(n)-sized circuit and the Hamming distance between tt(hi ) and z is at most εN .
   The correctness of CN follows from the properties of the list learner. If z ∈ Πyes , then
fz is computed by some circuit of size at most s(n). The choice of w∗ ensures that for
any fz , there exists an i ∈ [R], such that the Hamming distance between tt(hi ) and z is
at most εN . On the other hand, if z ∈ Πno , then no circuit of size at most t(n) can even
(1 − ε)-approximate fz . In particular, each of the hi s (if encoded properly) is a t(n)-sized
circuit h and is at least ε-far from fz , and thus FN outputs 0.
    Observe that for each run of Dfz , it is enough to use appropriate literals from the
input z whenever it needs to access the truth table of fz . Indeed, when wi∗ gets fixed
non-uniformly, the set of queries made by D(.)n in the ith run also gets fixed because of its
non-adaptivity. Recall that the size of the learner is t(n) and the hypothesis h output by
the learner can be interpreted as a t(n)-sized circuit and efficiently computed by another
circuit of size poly(t(n)). CN runs E (.)n of size O(t(n) · s(n)2 ) to generate the hypotheses,
then generates their truth tables using N · poly(t(n)) · s(n)2 gates, and uses O(N · s(n)2 )
many gates to check if there exists a hypothesis truth table which approximates z well.
Thus, CN has size O(N · poly(s(n), t(n))) overall.

Proof sketch of Lemma 3.7. We compute MCSP[nc , 2n /nc−2 ] by constructing a list learner
{E (.)n }n∈N using the learner {D(.)n }n≥1 and reducing gap MCSP to it. The proof is almost
the same as that of Lemma 3.6. The only difference is the acceptance criterion where the



                                               29
reduction accepts input z ∈ {0, 1}N if and only if there exists an i ∈ [R], such that the
                                                        n
Hamming distance between tt(hi ) and z is at most 2nc .
   When the input z is a yes instance, there exists an hi amongst the list of R hypotheses
obtained from E fz which has error at most 1/nc , and CN accepts it. When the input
z is a no instance, any hypothesis h which D(.)n outputs must have error greater than
1/nc . Indeed, if the error is less than 1/nc , then by hardwiring all the error inputs by
                                    n
using circuits of size at most O 2nc · n we get a circuit of size at most 2n /nc−2 , which is
                                        

a contradiction to the promise of the no instance. In this case, FN rejects z as none of
                                                         n
the R hypotheses have a Hamming distance of at most 2nc with z. Thus, CN computes
                                                   γ
MCSP[nc , 2n /nc−2 ] and has size O(N · poly(2O(n ) , nc ) ≤ O(N 1+ε ), for every ε > 0.


3.4      Towards a More Robust Theory of Magnification
                                     ε
Does magnification for MCSP[nc , 2n ] refute natural proofs against P/poly? In this section
we observe that this question is connected to basing hardness of learning on worst-case
hardness assumptions for NP.
   We first show that hardness of learning P/poly based on worst-case assumptions
implies that super-linear lower bounds for worst-case MCSP refutes natural properties
against P/poly. Formally,

Proposition 3.8. Suppose that there exists λ ∈ (0, 1) and k ≥ 1, such that NP 6⊆
         λ                                                                  λ
SIZE[2O(n ) ] implies that SIZE[nk ] is hard to learn by circuits of size 2n up to error 1/nk .
Then, there exists ε > 0 and c ≥ 1 such that MCSP[nc , nc+1 ] ∈
                                                              / SIZE[N 1+ε ] implies that
there exists no P/poly-natural properties useful against P/poly.

Proof. Suppose that there exists a P/poly-natural property useful against P/poly. From
                                                                                             λ
Theorem 3.3, we see that for every k ≥ 1 and λ ∈ (0, 1), there exists a sequence of 2n
size circuits which learns SIZE[nk ] up to error 1/nk . From our assumption, this implies
                      λ
that NP ⊆ SIZE[2O(n ) ]. From Theorem 4 in [OPS19] (or even Theorem 4.38 in Section
4.5), we see that for every ε > 0 and c ≥ 1, MCSP[nc , nc+1 ] ∈ SIZE[N 1+ε ].

   Next, we show a reverse implication from the stronger assumption of a reduction from
worst-case MCSP to approximate MCSP, instead of assuming the refutation of natural
proofs from super-linear lower bounds for worst-case MCSP. Additionally, we also need
to assume that MCSP with large parameters is NP-Complete.
    Define a polynomial-time reduction A from MCSP[s, t] to MCSP[(sk , 0), (t1/k , ε)], for
any k ≥ 1, as one which maps instances of MCSP[s, t] such that: If f ∈ SIZE[s], then
A(tt(f )) is the truth table of a function in SIZE[sk ], whereas if f ∈
                                                                      / SIZE[t], then A(tt(f ))



                                              30
is the truth table of a function which cannot even be (1 − ε)-approximated by SIZE[t1/k ]
circuits.

Proposition 3.9. Suppose there exists a polynomial-time reduction A from MCSP[s, t] to
MCSP[(sk , 0), (t1/k , ε)] for some k ≥ 1, and that for every 0 < α < β < 1, MCSP[2αn , 2βn ]
is NP-Complete. Then NP 6⊆ P/poly implies that there exists small enough α > 0, such
that for every β, where α < β/k < 1/k, SIZE[2kαn ] is hard to learn by SIZE[2βn ]-size
circuits up to error ε.

Proof. Suppose that for every small enough α > 0, there exists kα < β < 1/k and
a SIZE[2βn ]-learner for SIZE[2kαn ] up to error ε. Pick any small enough α > 0. From
Lemma 3.6 we see that, MCSP[(2kαn , 0), (2βn , ε)] ∈ P/poly. Using the reduction A, we
see that MCSP[2αn , 2kβn ] ∈ P/poly. Since MCSP[2αn , 2kβn ] is NP-Complete, we see that
NP ⊆ P/poly.


3.5         Upper Bounds for THR-AC0-MCSP
For the rest of this section, we assume that all Boolean functions are over {−1, 1}n . See
Section 2.5 for definitions on the Fourier expansion of a Boolean function.
   Recall that a THR (weighted threshold) gate over n variables is a Boolean function
h : {−1, 1}n → {−1, 1} where h(x) = sign( ni=1 wi xi − θ), where w1 , . . . , wn , θ are
                                               P

arbitrary real values. Note that the majority gate denoted by MAJ is a THR gate such
that w1 = · · · = wn = 1 and θ = 0.
   The main result of this section is a TC0 upper bound for approximate THR-AC0 -MCSP.

Theorem 3.10. There exists a universal constant e such that the following holds. For ev-
                                                                                         γ
ery constant c ≥ 1, d ≥ 2, 0 < ε < 1/2 and any γ > 0, THR-AC0d -MCSP[(nc , 0), (2n , ε)] ∈
TC0e·d [N 1+ρ ], for every ρ > 0.

   Theorem 3.10 is proved via a generalisation of Lemma 3.6 which (informally) states
that barely super-linear lower bounds for approximate C-MCSP against OR-THR-C implies
the non-existence of self-learners for C. For constant depth d, Cd [s(n)] has a self-learner
if it can be learnt by Cd [t(n)]-circuits, where 2n /nω(1) ≥ t(n) > s(n), such that the learner
outputs a string which is an effective encoding of a Cd [t(n)]-circuit. This means, it should
be possible for Cd0 -circuits to interpret the encoding as that of a Cd -circuit, and efficiently
evaluate computations given that description (typically d0 = O(d) and t(n) is taken to
be much larger than s(n)). This is an informal working definition, as for instance we do
not consider the dependence on ε or δ in the size of the learner, and we’ll consider these
details in the formal result statements (cf. [OS18b] for more details).


                                               31
Lemma 3.11 (Generalisation of Lemma 3.6). Let s, t : N → N be size functions such
that n ≤ s(n) ≤ t(n) and ε, δ be parameters such that 0 ≤ δ < 1/2 and 0 < ε < 1/2.
For any constant d ≥ 2, let Cd be any class of circuits of depth d which is closed under
composition.
   There exists a universal constant e > 0, such that the following holds. If for infinitely
many input lengths N = 2n , Cd -MCSP[(s, 0), (t, ε)] ∈
                                                     / OR-THR-Ce·d [N · poly(s(n), t(n))],
then for infinitely many n, Cd [s(n)] cannot be learnt up to error ε with confidence δ by
(randomised) Cd [t(n)]-circuits using non-adaptive membership queries over the uniform
distribution.5

Proof Sketch. The proof follows by inspection of Lemma 3.6. Once again, we construct
a sequence of deterministic list learner circuits {E (.)n }n≥1 using the randomised learner
circuits {D(.)n }n≥1 . Let z ∈ {0, 1}N be the input to Cd -MCSP and R = s(n)2 . E (.)n uses
non-uniform advice w∗ as a “good” random string to run R independent copies of the
learner D(.)n , such that for every f ∈ Cd [s(n)], E outputs a list of hypotheses h1 , . . . , hR ,
in which at least one of them is a good approximation of f . The circuit CN computing
Cd -MCSP runs E fz by providing it with answers to the queries made to fz (which are
fixed by w∗ ), and outputs 1 if and only if there exists a hypothesis truth table whose
Hamming distance with z is at most εN . We observe the correctness of the reduction,
from the proof earlier.
   We finish the proof by analysing the structure of CN . E fz is computed by running R
Cd -circuits in parallel, and thus its depth is also d. CN then computes the truth tables of
h1 , . . . , hR . Using the fact that D(.)n outputs an effective encoding of a Cd -hypothesis, we
see that circuits of depth O(d) can evaluate the truth tables of all the R hypotheses. CN
then checks whether the Hamming distance between the truth tables of each hi and z is
at most εN , by using a layer of THR gates (along with constantly many layers of gates to
check for inequalities in the two strings). Finally, CN uses an output OR gate to provide
the answer. Thus, using the earlier proof, we see that CN is of size N · poly(s(n), t(n))
and from the construction, it is an OR-THR-CO(d) -circuit.

      Conversely, Lemma 3.11 provides a way of using C-self-learners to derive upper bounds
for approximate C-MCSP. Indeed, we give an upper bound for approximate THR-AC0 -
MCSP by showing that the learning algorithm for THR-AC0 [poly(n)] by Gopalan and
Servedio [GS10], can in fact be simulated by sub-exponential sized THR-AC0 (randomised)
circuits.6
  5
      For clarity, t(n) is actually t0 (n, 1/δ, 1/ε) for some t0 (n) which is o(t(n)).
  6
      This observation was stated in [OS18b]. We provide a proof of this statement.




                                                     32
       The learning algorithm by [GS10] follows the well-known framework by [LMN93] for
learning Boolean functions whose Fourier weight is highly concentrated on monomials
with low degree t, using random examples over the uniform distribution (called the “low-
degree algorithm”). For this, the learning algorithm obtains a close approximation to the
Fourier coefficient of each monomial of size at most t empirically, by using sufficiently
many independent random examples. It then uses these estimates to obtain a good
approximation of the function we are trying to learn. The algorithm outputs the sign of
this approximation as its hypothesis.

Lemma 3.12 (Low-degree algorithm [LMN93] (see Section 3.4 in [O’D14])). Let C be a
class such that every function in C has Fourier weight (1 − ε/2)-concentrated on mono-
mials of degree t. Then C can be (ε, δ)-learnt using random examples over the uniform
distribution in time poly(nt , 1/ε, log(1/δ)), for any ε, δ > 0.
   Moreover, the learner outputs    a hypothesis hn , such that on input x ∈ {−1, 1}n ,
               P
h(x) = sign      S,|S|≤t f (S)χS (x) , where each f (S) is an approximate estimate of the
                         e                         e
Fourier coefficient on S.

In particular, O(nt ) is the number of monomials of size t.
   [GS10] show that for any constant depth d, polynomial-sized THR-AC0 circuit C
and any constant 0 < ε < 1/2, the Fourier weight of C is (1 − 4ε)-concentrated on
                                   Θ(d)   Θ(log2/3 s)
monomials of degree t = (log s) Θ(log·21/3 s)
                                                                    2/3
                                                        = 2Θ((log         n))
                                                                                . Combining this with the low-
                                   ε
                                                                0
degree algorithm, [GS10] then show that THR-AC circuits of depth d and polynomial
size
    can be2/3learnt
                     up to a constant accuracy ε and confidence 1/n in time O(nt ) =
      Θ((log n) )         γ
O n2                ≤ O 2n , for every γ > 0.
    Before moving on to the proof, we need the following well-known result about effective
encodings for AC0 . This lemma can in fact be extended to any standard constant-depth
circuit class. We provide a proof sketch for completeness.

Lemma 3.13. For any s = s(n), any constant d and any n-variate size-s depth-d AC0
circuit C, there exists an encoding σC of size O(s2 ), for which a sequence of polynomial
sized AC0 -circuits take σC and x ∈ {0, 1}n as inputs and output C(x).

Proof. W.l.o.g assume that C is layered i.e. each layer consists of only AND or OR gates,
and the NOT gates are pushed to the bottom.7 Suppose that the layer above the inputs
has only OR gates.
       We encode C as an adjacency matrix of a directed graph whose vertices are formed
by the n inputs, their complements and the s nodes in C (one can also add extra vertices
   7
    Any AC0 circuit C can be transformed into such a circuit by adding dummy gates to make it layered
and using De Morgan’s laws to push the NOT gates to the bottom. The new size is at most O(s · d) and
depth is at most O(d).


                                                        33
for advice inputs if necessary), and the edges are given by the wires in C directed from a
vertex in a bottom layer to the top. The size of the matrix is (2n + s)2 . Furthermore, the
vertices are ordered from the input layer (depth 0) to the output gate at depth d, where
any vertices in layer i come before layer i + 1 in the ordering.
   For m = (2n+s)2 +n, we first show that if C is a CNF over n inputs, then there exists
an AC0 -circuit Dm that takes the description of C and input x ∈ {0, 1}n , and outputs
C(x). An analogous argument can be used for a DNF. Let u0 be a Boolean vector of
length 2n+s such that the first 2n bits are fed by x and x, with the rest set to 0. Let g1 be
an OR gate in the first layer of C and vg1 be the vector obtained from the corresponding
matrix column in the encoding. Dm computes the coordinate-wise AND of u0 and vg1 ,
and outputs the OR of all these coordinates. Clearly this circuit simulates g1 .
     Dm simulates every OR gate in layer 1 this manner and constructs the Boolean vector
u1 , such that the outputs from x, x and the outputs of the simulations for the OR gates
feed into corresponding entries in u1 . Dm next simulates the AND gate g2 in a similar
fashion - by taking the coordinate-wise AND of u1 and vg2 . However, for every coordinate
j ∈ [2n + s] of vg1 that has 1 in it, the output of the coordinate-wise AND is fed and if
not, its complement is fed into an AND gate. D outputs the result of this simulation of
g2 as C(x).
   Dm repeats this step inductively layerwise, by considering the outputs of the simula-
tions of the gates from layer i − 1 as inputs to a gate in layer i, whose connectivity is
provided in the matrix. Finishing this simulation for C’s output gate in the dth layer,
Dm outputs C(x). From our construction, we observe that Dm is an AC0 -circuit of size
poly(s, n) and its depth is O(d).

Proof of Theorem 3.10. For any d > 1, let Cd = THR-AC0 d [poly(n)] and ε > 0 be any
                           2/3
constant. Let t = 2Θ(log n) be the degree of the monomials on which the Fourier weight
of any function in Cd is (1 − ε/4)-concentrated
                                              (as given      by [GS10]) and M be the number
                                                       2/3 n)
                                      t         2Θ(log                 γ
of such monomials, where M = O(n ) = O n                        ≤ O 2n , for every γ > 0.
   We first construct a sequence of constant depth Cd -circuits {D(.)n } such that for every
large enough input length n, D(.)n learns n-variate Cd -circuits up to constant error ε and
confidence δ = 1/n, using random examples over the uniform distribution. The learner
D(.)n does the following:
                                     Q
   • For each monomial χi (x) = k∈Si xk , where 1 ≤ i ≤ M and Si ⊂ [n] of size at most
                                        
          (.)n               M ·log(M/δ)
     t, D      takes r = O         ε
                                           = O(M t log n) many random examples and their
      labels.

   • For each random example zij , where 1 ≤ i ≤ M, 1 ≤ j ≤ r, D(.)n computes
      yij = f (zij ) · χi (zij ) ∈ {−1, 1}.

                                              34
    • D(.)n outputs the description of a hypothesis hn , into which it hardcodes the values
      y11 , . . . , y1r , . . . , yM 1 , . . . , yM r as non-uniform advice. On input x ∈ {−1, 1}n , hn
      does the following :

         – hn first computes the parities (or monomials) χ1 (x), . . . , χM (x) for all M mono-
            mials of size at most t.
         – It then uses a THR gate over M · r many inputs with w1 = · · · = wM ·r = 1/r
            and θ = 0, to output -

                   h(x) = THR(y11 χ1 (x), . . . , y1r χ1 (x), . . . , yM 1 χM (x), . . . , yM r χM (x))

    To see the correctness of h, we have
                                                                                             
                   y11 χ1 (x)          y1r χ1 (x)           yM 1 χM (x)           yM r χM (x)
     h(x) = sign              + ··· +             + ··· +               + ··· +
                        r                   r                     r                     r
                  y             y                       y             y              
                      11           1r                        M1             Mr
          = sign          + ··· +       · χ1 (x) + · · · +        + ··· +        · χM (x)
                  r               r                       r               r
          = sign fe(S1 )χ1 (x) + · · · + fe(SM )χM (x)
                 P             
                      r
Here fe(Si ) =        j=1 yij
                        /r is the empirical estimate of the Fourier coefficient of each
monomial of degree at most t (recall from Section 2.5 that any Fourier coefficient fb(Si ) =
Ex [f (x) · χi (x)]). Thus, hn approximates C with error at most ε/2 from Lemma 3.12.8
    It is important to note that hn does not perform division by r to compute the estimates
for the Fourier coefficients, but instead this estimation is delegated to the THR gate by
setting its weights to 1/r each.
    Next, we analyse the circuit complexities of D(.)n and hn . D(.)n computes O(M · r)
many parities y11 , . . . , yM r , each of which is over at most t many inputs. Thus, D(.)n is a
                                1/d−1             γ
circuit of size at most 2t · M · r ≤ 2n , for every γ > 0.9 The effective encoding for
the circuit based on Lemma 3.13 can be provided as non-uniform advice (for the single
threshold gate, the encoding will also have the rational weights 1/r in it), and D(.)n uses
this along with y11 , . . . , yM r to output the C-circuit description of hn . In other words,
                                                      γ
D(.)n can be computed by a C-circuit of 2n size and depth d.
    The output is an encoding of a hypothesis hn , which computes M many parities
χ1 (x), . . . , χM (x) on at most t inputs, and O(M · r) many constant input parities before
                                                                                         1/d−1
feeding them into a THR gate. The circuit size of hn is at most M · 2t                           + O(M · r)
                           nγ
which is also at most 2 , for every γ > 0, and its depth is d.
  8
p In fact we choose r, such that with probability at least 1 − δ, all Fourier estimates f (Si ) are within
                                                                                           e
 ε/16M of the real Fourier coefficients.
                                                                                          1/d−1
  9
    We know that for every d > 1, parity over n inputs requires ACd0 -circuits of size 2n       .



                                                      35
    Thus, Cd -circuits of polynomial size can be learnt up to error ε/2 and confidence
                                                                                               o(1)
1/n using random examples over the uniform distribution by Cd -circuits of size 2n
                                                                    γ
(which output Cd -circuit hypotheses), which is at most 2n for all γ > 0. From Lemma
                                                                                        γ
3.11, we see that for every constant c, γ > 0 and ρ > 0, Cd -MCSP[(nc , 0), (2n , ε)] is in
TC0 [N 1+ρ ].

Remark 3.14. Assuming the Gotsman-Linial conjecture [GL94] on the total influence of
every degree d PTF, [GS10] show a stronger Fourier concentration for THR-AC0 circuits.
They get a quasi-polynomial time learner under this assumption (by Lemma 3.12). Using
this with Lemma 3.11, we get a strengthening of the upper bound for THR-AC0 -MCSP-
[(poly(n), 0), (npoly(log n) , ε)].

Remark 3.15. [GS10] show that THR-AC0 [poly(n)] can actually be learnt to accuracy
                   1/3 )              o(1)
ε > 1/2O((log n)           in time O(2n      ), if d ≤ O(log2/3 n)/ log log n. Similarly, assuming
Gotsman-Linial conjecture, they show that constant depth-d THR-AC0 [poly(n)] can be
learnt up to 1/poly(log n) accuracy in quasi-polynomial time.
    Unfortunately, this technique does not give non-trivial learners for any ε = 1/nc ,
where c ≥ 1, and thus, cannot be extended to show that C-MCSP[nc , 2n /nc−2 ] has a super-
linear TC0 circuit upper bound. In particular, the [GS10] learners only work when the
error is large enough (ε ≥ 1/no(1) ), whereas we need ε = 1/nc for the worst-case version
of Lemma 3.11 to go through.


3.6        Open Problems and Future Directions
We end this chapter with some technical questions pertaining to the refutation of natural
proofs by hardness magnification. First, we would like to understand if it is possible
to strengthen items (a) and (b) in Theorem 3.1 to a wider range of parameters. For
                                                                        γ
example, is hardness magnification for worst-case MCSP[nc , 2n ] non-naturalisable? The
core of this question seems to be the problem of reducing worst-case MCSP from Item
(a) to approximate MCSP from Item (b) (see Section 3.4).
    Another direction is to show that hardness magnification refutes natural proofs also
in the context of non-meta-computational problems. Interestingly, many magnification
theorems from [OPS19] established for MCSP and variants were subsequently shown to
hold for any sparse family of languages in NP [CJW19]. Could it be the case that hardness
magnification avoids the natural proofs barrier in a much broader sense?
    Finally, from the point of view of self-learning, an interesting question is to explore
what circuit classes are self-learnable (cf. [OS18b]). As a starting point, it could be
worthwhile to explore the existence of quasi-polynomial sized AC0 -learners for AC0 .


                                                    36
Chapter 4

The Locality Barrier for Hardness
Magnification

4.1      Introduction
In this chapter, we are interested in understanding the prospects of proving new lower
bounds using hardness magnification, including potential barriers.

4.1.1     Hardness Magnification Frontiers
While hardness magnification is a broad phenomenon, its most promising instantiations
seem to occur in the setting of circuit classes such as NC1 . The potential of hardness
magnification stems from establishing the following scenario.


      HM Frontier: There is a natural problem Q and a computational model C such
    that:
                             / C implies NP 6⊆ NC1 or a similar breakthrough.
        1. (Magnification) Q ∈

        2. (Evidence of Hardness) Q ∈
                                    / C under a standard conjecture.

        3. (Lower Bound against C) L ∈
                                     / C, where L is a simple function like PARITY.

                                 / C − , where C − is slightly weaker than C.
        4. (Lower Bound for Q) Q ∈


   A frontier of this form provides hope that the required lower bound in Item 1 is true
(thanks to Item 2), and that it might be within the reach of known techniques (thanks
to Items 3 and 4, which provide evidence that we can analyse the circuit model and
the problem). HM frontiers have been already achieved in earlier works with a striking
example appearing in [OPS19] (see also [CJW19]). Despite the number of works in this
area, we note that a HM frontier is achieved only by some magnification theorems (Item
3 is often unknown; e.g. in the case of results in [AK10, CT19]).

                                           37
   In order to make our subsequent discussion more concrete, we provide five examples of
HM frontiers. Some of these results are new or require an extension of previous work, and
the relevant statements will be explained in more detail in their corresponding sections.
The list of frontiers is not meant to be exhaustive, but we have tried to cover different
computational models.


       (A) HM Frontier for MKtP[nc , 2nc ] and AC0 -XOR:
                             / AC0 -XOR[N 1.01 ] for large enough c > 1, then EXP * NC1
      A1. If MKtP[nc , 2nc ] ∈
    (Section 4.3.1).
      A2. MKtP[nc , 2nc ] ∈
                          / P/poly for large enough c, under exponentially secure PRFs
    [RR97].
                                     o(1)
      A3. Majority ∈ / AC0 -XOR[2N ] (immediate from [Raz87, Smo87]).
      A4. MKtP[nc , 2nc ] ∈/ AC0 , for any sufficiently large constant c (Section 4.3.1).

A. MKtP[s, t] refers to the gap version of MKtP on inputs of length N = 2n (see Section
2.4). The AC0 -XOR model is an extension of AC0 where gates at the bottom layer of the
circuit can compute arbitrary parity functions. AC0 -XOR[s] denotes AC0 -XOR circuits of
size s where the size is measured as the number of gates. This circuit class has received
some attention in recent years (cf. [CGJ+ 18]), and a few basic questions about AC0 circuits
with parity gates (such as constructing PRGs of seed length o(n) and learnability using
random examples) remain open for AC0 -XOR as well.

                                             1/3         2/3
       (B) HM Frontier for MCSP[2n                 , 2n        ] and Formula-XOR:
                     n1/3   n2/3
      B1. MCSP[2 , 2 ] ∈       / Formula-XOR[N 1.01 ] implies NQP 6⊆ NC1 (Section 4.4.1).
                     1/3   2/3
      B2. MCSP[2n , 2n ] ∈       / P/poly under standard cryptographic assumptions
    [RR97].
      B3(a). InnerProduct ∈/ Formula-XOR[N 1.99 ] (immediate consequence of [Tal17a]).
      B3(b). MCSP[2n /n4 ] ∈ / Formula-XOR[N 1.99 ] ([KKL+ 20]).
                   1/3   2/3
      B4. MCSP[2n , 2n ] ∈     / Formula[N 1.99 ] ([HS17]; see also [OPS19]).

B. In the statements above, NQP stands for nondeterministic quasi-polynomial time,
                                                                    P
InnerProduct is the Boolean function defined as InnerProduct(x, y) = i xi · yi (mod 2),
where x, y ∈ {0, 1}N , Formula-XOR[s] refers to the class of Boolean formulas over the De
Morgan basis with at most s leaves, where each leaf is an XOR of arbitrary arity over the
inputs,1 and MCSP[s, t] is worst-case gap MCSP over inputs of size N (see Section 2.3).
    1
      Note that Formula-XOR[N 1.01 ] ⊆ Formula[N 3.01 ]. A better understanding of the former class is
therefore necessary before we can understand the power and limitations of super-cubic formulas, which
is a major open question in circuit complexity.




                                                    38
       Intriguingly, as a consequence of A1 and A4 (or B1 and B4), we seem to only be a
layer of XOR gates away from proving major breakthroughs in complexity theory!

                                                 1/2          1/2
         (C) HM Frontier for MCSP[2n                   /10n, 2n     ] and Almost-Formulas:
                      n1/2     1/2
         C1. MCSP[ 210n , 2n          / N 0.01 -Almost-Formula[N 1.01 ] implies NP 6⊆ NC1 (Section
                                     ]∈
       4.5.1).
                        n1/2    1/2
         C2. MCSP[ 210n , 2n ] ∈    / P/poly under standard cryptographic assumptions
       [RR97].
                    / N 0.01 -Almost-Formula[N 1.01 ] (Section 4.5.1).
         C3. Parity ∈
                      1/2         1/2
         C4. MCSP[2n /10n, 2n ] ∈     / Formula[N 1.99 ] ([HS17]; see also [OPS19]).

C. An almost-formula is a circuit with a bounded number of gates of fan-out larger than
1. More precisely, a γ-Almost-Formula[s] is a circuit containing at most s many AND,
OR, NOT gates of fan-in at most 2, and among such gates, at most γ of them have
fan-out larger than 1. Consequently, this class naturally interpolates between formulas
and circuits. This magnification frontier can be seen as progress towards establishing
magnification theorems for worst-case variants of MCSP in the regime of sub-quadratic
formulas (see the discussion in [OPS19]).

                                             √
       (D) HM Frontier for MCSP[2 n ] and one-sided error randomised formulas:
                       √
         D1. MCSP[2 n ] ∈
                        / GapANDO(N ) -Formula[N 2.01 ] ⇒ NQP ∈  / NC1 (Section 4.6.1).
                    √
         D2. MCSP[2 n ] ∈
                        / P/poly under standard cryptographic assumptions [RR97].
                         / GapANDO(N ) -Formula[N 2.99 ] (implicit in [Hås98]).
         D3(a). AndreevN ∈
         D3(b). MCSP[2n /n4 ] ∈
                              / GapANDO(N ) -Formula[N 2.99 ] (implicit in [CKLM19]).
                    √
         D4. MCSP[2 n ] ∈
                        / GapANDO(N ) -Formula[N 1.99 ] [CJW20].

D. GapANDN is the promise function on N bits such that it outputs 1 when all input bits
are 1, and outputs 0 when at most 1/10 of the input bits are 1. GapANDO(N ) -Formula[s]
denotes circuits with GapANDO(N ) gate at the top with its inputs being formulas of size
s. Therefore, GapANDO(N ) -Formula can be seen as randomised formulas with one-sided
error.2 The most interesting aspect of this magnification frontier is that the gap between
the known hardness result and the magnification threshold is arbitrarily-close i.e. we
   2
     Suppose there is a GapANDO(N ) -Formula circuit computing a function f : {0, 1}N → {0, 1}. Consider
a uniform distribution of all sub-formulas below the top GapANDO(N ) gate. Then for any input x, if
f (x) = 1 then a sample formula from that distribution always outputs 1 on x, otherwise it outputs 0
with probability at least 0.9, if f (x) = 0. On the other hand, it is possible to derandomise a distribution
of formulas computing f with one-sided error using a top GapANDO(N ) gate. See Section 4.6 for more
details.




                                                       39
                                                               √
have an N 2−ε unconditional lower bound for MCSP[2 n ], whereas only an N 2+ε lower
bound is needed for the same problem to achieve magnification.3


          (E) HM Frontier for (n − k)-Clique and AC0 :
                              / AC0 [m1.01 ] for k = (log n)C , then NP * NC1 (Section 4.7.1).
          E1. If (n−k)-Clique ∈
          E2. (Non-uniform) ETH ⇒ (n − k)-Clique ∈          / P/poly for k = (log n)C (Sec-
       tion 4.7.1).
                     / AC0 [Ajt83, FSS84, Yao85, Hås86].
          E3. Parity ∈
                             / mP/poly for k = (log n)C ([AJ08]; see Section 4.7.1).
          E4. (n − k)-Clique ∈

E. The `-Clique problem is defined on graphs on n vertices in the adjacency matrix
representation of size m = Θ(n2 ). (The statements above refer to the regime of very
large clique detection.) The class mP/poly refers to monotone circuits of polynomial size.
In this frontier we modify Item 4 from the notion of an HM frontier, so that instead of
slightly weaker C − we consider an incomparable C − .
       This frontier is however particularly interesting, as items E1 and E4 connect hard-
ness magnification to a basic question about the power of non-monotone circuits when
computing monotone functions (see [COS17, GKRS19] and the references therein): Is
every monotone function in AC0 computable by a monotone (unbounded depth) Boolean
circuit of polynomial size? If this is the case, NP * NC1 would follow.

       Note that these hardness magnification frontiers offer different approaches to proving
lower bounds against NC1 .

       Do magnification theorems bring us closer to strong circuit lower bounds? To further
understand the limits and prospects of hardness magnification, the following questions
are relevant.

Q1. Extending known lower bounds. Can we adapt an existing lower bound proof from
         Items 3 and 4 in some HM frontier to show the lower bound required in Item 1
         in that HM frontier? Is it possible to establish the required lower bounds via a
         reduction from L to Q?

Q2. Improving existing magnification theorems. Can we close the gap between Items
         1 and 4 in some HM frontiers by establishing a magnification theorem that meets
         known lower bounds, such as the ones appearing in Item 4?
                                                                                               √
   3
    This tight threshold was first observed in [CJW20] via a very similar frontier for MCSP[2 n ] and
two-sided error randomised formulas. We include it here to study its potential for proving strong lower
bounds.



                                                  40
4.1.2    The Locality Barrier
The results from Chapter 3 show that hardness magnification can go beyond natural
proofs. Is there another barrier that makes it difficult to establish lower bounds via
magnification? In this section, we present a general argument to explain why the lower
bound techniques behind A3-E3, A4-D4 in the magnification frontiers from Section 4.1.1
cannot be adapted (without significantly new ideas) to establish the required lower bounds
in Items A1-E1, respectively. We refer to it as the locality barrier. While we will focus
on these particular examples to make the discussion concrete, we believe that this barrier
applies more broadly.
   In order to explain the locality barrier, let’s consider the argument behind the proof
of B1 presented in Section 4.6.1 (or an alternative proof in Section 4.4.1). Recall that
                                                              1/3   2/3
this magnification result shows that if MCSP[2n , 2n ] ∈
                                                       / Formula-XOR[N 1.01 ] then
NQP 6⊆ NC1 . This and other known hardness magnification theorems are established
in the contrapositive. The core of the argument is to prove that there are highly efficient
                                                                    1/3          2/3
Formula-XOR circuits that reduce an input to MCSP[2n                      , 2n         ] of length N to deciding
whether certain strings of length N 0 (much smaller than N ) belong to a certain language
L0 . Then, under the assumption that NQP ⊆ NC1 , one argues that L0 has polynomial
size formulas. Finally, since N 0  N , we can employ such formulas and still conclude
              1/3      2/3
that MCSP[2n        , 2n     ] is in Formula-XOR[N 1.01 ], which completes the proof.
   Note that the argument above provides a conditional construction of highly efficient
formulas for the original problem. Crucially, however, we can derive an unconditional
circuit upper bound from this argument: If we stop right before we replace the calls to L0
by an algorithm for L0 (this is what makes the reduction conditional), it unconditionally
                           1/3      2/3
follows that MCSP[2n             , 2n     ] can be computed by highly efficient Formula-XOR circuits
containing oracle gates of small fan-in, for some oracle. Similarly, one can argue that the
problems in Items A1-E1 can be computed in the respective models by highly efficient
Boolean devices containing oracles of small fan-in.
   We stress that, as opposed to a magnification theorem, where one cares about the
complexity of the oracle gates, in our discussion of the locality barrier we only need the
fact that there is some way of setting these oracle gates so that the resulting circuit or
formula solves the original problem. (A definition of this model appears in Section 4.2.4).
A more exhaustive interpretation of magnification theorems as constructions of circuits
with small fan-in oracles can be found in Section 4.2.5.
   On the other hand, we argue that the lower bound arguments from Items A3-E3 of
the hardness magnification frontiers quite easily handle (in the respective models) the
presence of oracles of small fan-in, regardless of the function computed by these oracles.
Using a more involved argument we can also localise lower bounds from items A4-D4.

                                                       41
 Consequently, these methods do not seem to be refined enough to prove the lower bounds
 required by A1-D1 without excluding oracle circuits that are unconditionally known to
 exist for the corresponding problems.
    Following the example above, we state our results for the Magnification Frontier B.

 Theorem 4.1 (Locality Barrier for HM Frontier B). The following results hold.

(B1O ) (Oracle Circuits from Magnification) There exists oracle O, such that for any ε > 0,
                1/3      2/3
       MCSP[2n        , 2n     ] ∈ Formula-O-XOR[N 1.01 ], where every oracle gate has fan-in at
       most N ε and appears in the layer right above the XOR leaves.

(B3O ) (Extension of Lower Bound Techniques) For any δ > 0 and oracle O, InnerProduct
       over N input bits cannot be computed by N 2−2δ -sized Formula-O-XOR circuits with
       at most N 2−3δ oracle gates of fan-in N δ in the layer right above the XOR leaves.

(B4O ) (Extension of Lower Bound Techniques Below Magnification Threshold) There ex-
       ists a universal constant c such that for all constants ε > 0 and every oracle O,
       MCSP[nc , 2εn/3 ] 6∈ FormulaO
                                   3 [N
                                        2−ε
                                            ], where the adaptivity of the oracle formulas is at
       most o(log N/ log log N ).

    Here, FormulaO
                 t [s] denotes the class of functions which can be computed by a sequence
 of oracle formulas, such that on replacing each oracle gate O with fan-in B by an equiva-
 lent formula of size B t which reads each of its B inputs exactly B t−1 times, we obtain a De
 Morgan formula of size at most s (see Section 4.8.2 for the motivation of this definition).
 Further, adaptivity of an oracle formula refers to the maximum number of oracle gates
 encountered in any path from the root to a leaf.
    The first two items of Theorem 4.1 are proved in Section 4.4.2. The third item is
 proved in Section 4.8.2. While Theorem 4.1 does not specify that, we actually localise all
 proofs of the lower bounds in B3 and B4 we are aware of. Interestingly, the localisation of
 B4 allows us to refute the Anti-Checker Hypothesis from [OPS19] (and a family of poten-
 tial hardness magnification theorems), in Section 4.8.2. We refer to Sections 4.3.2, 4.5.2,
 4.6.2, 4.7.2 and 4.8 for analogous statements describing the locality barrier for frontiers
 A, C, D, and E, respectively.

                                                                        √
    The recent HM Frontier introduced by [CJW20] for MCSP[2 n ] and two-sided error
 randomised formulas is also subject to the locality barrier based on ideas analogous to
 the barrier for HM Frontier D (cf. Section 4.6.2). In another recent work, [CHMY20]
 (and [MMW19]) prove magnification for MCSP[2o(n) ] against one-tape Turing machines
 by constructing highly efficient uniform oracle algorithms that make short oracle queries.


                                                   42
They also prove a sub-quadratic time lower bound for MCSP[2(1−o(1))n ] against one-tape
Turing machines and show that this technique can be localised; it is impossible to extend
this technique to MCSP[2o(n) ], with the intention of obtaining magnification (or obtaining
magnification from MCSP[2(1−o(1))n ] lower bounds against one-tape Turing machines using
similar ideas).

Locality of Computations and Lower Bound Techniques. The fact that many
lower bound techniques extend to computational devices with oracles of small fan-in was
already observed by Yao in 1989, in a paper on local computations [Yao89]. According
to Yao, a local function is one that can be efficiently computed using only localised
processing elements. In our terminology, this corresponds to circuits with oracles of
small fan-in. Among other results, [Yao89] argues that Razborov’s monotone circuit size
lower bound for k-Clique [Raz85] and Karchmer and Wigderson’s monotone formula size
lower bound for ST-CONN [KW90] extend to Boolean devices with monotone oracles of
bounded fan-in. Compared to Yao’s work, our motivation and perspective are different.
While Yao is particularly interested in lower bounds that can be extended in this sense
(see e.g. Sections 2 and 6 in [Yao89]), here we view such extensions as a limitation of
the corresponding arguments, meaning that they are not refined enough to address the
locality barrier.4
    We note, however, that not every lower bound technique extends to circuits with small
fan-in oracles.5 For instance, by the work of Allender and Koucký [AK10] (also a more
recent work by Chen and Tell [CT19]), the parity function Parityn over n input bits can
be computed by a TC0 circuit of size O(n) (number of wires) containing ≤ n1−ε oracle
gates of fan-in ≤ nε , provided that its depth d = O(1/ε). On the other hand, it is known
                           −d
             / TC0d [n1+c ] for a constant c > 0 [IPS97] (again, the complexity measure is
that Parityn ∈
the number of wires). Since the latter lower bound is super-linear for every choice of d,
it follows by the result of [AK10, CT19] that it cannot be extended to circuits containing
a certain number of oracles of fan-in nε , for a large enough depth d that depends on
ε. Incidentally, the hardness magnification theorems of [AK10, CT19] do not achieve a
magnification frontier.
   In Section 4.6.2 we identify one specific lower bound related to HM frontier D which is
both above the magnification threshold and provably non-localisable (cf. Theorem 4.48).
In principle, there might be ways to overcome the locality barrier and match the lower
bound with the magnification threshold. We refer to Section 4.9 for additional discussion.
   4
     On a more technical level, we are interested in the regime of barely super-linear size circuits and
formulas, and our results do not impose a monotonicity constraint on the oracle.
   5
     Of course any such discussion depends on parameters such as number of oracles and their fan-ins, so
whether a technique avoids the locality barrier or not is relative to a particular magnification theorem.



                                                   43
On Lower Bounds Through Reductions. The discussion above has focused on the
possibility of directly adapting existing lower bounds from Item 3 in HM frontier to
establish the desired lower bound in Item 1. There is however an indirect approach that
one might hope to use: reductions. For instance, in the context of the HM Frontier B
                                                                        1/3 2/3
discussed above, can we have a reduction from InnerProduct to MCSP[2n , 2n ] that
                                         1/3      2/3
would allow us to show that MCSP[2n            , 2n      / Formula-XOR[N 1.01 ]? The first thing to
                                                        ]∈
notice is that, for this approach to make sense, the reduction needs to have a specific
form and satisfy certain complexity constraints, so that composing the reduction with a
                                                        1/3 2/3
small-sized candidate Formula-XOR circuit for MCSP[2n , 2n ] violates the hardness of
InnerProduct. Is there any hope to design a reduction of this form?
   The locality barrier presents a definitive answer in this case. Indeed, it is immediate
from the first two items of Theorem 4.1 that such a reduction does not exist (see Section
4.4.3). For the same reason, it is not possible to use reductions to establish the required
lower bounds in some other magnification frontiers. Essentially, under the constraints
needed for a reduction to be meaningful, we end up with a class of reductions which
produce circuits that are ruled out by the locality barrier.


4.2      Preliminaries
We refer the reader to Chapter 2 for notational conventions and additional definitions.

4.2.1     Pseudorandomness
Definition 4.2 (Pseudorandom Generators). Let G : {0, 1}r → {0, 1}n be a function, C
be a class of Boolean functions and 0 < ε < 1. We say that a pseudorandom generator
G of seed length r, ε-fools C if for every function f ∈ C, we have

                            Ez∼Ur [f (G(z))] − Ex∼Un [f (x)] ≤ ε

Next, we look at particular instantiations of pseudorandom generators (or pseudorandom
distributions). We call G as an ε-biased generator if it ε-fools parities.

Definition 4.3 (Small-bias generator [NN93]). For any ε ∈ 0, 21 , a generator G :
                                                                

{0, 1}r → {0, 1}n is ε-biased if for all non-zero v ∈ {0, 1}n ,

                  Ez∼Ur [hv, G(z)i (mod 2)] − Ex∼Un [hv, xi (mod 2)] ≤ ε

   In other words, Ez∼Ur [hv, G(z)i] ∈ (1/2 − ε, 1/2 + ε). We refer to the output distribu-
tion of G as an ε-biased distribution.


                                                  44
Lemma 4.4 (Construction of ε-biased generators [AGHP92, NN93]). There exists an
ε-biased distribution G : {0, 1}r → {0, 1}n that can be sampled in time poly(n/ε) time
deterministically, using an r = O(log(n/ε))-long seed. Moreover, there exists a sequence
of circuits of size at most O(log(n/ε)
                            e          · log n), such that given the seed z and an index
j ∈ [n], the circuit prints the j th -bit of G(z).

A multidimensional distribution is called k-wise independent if any k coordinates of the
distribution are uniformly distributed.

Definition 4.5 (k-wise independence). A distribution over [m]n is called k-wise inde-
pendent if for any 1 ≤ i1 ≤ i2 ≤ · · · ≤ ik ≤ n and every b1 , . . . , bk ∈ [m], we have

                        Pr{Xi1 = b1 , Xi2 = b2 , . . . , Xik = bk } = 1/mk

   We say that a function G is a k-wise independent generator if for a random seed, the
output distribution of G is k-wise independent.
   Finally, note that any k-wise independent distribution is also a pairwise independent
distribution. We state the following version of Chebyshev’s inequality (Lemma 2.6) to
derive tail bounds on the number of 1s in the output of a pairwise independent distribution
over {0, 1}N .

Lemma 4.6 (Chebyshev’s inequality for pairwise independent distributions). Suppose
X1 , . . . , Xn are pairwise independent random variables over {0, 1}. Then,
                           ( n           " n    #    ) P
                                                             n
                              X           X                     Var[Xi ]
                        Pr        Xi − E      Xi > t ≤ i=1 2
                              i=1         i=1
                                                                t

We refer [Vad12] for more details on these notions.

4.2.2     Random restrictions
Let f be an n-variate Boolean function. A restriction ρ is defined as a mapping from
the n variables to {0, 1, ∗}. We refer to f |ρ (x) as the restricted Boolean function over
variables in ρ−1 (∗), defined as f |ρ (x) = f (y), where yi = xi if ρ(i) = ∗ and otherwise,
yi = ρ(i).
   Any distribution D over restrictions is called a random restriction. We say that D is
p-regular if each variable is unrestricted with probability p. Let Rp be the p-regular truly
random restriction where each coordinate of the restriction is independently unrestricted
with probability p and otherwise, equal to 0 or 1, with probability (1 − p)/2 each.
   We use the following encoding for a restriction suggested by [TX13].



                                                45
Definition 4.7 (Restriction). For any q, n ∈ N, any binary string w ∈ {0, 1}(q+1)n defines
a restriction ρw : [n] → {0, 1, ∗} as follows. Partition w into (w1 , α1 ), . . . , (wn , αn ), where
wi ∈ {0, 1}q and αi ∈ {0, 1} for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Set ρw (i) = ∗ if wi = 1q , otherwise set
ρw (i) = αi .

Observe that Rp is now a uniform distribution over {0, 1}(q+1)n , where p = 2−q .
    A subclass of random restrictions is a pseudorandom restriction, which is the output
distribution of a suitable pseudorandom generator over {0, 1}(q+1)n using much fewer
random bits than a truly random restriction. For example, [TX13, Tal17b] use a small-
bias generator over {0, 1}(q+1)n to sample a pseudorandom restriction.
    Another way to do this is by making a “pseudorandom selection” obtained from a
k-wise independent distribution on [1/p]n (by sampling a string of length qn). In such a
case, each variable is unrestricted with probability p, and any k elements in the output are
independent. This is followed by sampling a string from a k-wise independent distribution
over {0, 1}n to set the restricted variables. More formally, we need the following lemma
stating that one can sample a k-wise independent random restriction using a short seed,
and moreover all restrictions have a small circuit description.

Lemma 4.8 ([IMZ19, Vad12]). There exists a p-regular k-wise independent random re-
striction D distributed over ρ : [N ] → {0, 1, ∗}, samplable using O(k log N log(1/p)) bits.
Furthermore, each output coordinate of the pseudorandom restriction can be computed in
time polynomial in the number of random bits.

    We can compose two restrictions ρ1 and ρ2 in a natural way, by applying them one
after the other. The composition is denoted by ρ1 ◦ ρ2 .

4.2.3      Lower bounds using random restrictions
In this section we recall the main ideas behind classical lower bound results based on
the random restriction technique, used against circuit classes like AC0 and cubic-sized
De Morgan formulas. We refer to [AB09, Juk12] for more details about the lower bound
proofs.
AC0 circuits: A Decision Tree is a tree in which each internal node is labeled by a variable
and each leaf is labeled by a Boolean value. A decision tree defines the computation of
a Boolean function as a traversal down the tree, by examining the variable at each node
and picking a branch based on its value. The output of the function is the leaf label at
the end of the traversal. Every Boolean function can be computed by a decision tree.
For any function f over n variables, let DTdepth (f ) be the depth of the smallest decision
tree computing f .

                                                 46
   A sequence of works [Ajt83, FSS84, Yao85, Hås86] used the method of random re-
strictions to show lower bounds for parity against AC0 . The main idea behind the lower
bound was the switching lemma:

Lemma 4.9 (Håstad’s switching lemma [Hås86]). Let F be a CNF of width w (one which
has at most w variables in each clause), 1 > p > 0, t > 0 and ρ be a p-regular random
restriction sampled from Rp . Then,

                              Pr {DTdepth (F |ρ ) > t} ≤ (5pw)t
                              ρ∼Rp

   In particular, under the application of a p-regular truly random restriction for suitably
large p, any AC0 -circuit can be shown to collapse to a constant function (with high
probability) by iterative application of the switching lemma.
De Morgan formulas Random restrictions have also been used to show lower bounds
against small-sized De Morgan formulas. The lower bound is proved by the following
classical shrinkage result.

Theorem 4.10 (Formula shrinkage under random restrictions [Hås98, Tal14]). Let f be
a Boolean function. For any p > 0,
                                                          p     
                          Eρ∼Rp [L(f |ρ )] ≤ O p2 L(f ) + p L(f )

   In other words, under the application of a p-regular truly random restriction, the
formula size of a function shrinks by at least a p2 -factor in expectation.

4.2.4      Local Circuit Classes
Our definition of local computation is somewhat similar to some definitions appearing in
[Yao89].

Definition 4.11 (Local circuit classes). Let C be a circuit class (such as AC0 [s], TC0 [s],
SIZE[s], etc). For functions q, `, a : N → N, we say that a language L is in [q, `, a]– C if
there exists a sequence {En } of oracle circuits for which the following holds:

 (i ) Each oracle circuit En is a C-circuit.

 (ii ) There are at most q(n) oracle gates in En , each of fan-in at most `(n), and any
       path from an input gate to an output gate encounters at most a(n) oracle gates.

(iii ) There exists a language O ⊆ {0, 1}∗ such that the sequence {EnO } (En with its oracle
      gates set to O) computes L.

   In the definition above, q stands for quantity, ` for locality, and a for adaptivity of the
corresponding oracle gates.

                                               47
4.2.5     Hardness Magnification Through the Lens of Oracle Cir-
          cuits
In Section 3.1.1 we had reviewed some existing magnification results. Following our
definition of local circuit classes, we can view these results as unconditional upper bounds
on the size of small fan-in oracle circuits solving the corresponding problems, for a certain
choice of oracle gates. In a magnification theorem, it is important to upper bound the
uniform complexity of the oracle gates. For our discussion, this is not going to be relevant.
    The fact that existing magnification theorems produce such circuits is a consequence
of the algorithmic nature of the underlying proofs, which show how to reduce an instance
of a problem to shorter instances of another related problem. By inspection of each proof,
it is possible to establish a variety of upper bounds. We explicitly state some of them
below.

Proposition 4.12. The following results hold.

   • [AK10]
         h For every  Π ∈ {BFE, WS5 , W5-STCONN} and every β > 0, we have that
                   β  1 i
     Πn ∈ O n 1−β
                   , n , O β – TC0 [O(n)].
                                                                  
   • [LW13] For every δ > 0, CircEvaln ∈ n · poly(log n), nδ , n1−δ – SIZE[n · poly(log n)].

   • [OS18a] For every constructive function n ≤ s(n) ≤ 2n /poly(n) and parameter
      0 < δ(n) < 1/2, MCSP[(s, 0), (s, δ)] ∈ [N, poly(s/δ), 1]– Formula[N · poly(s/δ)].

   • [OS18a] Let k = (log n)C , where C ∈ N. Then k-Vertex-Cover ∈ [1, (log n)4C , 1]–
     AC0d [m1+εd ], where εd → 0 as d → ∞.

   • [OPS19] For every β > 0 and any s(n) ≤ 2βn , MKtP[s(n), 2s(n)] ∈ [N, poly(s), 1]–
     Formula-XOR[N · poly(s)].

   • [OPS19] For every size function s(n) ≤ 2n /poly(n), we have MCSP[s(n)/n, s(n)] ∈
      [N · poly(s), poly(s), poly(s)]– SIZE[N · poly(s)].

   • [MMW19] For every constructive function s(n) ≤ 2n /poly(n), we have MCSP[s(n)] ∈
      [O(N/poly(s)), poly(s), O(n/ log(s))]– SIZE[N/poly(s)].

   We stress however that not every hardness magnification theorem needs to lead to an
unconditional construction of efficient oracle circuits. (All the proofs that we know of
produce such circuits though.)




                                              48
4.3          HM Frontier for Gap MKtP and AC0-XOR
An AC0 -XOR circuit on variables x1 , . . . , xn is an extension of AC0 where gates at the
bottom layer of the circuit can compute parity functions of arbitrary arity over x1 , . . . , xn .
The size of an AC0 -XOR circuit is measured by the number of gates.
     We first establish HM Frontier A in Section 4.3.1. Next, in Section 4.3.2, we show
that a well-known technique for proving AC0 [2] lower bounds above the magnification
threshold, i.e. the Razborov-Smolensky polynomial approximation method, localises and
thus cannot be adapted to achieve magnification using Item A1.

4.3.1        Establishing HM Frontier A
Items A2 [RR97] and A3 [Raz87, Smo87] follow from known results. We start with the
magnification theorem in Item A1.

Theorem 4.13. There exists a constant c0 ≥ 0, such that for every large enough c ≥ 1

              MKtP[logc N, logc N + c0 log N ] ∈
                                               / AC0 -XOR[N 1.01 ] =⇒ EXP 6⊆ NC1

Before diving into the proof, we need the following structural result about NC1 -circuits.

Lemma 4.14 (cf. [IMP12], Lemma 8.1 in [AHM+ 08]). For every sequence of NC1 -circuits
{Cn }n∈N and for every d ≥ 2, there exists a sequence {Dn } of depth-d AC0 -circuits of size
  O(1/d−1)
2n           , such that for each n ∈ N, Dn computes the same function as Cn .

Proof of Thoerem 4.13. We show the contrapositive of this result. Assume that EXP ⊆
NC1 . Consider the following language L which consists of input strings of the form
(a, 1k , (i1 , b1 ), . . . , (ir , br )) (where a, k ∈ N, a is encoded in binary and bj ∈ {0, 1}), if for
each 1 ≤ j ≤ r, ij is a string of length dlog ae and there exists a string z of length a such
that Kt(z) ≤ k and zij = bj , for every index j.
   [OPS19] show that L ∈ EXP and further, also show that for every large enough N
and c ≥ 1, MKtP[logc N, logc N + c0 log N ] can be computed by a sequence of L-oracle
circuits {DN } of the following form : The bottom layer has only XOR gates of arbitrary
fan-in over the inputs, the middle layer has L-oracle gates of fan-in m = O(logc N ) and
the output gate is an AND-gate of fan-in O(N ).
   Under the assumption that EXP ⊆ NC1 , L can be computed by a sequence of
polynomial-sized NC1 -circuits {Cn }n∈N . Using Lemma 4.14, for every d ∈ N and m =
                                                                        1/d
O(logc N ), Cm can be computed by an AC0 -circuit of size 2m                  , which is of size at most
  0.01
N     if d is picked to be large enough. Replacing each occurrence of the Lm -oracle with
its equivalent depth-d AC0 circuit, we obtain an AC0 -XOR circuit of superlinear size and
depth d + 2 which computes MKtP[logc N, logc N + c0 log N ].

                                                   49
   We next prove that even with a much larger gap, MKtP is not in AC0 . This in turn
establishes HM Frontier A4.
                                     h                            i
                                                3
Theorem 4.15. For any d = d(N ), MKtP d · O(log
                                          e       N ), ω(logNd N ) ∈/ AC0d .

    We use random restrictions to show that MKtP[s1 , s2 ] is not in AC0 , where s1 =
          3
d · O(log
    e       N ) and s2 = N/ω(logd N ). The proof technique is similar to that of the
exponential size AC0 lower bound for MCSP in [CKLM19]. However, a crucial difference
here is that we optimise on the Kt complexity of the YES instances instead of the size of
the lower bound.
   The idea is that when any polynomial sized constant-depth circuit C over N inputs
is hit by a random restriction ρ ∼ Rp , it collapses to a shallow decision tree with high
probability (see Lemma 4.9). This would allow us to take a fixed restriction ρ and either
complete it into a YES instance z Y of Kt complexity at most s1 (N ), or to a NO instance
z N of Kt complexity at least s2 (N ), if the number of unrestricted variables is large enough.
However, the simplified circuit C|ρ now depends on very few variables in ρ−1 (∗), and thus
C|ρ can’t distinguish between z Y and z N , if they are suitably defined. This means that
CN cannot compute MKtP[s1 , s2 ].
   The main issue with this approach is that the restrictions we use to simplify C would
restrict a large fraction of the N variables and a typical random restriction cannot be com-
pleted to get an instance with low Kt complexity. We thus use pseudorandom restrictions
which can be computed from a small number of random bits by efficient algorithms.
   Trevisan and Xue [TX13] showed that there exists a pseudorandom restriction D sam-
plable using seeds of length poly(log N ), which collapses every polynomial-sized DNF (or
a CNF) to a shallow decision tree with high probability. Moreover, the expected fraction
of unrestricted variables is at least p = Ω(1/ log N ). Under the restriction ρ obtained by
composing d independently sampled pseudorandom restrictions, every polynomial sized
constant-depth circuit CN can be collapsed to a constant function, while leaving at least
pd many variables unrestricted.
   Since the seed length for generating ρ is d · poly(log N ), for the instance wY generated
from the distribution 0N ◦ ρ, Kt(wY ) ≤ poly(log N ). On the other hand, we see that C|ρ
cannot distinguish between wN = UN ◦ ρ (variables unrestricted by ρ are set by a uniform
distribution) and 0N ◦ ρ, since C|ρ is a constant function and does not depend on any of
the unrestricted variables. In particular, if ρ leaves at least N/O(logd N ) many variables
unrestricted, wN has high Kt complexity and thus, CN cannot compute MKtP[s1 , s2 ].

Remark 4.16. Notice that Theorem 4.15 is only meaningful when d = o(log N/ log log N ),
because otherwise the gap for the promise problem is undefined.


                                              50
   The rest of the section is devoted to the formal proof of Theorem 4.15. Trevisan
and Xue stated a derandomised version of Håstad’s switching lemma, i.e. showed that
every pseudorandom distribution that fools large enough CNFs, generates pseudorandom
restrictions under which small-width CNFs collapse to shallow decision trees with high
probability. To state this formally, define a w-width CNF/DNF as one which has at most
w variables in each clause.

Lemma 4.17 (Derandomised Switching Lemma [TX13] (Lemma 7)). Let F be an S-
clause w-width CNF over n variables, p = 2−q be a positive parameter for some q ∈ N
and D be a distribution over {0, 1}(q+1)n that ε0 -fools all S · 2w(q+1) -clause CNFs. Then,
for every integer t > 0,

               Pr {DTdepth (F |ρz ) > t} ≤ 2t+w+1 · (5pw)t + ε0 · 2(t+1)(2w+log S)
              z∼D

We also need the following fact.

Fact 4.18 (Corollary 55 in [Tal17b]). Let D be a distribution over {0, 1}n that ε-fools
CNFs of size S. For any t ∈ N, let Dt be the distribution over {0, 1}n·t sampled by
concatenating t independent samples from D. Then, Dt (t · ε)-fools CNFs of size S on nt
variables.

We first show a version of derandomised switching lemma for AC0 .

Theorem 4.19 (Based on Theorem 11 in [TX13] and Theorem 56 in [Tal17b]). Let C be
a circuit of size S and depth d over N variables. Let p = 2−q for some q ∈ N and t ∈ N be
a parameter so that p < 1/64t. Assume that there exists a polynomial-time pseudorandom
generator G : {0, 1}r → {0, 1}(q+1)N that ε0 -fools CNFs of size S · 2t · 2t(q+1) . Then, there
exists a distribution over restrictions D samplable by a generator G0 having seed length
d · r which runs in polynomial time, such that

  1.
                      Pr {DTdepth (C|ρ ) > t} ≤ S · 21−t + ε0 · 2(t+1)(3t+log S)
                                                                                   
                     ρ∼D


  2. For every 0 < δ ≤ 1, with probability at least (1 − N (δ + ε0 d)), the number of
                                          pd−1
     unrestricted inputs is at least 64Nlog(1/δ) .

Proof of Theorem 4.19. The proof structure is very similar to that of [Tal17b] (cf. The-
orem 56). W.l.o.g. we consider C as a (d + 1)-depth circuit C 0 over n inputs where the
fan-in of the bottom layer is 1 (can do this by adding a dummy layer of at most S · n
many gates of fan-in 1). For each 1 ≤ i ≤ d, let Si be the number of gates in layer i of
the original circuit C.

                                              51
   We construct G0 by sampling d independent pseudorandom restrictions using G. More
formally, the generator G0 takes input w = w1 , . . . , wd , where each wi is picked uniformly
at random from {0, 1}r . It then outputs the restriction Go (w) = ρ defined as ρ = ρ1 ◦
· · · ◦ ρd , where each ρi is independently sampled using G on the seed wi . Clearly, the seed
length of G0 is d · r and it runs in polynomial time since G does.
   The proof proceeds by establishing the invariant that at the end of each iteration, C 0
can be simplified into a circuit whose depth reduces by 1, such that in the new circuit,
every gate in layer 2 has a fan-in of at most S · 2t (computes a CNF/DNF of size at
most S · 2t ) and the bottom fan-in is at most t. This can be observed by an inductive
argument.

   First Iteration: In the first iteration, we set p = 1/64 and w = 1 for the application
of Lemma 4.17. We sample ρ1 by computing G(w1 ) for a uniformly random seed w1 and
define ρ1 by its first (6 + 1)N = 7N bits. The probability that there exists a gate in
layer 2 of C 0 |ρ1 that cannot be computed by a decision tree of depth at most t is at most
                                          
S1 · 2t+2 · (5/64)t + ε0 · 2(t+1)(2+log S) .
   In other words, in the complement event, each gate at layer 2 in C 0 |ρ1 can be computed
by a depth-t decision tree and thus, can be written as a t-width DNF (or a CNF)of size
at most 2t . This leads to the collapse of this layer into the one above it and yields a
depth d-circuit, such that the fan-in of the gates in layer 2 of the new circuit is at most
S · 2t , and in layer 1, is at most t.

   The other d − 1 iterations: For any other iteration 2 ≤ i ≤ d, we set p = 2−q
and w = t for the application of Lemma 4.17. We first generate ρi = G(wi ) and use the
invariant from the (i − 1)th iteration, to observe that the probability that there exists a
gate at layer 2 in C 0 |ρ1 ,...,ρi that cannot be computed by a decision tree of depth at most
                                                         t 
t is at most Si · 22t+1 · (5pt)t + ε0 · 2(t+1)(2t+log(S·2 ) . In the complement event, each gate
in layer 2 in C 0 |ρ1 ,...,ρi can be computed by an t-width DNF (or CNF) of size 2t , and
we collapse this layer into the one above it (reducing the depth of C 0 |ρ1 ,...,ρi by 1). The
resulting circuit maintains the invariant that every gate in layer 2 has fan-in at most S · 2t
and the bottom fan-in is at most t.
   At the end of d iterations, we use a union bound to observe that the probability that
DTdepth (C|ρ ) is greater than t
                    d
                        !
                  X                                                              t
                                                                                      
             ≤        Si · 22t+1 · max{(5/64)t , (5pt)t } + ε0 · 2(t+1)(2t+log(S·2 ))
                  i=1
                                                          t
                                                               
             ≤ S · 22t+1 · (5/64)t + ε0 · 2(t+1)(2t+log(S·2 ))
             ≤ S · 21−t + ε0 · 2(t+1)(3t+log S)
                                                



                                                 52
This shows Item 1 of the theorem.
       To prove Item 2 of the theorem, we divide [N ] into B blocks of size k each, i.e.
B = bN/kc, for k to be fixed later. The idea is to show that every block has at least one
unrestricted variable with high probability.
   Fix any block Tj for 1 ≤ j ≤ B. [Tal17b] constructs a CNF of size at most N that
takes ρ1 , . . . , ρd ∈ {0, 1}d·N (q+1) as input and checks if every variable in Tj is restricted
by their composition ρ. Using Fact 4.18 with the fact that G ε0 -fools CNFs of size
S · 2t · 2t(q+1) , observe that G0 (ε0 d)-fools CNFs of size S · 2t · 2t(q+1) on d(q + 1)N variables.
     Thus, the probability that all the variables in Tj are restricted by ρ is at most
                  k
 1 − pd−1 /64 + dε0 , where the first term in the expression is the probability that a
truly random restriction fixes all the variables in Tj . For any 0 < δ < 1, by picking
k = 64 log(1/δ)/pd−1 , this probability is at most δ + dε0 . Using a union bound over all
the blocks, we see that each block has at least one unrestricted variable with probability
at least 1 − (bN/kc · (δ + ε0 d)). In other words, with probability at least (1 − N (δ + ε0 d)),
                    d−1
|ρ−1 (∗)| ≥ 64Nlog(1/δ)
                 p
                        .

Remark 4.20. The proof of Theorem 4.15 is marginally different to that of [Tal17b] in a
couple of ways: (1) we apply the derandomised switching lemma d times (instead of d − 1)
in order to turn depth-d circuits into shallow decision trees, and (2) for the application of
constructing a PRG for AC0 , Tal (and also [TX13]) uses G to generate a pseudorandom
selection (i.e. a string in {0, 1}qn ) and set the bits of the restriction using truly random
bits, whereas in our case we generate the entire restriction using G.

Corollary 4.21. Let C be an N -variate circuit of size S and depth d. There exists a
restriction ρ ∈ {0, 1, ∗}N such that

   1. The decision tree depth of C|ρ is at most t = 2 log S.
                                                               N
   2. The number of unrestricted variables in ρ is at least O(log d
                                                                    S)
                                                                       .

                        3
   3. Kt(ρ) ≤ d · O(log
                  e       S).

    For the proof, we need the following instantiation of a pseudorandom generator which
fools DNFs/CNFs from [Tal17b].6

Lemma 4.22 (Theorem 52 in [Tal17b]). There exists a polynomial time pseudorandom
generator of seed length O(log
                         e     S · (log(S/ε0 ))) which ε0 -fools all DNFs (or CNFs) of size
S on n variables.
   6
       [Tal17b] uses a small-bias generator (see Definition 4.3) for this purpose.




                                                      53
Proof of Corollary 4.21. We apply Theorem 4.19 with parameters t = 2 log S and p =
                                                                2
1/65t. To do so, we first use Lemma 4.22 with ε0 = 1/215t to give us a pseudorandom
generator G which fools DNFs (or CNFs) of size S · 2t · 2t(q+1) , using a seed of length
          3
r = O(log
    e       S).
   For these parameters, Theorem 4.19 shows that for restriction ρ sampled from G0 ,
                                                                                        3
the probability that DTdepth (C|ρ ) is greater than t is at most 1/4. Further, for δ = 4N ,
                d−1
|ρ−1 (∗)| < 64Nlog(1/δ)
                 p
                        with probability less than 1/4. Thus, we see that there exists a
restriction ρ generated by G0 such that the decision tree depth of C|ρ is at most t and
                                                    N
the number of unrestricted variables is at least O(log d
                                                         S)
                                                            . This proves items 1 and 2.
   To prove item 3, we see that the machine which computes the string that defines ρ
                                                3
has description length O(dr) + O(1) = d · O(log
                                          e       S) (as we need to fix the random seed
that generates ρ) and runs in time poly(N, r). Thus, the Kt complexity of ρ is at most
          3
d · O(log
    e       S).

We also make use of the following proposition.

Proposition 4.23 (Proposition 8 in [OPS19]). Let B be an algorithm that runs in time
T (N ) over inputs of length N . Then, for every w ∈ {0, 1}N , we have Kt(B(w)) ≤
Kt(w) + log(T (N )) + O(1).
                                               3
Proof of Theorem 4.15. Let s1 (N ) = d · O(log
                                         e       N ) and s2 (N ) = N/ω(logd N ). Assume
that there exists a circuit C of size at most S = poly(N ) and depth d that com-
                     3
putes MKtP[d · O(log
                e      N ), N/ω(logd N )]. We define a YES instance wY and a NO in-
stance wN such that C(wY ) = C(wN ) and this contradicts the fact that C computes
MKtP[s1 (N ), s2 (N )]. Let ρ ∈ {0, 1, ∗} be a restriction given by Corollary 4.21.

   • Define wY ∈ {0, 1}N as wY = 0N ◦ ρ, i.e. all the variables unrestricted by ρ are
     set to 0. Next, observe that given ρ as input, there exists an algorithm which
     runs in polynomial time which outputs wY . In particular, this means that the
     Kt(wY ) ≤ Kt(ρ) + a · log N from Proposition 4.23, for some universal constant
     a ≥ 0. Since this is at most s1 (N ) (by choosing a large enough constant), we see
     that wY is a YES instance.

   • Let W ⊆ ρ−1 (∗) be the set of variables of size at most t = 2 log N which are queried
     by the smallest-depth decision tree of C|ρ . The number of strings over ρ−1 (∗) \ W
                                    d
     variables is at least 2N/O((log N ))−2 log N > 2s2 (N )+1 , where the latter quantity is the
     number of strings of length N with Kt complexity at most s2 (N ). In particular,
                                        −1
     there exists a string h ∈ {0, 1}ρ (∗)\W such that any string of length N which agrees
     with it has Kt complexity larger than s2 (N ). The string wN is extended from ρ by
     additionally fixing the unrestricted variables in W to be 0, and setting the remaining

                                              54
      unrestricted variables in ρ−1 (∗) \ W to h. Clearly, wN has Kt complexity at least
      s2 (N ).

Finally, C(wY ) = C(wN ), as wY and wN agree on all inputs in W ∪ ρ−1 ({0, 1}), and C
restricted by ρ depends only on W .

4.3.2     Locality Barrier for AC0 [2]-Lower Bounds Above the Thresh-
          old in HM Frontier A
In this section we observe that the Razborov-Smolensky [Raz87, Smo87] lower bound
technique can be “localised”.
   Recall that the Razborov-Smolensky lower bound technique consists of two parts. The
first part shows that Majority cannot be well-approximated by low-degree polynomials.
In more detail, [Smo87] showed that no polynomial in F2 [x1 , . . . , xN ] of degree at most
   √
O( N ) can agree with Majority on more than 4/5-fraction of the inputs.

Lemma 4.24 ([Smo87]). There exists c > 0, such that for any p ∈ F2 [x1 , . . . , xN ] of
          √
degree c · N
                               Pr       {p(x) 6= Majority(x)} > 1/5
                             x∈{0,1}N


   The second part shows that AC0 [2] circuits can be well-approximated by low-degree
polynomials. A combination of these two proves the lower bound. We localise the second
part by extending the result to AC0 [2] circuits with oracles having constrained fan-in. In
particular, we show that -

Lemma 4.25. For any AC0 [2] oracle circuit C of polynomial size and depth d, where
the fan-in of the oracle gates in the ith -level is at most Oi , there exists a polynomial
p ∈ F2 [x1 , . . . , xN ] of degree at most O(logd−1 N ) · dj=1 Oj such that Prx∈{0,1}N {p(x) 6=
                                                          Q

C(x)} ≤ 1/5.

   The proof requires the notion of a low degree ε-error probabilistic polynomial. Recall
from [Raz87, Smo87] that a probabilistic polynomial from F2 [x1 , . . . , xN ] of degree at
most D is a randomised multilinear polynomial P sampled from some distribution over
polynomials in F2 [x1 , . . . , xn ] of degree at most D. We say that P is an ε-error proba-
bilistic polynomial for a function f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} if for each x ∈ {0, 1}n , we have
PrP {P(x) 6= f (x)} ≤ ε.

Proof of Lemma 4.25. The proof is similar to the inductive probabilistic polynomial con-
struction by [KS18] (cf. Lemma 3.6), which is a direct strengthening of [Raz87]. We start
from the bottom layer, and work our way upwards to the output gate, while converting


                                                55
 the gates in each layer of C into a low degree probabilistic polynomial which approximates
 the gate well.
        For the base case, each variable xi can be trivially represented by a degree 1 polyno-
 mial. Next, for any 0 < i < d − 1, consider layer i of the circuit C. Assume that every
 sub-circuit rooted at a gate in level i − 1 is approximated up to an error of 1/poly(N )
                                                                          Qi−1
 by a probabilistic polynomial on N variables and degree O(logi−1 N ) · j=1    Oj . Now,
 every AND, OR, NOT or XOR gate can be approximated by a probabilistic polynomial
 of degree O(log N ) over the gate inputs, up to an error 1/poly(N ) using standard ideas
 from [Raz87]. Every oracle gate O can be represented by a polynomial by simply taking
 the multilinear extension of O of degree at most Oi , since the fan-in of the oracle gate
 in this layer is at most Oi . In particular, every gate in this layer can be represented by
 a probabilistic polynomial of degree at most max{O(log N ), Oi } up to error 1/poly(N ).
 Composing this polynomial with the polynomials from the (i − 1)th layer, we see that
 each gate in this layer can be approximated by an N -variate probabilistic polynomial of
 degree at most O(logi N ) · ij=1 Oj .
                             Q

    Thus, each gate in layer d − 1 can be represented by a probabilistic polynomial of
 degree at most O(logd−1 N ) · d−1
                              Q
                                j=1 Oj . Finally, the output gate of C can be represented
 by a probabilistic polynomial of degree at most max{O(1), Od }.7 By composing it with
 the polynomials for the gates in layer d − 1, we get a probabilistic polynomial P on N
 variables and degree at most O(logd−1 N ) · dj=1 Oj that approximates C up to an error
                                            Q

 1/5. Using an averaging argument over P, there exists a (deterministic) polynomial p of
 the same degree that computes C on at least a 4/5-fraction of the inputs.

        The main result of this section is the following instantiation of the locality barrier for
 HM Frontier A.

 Theorem 4.26 (Locality Barrier for HM Frontier A). The following results hold :

(A1O ) (Oracle Circuit Construction from Magnification) There exists a constant c ≥ 0 and
          an Oracle O, such that for every large enough d > 1, MKtP[(logd N ), (logd N ) +
          c log N ] ∈ AND-O-XOR[N 1.01 ], where each oracle gate has fan-in O(logd N ).
                                                                                         Qd
(A3O ) (Extension of Lower Bound Techniques) Let O1 , . . . , Od ∈ N such that               i=1 Oi ≤
              √
                  N                                                                      0
                     . Then, Majority on N inputs cannot be computed by any AC [2] oracle
          ω(logd−1 N )
          circuit of polynomial size and depth d, where any arbitrary oracle gates of fan-in Oi
          can be used in the ith layer.
    7
     As in [KS18], if the output gate of C is an AND, OR, NOT or XOR gate, we can approximate it by a
 probabilistic polynomial of constant degree up to an error of 1/10.




                                                 56
Proof. The proof of the first item follows from Theorem 4.13. For the second item,
towards a contradiction, let C be an AC0 [2] oracle circuit having n inputs, polynomial
size and depth d, which satisfies the constraints for oracle fan-in in the item 2 and
computes Majority. From Lemma 4.25 we see that there exists a polynomial of degree
                           √
O(logd−1 N ) · dj=1 Od < o( N ) that approximates Majority up to an error of at most
              Q

1/5, which contradicts Lemma 4.24.

   An incomparable lower bound can also be obtained for (A3O ) by using the lower
bound for AC0 [2] interactive compression games from [OS15].

Proposition 4.27 (Corollary 5.3 in [OS15]). Majorityn cannot be computed by AC0 [2]
circuits of polynomial size with arbitrary oracle gates, if the total fan-in of the oracle
gates is N/(log N )ω(1) .


4.4      HM Frontier for Gap MCSP and Formula-XOR
Recall that Formula-XOR[s] is the class of De Morgan formulas on variables x1 , . . . , xn
with at most s leaves, where each leaf is a parity function of arbitrary arity over x1 , . . . , xn .
   We first establish HM Frontier B in Section 4.4.1. Following this, we show that
known lower bound techniques by [Tal17a] and [KKL+ 20] against Formula-XOR localise
in Section 4.4.2.

4.4.1      Establishing HM Frontier B
In this section we establish the HM Frontier B. Items B2 [RR97], B3(a) [Tal17a], B3(b)
[KKL+ 20] and B4 [HS17, OPS19] follow from known results. We show the hardness
magnification result in Item B1 here.
   In fact, we provide two different proofs for Item B1, one based on [OS18a] and the
other based on [CJW19]. In both proofs, magnification is achieved by constructing a
low fan-in oracle circuit for MCSP. We present the first approach here and the second
approach in Section 4.6.1, as it is obtained as a by-product of proving Item D1.

Theorem 4.28 (HM for worst-case MCSP via reductions). Suppose that there exists
                             1/3      2/3
ε > 0, such that MCSP[2n           , 2n     ] 6∈ Formula-XOR[N 1+ε ]. Then NQP 6⊆ NC1 .

    The most interesting part of the proof of Theorem 4.28 is that we get a conditional or-
acle circuit construction, assuming that QP ⊆ P/poly. Although, the oracle construction
(Theorem 4.45) from Section 4.6.1 is unconditional, the proof in this section illustrates
a potentially more applicable approach where the assumption in the contrapositive (i.e.



                                                     57
NQP ⊆ NC1 ) is also needed for the construction of the oracle circuits which imply mag-
nification.
       [OS18a] showed hardness magnification for approximate MCSP. Theorem 4.28 uses
their result to show a similar phenomenon for the worst-case version of MCSP.
   A natural approach to establish a reduction from worst-case gap MCSP to approximate
MCSP is by using error-correcting codes. Error-correcting codes map a Boolean function
which is hard in the worst-case to one which is hard on average. One issue with using
codes is that, if the function is easy to begin with (i.e. can be computed by a small-sized
circuit), the generated codeword has no guarantee about being easily computable. We
show that this property holds under the assumption that QP ⊆ P/poly (which follows
from NQP ⊆ NC1 ).8
       We use the following error-correcting code.

Theorem 4.29 (Explicit linear error-correcting codes [Jus72, SS96]). There exists a
sequence {EN } of error-correcting codes EN : {0, 1}N → {0, 1}M (N ) with the following
properties:

   • EN (x) can be computed by a uniform deterministic algorithm running in time
         poly(N ).

   • M (N ) = b · N for a fixed b ≥ 1.

   • There exists a constant δ > 0 such that any codeword EN (x) ∈ {0, 1}M (N ) that is
         corrupted on at most a δ-fraction of coordinates can be uniquely decoded to x by a
         uniform deterministic algorithm D running in time poly(M (N )).

   • Each output bit is computed by a parity function: for each input length N ≥ 1 and
         for each coordinate i ∈ [M (N )], there exists a set SN,i ⊆ [N ] such that for every
         x ∈ {0, 1}N ,
                                                       M
                                          EN (x)i =            xj .
                                                      j∈SN,i


       We need the following result from [OS18a] for the proof.

Lemma 4.30 (Lemma 16 from [OS18a]). If there exists ε > 0 and constant δ > 0 such
                 √       √
                                / Formula-XOR[N 1+ε ], then NP 6⊆ NC1 .
that MCSP[(2 n , 0), (2 n , δ)] ∈
   8
    The proof of Theorem 4.28 shows a conditional reduction from worst-case MCSP to approximate
MCSP. Recall Section 3.4 for connections between such reductions and hardness of learning from worst-
case assumptions.




                                                 58
 Proof of Theorem 4.28. Towards proving the contrapositive, assume that NQP ⊆ NC1 .
                                                                                                                    1/3       2/3
 For any N = 2n , let w ∈ {0, 1}N be the input instance to MCSP[2n                                                        , 2n       ]. We first
                                                                                    √              √
                                                n1/3    n2/3                            n                  n
 show a reduction from MCSP[2                          ,2       ] to MCSP[(2                , 0), (2           , δ)], for δ > 0 given by
 Theorem 4.29. The reduction maps w to EN (w) = z, where EN is the encoder given by
 the code in Theorem 4.29 and z ∈ {0, 1}M (N ) . Let m = log M (N ).
                                                                                                                             1/3
    We first show that if fn(w) can be computed by a circuit Cn of size 2n                                                           , then fn(z)
                                                            √
                                                                m
 can be computed by a circuit of size 2                              over m inputs. Define function F which takes
 as inputs an encoding of Cn and i ∈ {0, 1}m , and outputs the ith bit of EN (w). The size
                          1/3
 of the input to F is 2O(n ) and EN (w) runs in time 2O(n) . Since NQP ⊆ NC1 , we see
 that QP ⊆ P/poly and thus, F can be computed by a polynomial-sized circuit. In other
                                                                    1/3 )
 words, there exists a circuit F 0 of size 2O(n                             into which we can hard-wire the description
 of the circuit Cn , such that on input i, F 0 (Cn , i) outputs fn(z)(i). Clearly, fn(z) can be
                                    1/3     √
 computed by a circuit of size 2O(n ) ≤ 2 m .
                                                                                                                                             √
    For the other direction, suppose fn(z) can be computed by a circuit Bm of size 2 m
 on at least (1 − δ)-fraction of the inputs of length m. Define G which takes Bm and
 j ∈ {0, 1}n as inputs and outputs the j th bit of DN (tt(Bm )), where DN is the decoder
 given by Theorem 4.29. Observe that G is computable in time 2O(n) and thus, is in
                                                                                                                √            2/3
 QP ⊆ P/poly. In other words, there exists a circuit G0 of size 2O( m) ≤ 2n                                                           into which
                                                                                                       0
 we can hardwire the description of Bm , such that on input j, G (Bm , j) outputs fn(w)(j).
    Finally, we use Lemma 4.30 along with the assumption that NQP ⊆ NC1 , to obtain
              √         √
 that MCSP[(2 m , 0), (2 m , δ)] ∈ Formula[N 1+ε ], for every ε > 0. Since each output bit of
 EN can be computed by an XOR gate, the reduction can be implemented by a linearly
 many XOR gates at the bottom. Combining the formula above with this reduction, we
                    1/3          2/3
 see that MCSP[2n         , 2n         ] ∈ Formula-XOR[N 1+ε ].

 4.4.2     Locality Barrier for Formula-XOR Lower Bounds Above the
           Threshold in HM Frontier B
 This section captures an instantiation of the locality barrier for HM Frontier B. In this
 section we use the {−1, 1} realisation of the Boolean domain (recall that -1 represents
 True and 1 represents false). Define the Inner Product modulo 2 function, InnerProductn :
                                                                                                 Pn
 {−1, 1}n × {−1, 1}n → {−1, 1} as InnerProduct(x, y) = (−1)                                        i=1 (1−xi )(1−yi )/4          .

 Theorem 4.31 (Locality Barrier for HM Frontier B). The following results hold.

(B1O ) (Oracle Circuits from Magnification) There exists an oracle O, such that for any
                             1/3          2/3
       ε > 0, MCSP[2n                  , 2n     ] ∈ Formula-O-XOR[N 1.01 ], where every oracle gate has
       fan-in at most N ε and appears in the layer right above the XOR leaves.



                                                                      59
(B3O ) (Extension of Lower Bound Techniques - 1) For any δ > 0, InnerProduct over
        N inputs cannot be computed by N 2−2δ -size Formula-O-XOR circuits with at most
        N 2−3δ oracle gates of fan-in N δ in the layer right above the XOR leaves, for any
        oracle O.

(B3O ) (Extension of Lower Bound Techniques - 2) For every δ > 0, MCSP[2n /n4 ] cannot be
        computed by N 2−2δ−o(1) -size Formula-O-XOR circuits with at most N 2−3δ−o(1) oracle
        gates of fan-in N δ in the layer right above the XOR leaves, for any oracle O.

     To prove item 2 of Theorem 4.31, we adapt Tal’s [Tal17a] lower bound for bipartite
 formulas,9 for which we need the following results.

 Lemma 4.32 ([Rei11, Tal17a]). Let F be a De Morgan formula of size s which computes
 f : {−1, 1}n → {1, 1}. Then, there exists a multilinear polynomial p over R of degree
    √
 O( s), such that for every x ∈ {−1, 1}n , p(x) ∈ [F (x) − 1/3, F (x) + 1/3].

     For any function f : {−1, 1}n → {−1, 1}, f is said to be ε-correlated with a parity
          Q
 pS (x) = i∈S xi , if Ex∈{−1,1}n [f (x) · pS (x)] ≥ ε. Next, we show the following result on
 pointwise approximating formula-XOR circuits with oracles using polynomials.

 Lemma 4.33. For any δ > 0, let F (x1 , . . . , xn ) be a Formula-O-XOR circuit of size s,
 where every oracle O has fan-in at most nδ and appears in the layer right above the XOR
 leaves. Then the following hold:
                                                                                                                 √
    1. There exists a multilinear polynomial p(x1 , . . . , xn ) over R with at most sO( s) ·
           δ   √
       2n ·O( s) monomials such that for every x ∈ {−1, 1}n , sign(p(x)) = F (x).
                                                                                              
                                                                                      1
    2. There exists a parity function pT (x1 , . . . , xn ) which is at least sO( s) ·2nδ O( s) -
                                                                                 √          √


        correlated with F .

 Proof. We assume that each oracle gate is on ` = nδ inputs. Let t ≤ s/nδ be the number
 of oracle gates in F . Let p1 , . . . , ps be the leaves of F , where each pi is an XOR gate over
 x1 , . . . , xn . Let g1 , . . . , gt be oracle gates such that gi (x) = O(pi1 (x), . . . , pi` (x)), where
 pij ∈ {p1 , . . . , ps } for every i ∈ [t], j ∈ [`].
     Let F 0 be a De Morgan formula obtained by replacing each oracle gate in F with a
 new variable zi (for notational simplicity we assume that every leaf is an input to some
 oracle gate). We now use Lemma 4.32 on F 0 to get a t-variate polynomial q(z) over R of
    9
      A bipartite formula on variables x1 , . . . , xn , y1 , . . . , yn is a formula such that each leaf computes an
 arbitrary function in either (x1 , . . . , xn ) or (y1 , . . . , yn ). Formula-XOR circuits are a subset of bipartite
 formulas as one can always write ⊕(x1 , . . . , x2n ) as the parity of ⊕(x1 , . . . , xn ) and ⊕(xn+1 , . . . , x2n ).




                                                          60
             √
degree d = O( t), such that for every z ∈ {−1, 1}t , sign(q(z)) = F 0 (z). Expanding q(z)
as a multilinear polynomial :
                                                                   X                 Y
                                                  q(z) =                     qb(S)         zi
                                                               S⊆[t],|S|≤d           i∈S

   To prove the first item we substitute zi back with its corresponding oracle gate gi (x).
For every x ∈ {−1, 1}n , we have
                                           
                        X           Y
       F (x) = sign          qb(S)   gi (x)
                                S⊆[t],|S|≤d              i∈S
                                                                                              
                                    X                    Y         X              Y
                  = sign                        qb(S)                     O(U
                                                                            b )         pij (x)
                                S⊆[t],|S|≤d              i∈S       U ⊆[`]         j∈U
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                              
                                     X                    X                          Y                Y          
                  = sign                                               qb(S) ·          O(U
                                                                                          b i )       p      (x)
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                        ik j
                                                                                              k
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                 
                                  S⊆[t]            Ui1 ,...,Ui|S| ⊆[`]           1≤k≤|S|       j∈Uik             
                                S={i1 ,...,i|S| }
                                   |S|≤d

where the second equality uses the fact that any Boolean function on ` inputs can be
represented by a multilinear polynomial of degree at most ` where each coefficient is
                                                               √       δ   √
between [−1, 1]. Clearly the number of monomials is at most sO( s) · 2n ·O( s) .
   To prove the second item, firstly observe that for every z ∈ {−1, 1}t , q(z) · F 0 (z) ∈
[2/3, 4/3], because |q(z) − F 0 (z)| ≤ 1/3 for every z. This also means that for the polyno-
mial r(x) = q(g1 (x), . . . , gt (x)), Ex∈{−1,1}n [r(x) · F (x)] ≥ 2/3.
                                           Q         
   Given that qb(S) = Ez∈{−1,1}t q(z) i∈S zi , we see that |b         q (S)| ≤ 4/3. We have

2/3 ≤         E       [F (x) · r(x)]
         x∈{−1,1}n
                                                                           
                                   X                         Y
     =        E        F (x) ·                      qb(S)         gi (x)
         x∈{−1,1}n
                                    S⊆[t],|S|≤d              i∈S
                                                                                                                                  
              X                  X                           Y                                              Y      Y
     ≤                                           qb(S) ·              O(U
                                                                      b i )·
                                                                          k             E       F (x) ·                   pik j (x)
                                                                                  x∈{−1,1}n
            S⊆[t]          Ui1 ,...,Ui|S| ⊆[`]             1≤k≤|S|                                         1≤k≤|S| j∈Uik
         S={i1 ,...,i|S| }
            |S|≤d


Since, |b
        q (S)| ≤ 4/3 for every S ⊆ [t] and |O(U b )| ≤ 1 for every U ⊆ [`], we see that there
exists a set S of size at most d and sets Ui1 , . . . , Ui|S| such that
                                               
                             Y Y                                1              1
       Ex∈{−1,1}n F (x) ·             pik j (x) ≥ O(√t) nδ O(√t) ≥ O(√s) nδ O(√s)
                           1≤k≤|S| j∈U
                                                        t      ·2       s     ·2
                                                      ik



                                                                      61
                                                                             Q             Q
Taking pT be the parity of the parities defined by pT =                          1≤k≤|S|       j∈Uik pik j (x), we see
that pT is sO(√s) ·21nδ O(√s) -correlated with F .

Proof Sketch of Items 1 and 2 of Theorem 4.31. The first item follows from an inspec-
tion of the proof of Theorem 4.45 in Section 4.6.1.10
       The second item follows from Lemma 4.33. We observe that three different techniques
used to show Formula-XOR lower bounds by [Tal17a] localise.

    • Tal’s proof can be extended to show that the sign rank11 of any Formula-O-XOR
         circuit F having the desired structure is at most the number of monomials in the
                                                                                                                 √
         polynomial p given by the first item of lemma 4.33. Since this is at most sO( s) ·
           δ   √
         2n ·O( s) and InnerProduct has a sign rank which is at least 2n/2 [For02], the lower
         bound follows.

    • Tal’s lower bound based on the discrepancy of a function also localises.12 He shows
         that the discrepancy of F is at least a constant times the correlation
                                                                               of F with
                                                                                        the
         parity fT given by item 2 of Lemma 4.33, which is at least Ω sO(√s) ·21nδ O(√s) . On
         the other hand, the discrepancy of InnerProduct is at most 1/2n/2 (cf. Lemma 14.5
         of [Juk12]), thus proving the given lower bound for InnerProduct.

    • Finally, we observe that the lower bound technique of showing a high correlation of
         F with some parity fT , in combination with the fact that InnerProduct has exactly
         2−n/2 -correlation with any parity also localises to give the same lower bound.13



   Similar ideas can be used to localise the MCSP lower bound against sub-quadratic
Formula-XOR circuits by [KKL+ 20]. The main idea behind their proof is the following
lemma which is used to get PRGs for Formula-G from small-error PRGs for XOR-G.

Lemma 4.34. Let G be a class of functions over n bits. For any integer s = s(N ) and
                                                                            √
any 0 < ε < 1, if a distribution D over {−1, 1}N γ-fools the XOR of any O( s log(1/ε))
                                    √
functions from G, where γ = exp(O( s log s·log(1/ε))), then D also ε-fools Formula-G[s].
  10
      Note that Theorem 4.28 in Section 4.4.1 also gives us the same oracle circuit construction, under the
assumption QP ⊆ P/poly (although, with different oracles).
   11
      For any matrix A ∈ {−1, +1}m×n , the sign-rank of A is defined as the least rank of a matrix
B ∈ Rm×n such that for every (i, j) ∈ [m] × [n], B(i, j) 6= 0 and sign(Bi,j ) = Ai,j . The sign-rank of any
Boolean function f (x1 , . . . , xn , y1 , . . . , yn ) is defined as the sign-rank of the 2n × 2n matrix Mf , given as
Mf [x, y] = f (x, y).
   12
      The discrepancy of any Boolean function f (x1 , . . . , xn , y1 , . . . , yn ) is defined as
 1
                   P      P
22n maxI,J⊆[2 ]              y∈J Mf (x, y) .
               n
                      x∈I
  13
    It is well-known that InnerProduct is a bent function, i.e. each Fourier coefficient is equal to 2−n/2
(see [O’D14]).


                                                         62
   We use this framework to construct a PRG which ε-fools Formula-Onδ -XOR[s(n)] cir-
cuits over n inputs.
                                                                  √
Lemma 4.35. For any integer s(n), 0 < ε < 1 and δ > 0, any exp(O(− s log(1/ε) ·
(log s + nδ )))-biased distribution ε-fools Formula-Onδ -XOR[s].
                         √
Proof. Let γ 0 = exp(O(− s(log s + nδ ) · log(1/ε))). Next, let G = Onδ -XOR over n
inputs and D be any γ 0 -biased distribution from Definition 4.3. Finally, let ` = nδ
            √
and t = O( s log(1/ε))). Let g1 , . . . , gt be any functions from G such that gi (x) =
O(pi1 (x), . . . , pi` (x)), where each pij is an XOR gate of arbitrary arity over the n inputs.
Let F (x) = ti=1 gi (x).
                Q
                                        √
   For γ = γ 0 · 2t` = exp(O(− s log s log(1/ε))), we show that D γ-fools the XOR
      √
of O( s · log(1/ε)) many functions from G. Using Lemma 4.34 with these parameter
settings proves the result.
   Since O` can be represented by a multilinear polynomial of degree at most ` where
each coefficient is between [−1, 1], we have
                                                                         !
                    Y                                 Y   X      Y
         F (x) =        O(pk1 (x), . . . , pk` (x)) =      O(S)
                                                            b      pkj (x) 
                    1≤k≤t                                                    1≤k≤t      S⊆[`]             j∈S
                                                                                     !!
                        X               Y                           Y
                =                                    O(V
                                                     b k)                    pkj (x)
                    V1 ,...,Vt ⊆[`]   1≤k≤t                     j∈Vk


Now, we have
                                                                         !              "                          #
                                X                 Y                                          Y Y
        Ex∼D [F (x)] =                                    O(V
                                                          b k)               · Ex∼D                      pkj (x)
                            V1 ,...,Vt ⊆[`]       1≤k≤t                                     1≤k≤t j∈Vk
                                                                         !                   "                         #      !
                                X                 Y                                               Y Y
                        ≤                                 O(V
                                                          b k)               ·   Ex∼Un                        pkj (x) + γ 0
                            V1 ,...,Vt ⊆[`]       1≤k≤t                                          1≤k≤t j∈Vk
                                                                                                             !!
                                                     X                   Y                    Y
                            ≤ Ex∼Un                                                 O(V
                                                                                     b k)            pkj (x)       
                                              V1 ,...,Vt ⊆[`]        1≤k≤t                    j∈Vk
                                                                                                 !
                                                      X                          Y
                                              +                     γ0                 O(V
                                                                                       b k)
                                                  V1 ,...,Vt ⊆[`]            1≤k≤t
                                                              t`         0
                            ≤ Ex∼Un [F (x)] + 2 · γ

where the second inequality holds because D γ 0 -fools 1≤k≤t j∈Vk pkj (x) which is a large
                                                      Q     Q

parity and the final inequality holds because O(V
                                              b k ) ≤ 1 for every Vk .

We also need the following result to show the MCSP lower bound.


                                                                    63
Theorem 4.36 (Section 3 of [CKLM19]). There exists a constant c > 0 such that the
following holds. For any circuit class C, suppose that MCSP[2n /n4 ] is computable in C[s],
where s = s(N ). If there exists a psuedorandom generator G : {0, 1}r → {0, 1}N that
1/3-fools C[s] such that the circuit complexity of every string in the output of G (seen as
                                        N
a truth table) is T (N, s), then T ≥ c log N
                                             .

Proof of Item 3 of Theorem 4.31. For any s = s(N ), Lemma 4.35 gives the construction
of a PRG G : {0, 1}r → {0, 1}N that ε-fools Formula-ON δ -XOR[s] where:
           √
   • r = O( s log(1/ε) · (log s + N δ ) + log N ).

   • every string in the output of G has circuit complexity T = O(r·poly(log N )) (Lemma
      4.4).

   Suppose that MCSP[2n /n4 ] ∈ Formula-ON δ -XOR[s]. From Theorem 4.36, we have
                    √                                                         N
                 O( s log(1/ε) · (log s + N δ ) + log N ) · poly(log N ) ≥
                                                                           c log N
                              2−2δ
                                     
                           N
              =⇒ s ≥ Ω
                         poly(log N )



4.4.3     On Lower Bounds through Reductions
In this section we show that the locality barrier also rules out reductions from InnerProduct
              1/3      2/3
to MCSP[2n          , 2n     ], that would imply stronger lower bounds via magnification.
                                                                                               1/3          2/3
   More precisely, consider a reduction from InnerProductN to MCSP[2n                                , 2n         ] of the
following form: Suppose that there exists δ > 0, such that the reduction is a sub-
quadratic Formula-O-XOR circuit with a certain number of (possibly non-local) oracle
                                                                                             1/3          2/3
gates above the XOR layer, where each oracle gate computes MCSP[2n                                 , 2n         ], and on
                                                                                    1.01
replacing each MCSP oracle with a Formula-XOR circuit of size N                            , we get a Formula-
XOR circuit of total size N 2−2δ which computes InnerProduct. The reduction implies that
        1/3   2/3
MCSP[2n , 2n ] ∈   / Formula-XOR[N 1.01 ], since otherwise we would contradict [Tal17a].
   All in all, such a reduction would show that NP * NC1 via magnification from Theorem
4.28. Unfortunately, Theorem 4.31 also rules out this possibility.
                                            1/3          2/3
Theorem 4.37. Let O = MCSP[2n                     , 2n         ]. For every δ > 0, InnerProductN cannot be
computed by Formula-O-XOR-circuits with at most N 1−3δ O-oracle gates above the XOR
layer, such that replacing each oracle with a Formula-XOR circuit of size N 1.01 would
result in a Formula-XOR circuit of total size at most N 2−2δ .



                                                           64
Proof. Suppose such a reduction exists for some δ > 0. From Item 1 of Theorem 4.31,
                                                                                                    1/3      2/3
there exists a language L, such that for every 1 > ε > 0, MCSP[2n                                         , 2n     ] can be
                                                                 1.01
computed by Formula-XOR oracle circuits of N                            size, with O(N )-many L-oracle gates
of fan-in N ε in the layer above the XOR leaves.
    Replacing the MCSP oracles in the reduction with these circuits, we get a Formula-O-
XOR circuit of size at most N 2−2δ (from the assumption in the theorem), with O(N 2−3δ )
oracles of fan-in N δ right above the XOR layer. This contradicts Item 2 of Theorem 4.31.
   One minor caveat for the reduction to hold is that the fan-in of the MCSP oracle
gates in the reduction needs to be B = ω(N δ ), so that we can employ the oracle circuit
construction for MCSP with an appropriate 1 > ε > 0, i.e. ε is such that B ε = N δ .

   Based on their respective locality barriers, analogous arguments rule out the possibility
of establishing strong lower bounds using structured reductions in the other HM Frontiers
as well.


4.5        HM Frontier for Gap MCSP and Almost-Formulas
Define a t-almost-formula of size s as a Boolean circuit with at most s AND, OR and
NOT gates of fan-in at most 2, such that at most t of these gates have fan-out larger than
1. Almost-formulas can be thought of as a model which naturally interpolates between
formulas (where all gates have fan-out at most 1) and circuits.
   We first establish HM Frontier C in Section 4.5.1. Following this, in Section 4.5.2 we
show that the lower bound for Parity against almost-formulas localises.

4.5.1      Establishing HM Frontier C
In this section, we establish HM Frontier C. We begin with the hardness magnification
theorem in Item C1.
                                                                                   o(1)      o(1)
   On one hand, [OPS19] show that if worst-case MCSP[2n                                   , 2n      ] does not have
super-linear sized circuits, then NP 6⊆ P/poly. They proved this statement using a
highly-efficient construction of anti-checkers, i.e. a bounded set of inputs which wit-
nesses a lower bound for a hard function f against a circuit class. On the other hand,
                             o(1)      o(1)
recall that MCSP[2n                 , 2n      ] has a near-quadratic formula size lower bound from [HS17].
Consequently, if one could extend this magnification theorem to work for formulas,
NP 6⊆ NC1 would follow. We take a step in this direction by showing that if worst-
               o(1)      o(1)
case MCSP[2n          , 2n          ] cannot be computed by super-linear sized almost-formulas, then
           1
NP 6⊆ NC .




                                                            65
Theorem 4.38 (Magnification for almost-formulas). If there exists ε > 0, such that
           √         √          √
                    / 2O( n) -Almost-Formula[N 1+ε ], then NP 6⊆ NC1 .
MCSP[2 n /2n, 2 n ] ∈

       In Section 4.8.2, we rule out a large family of theorems which magnify worst-case
MCSP lower bounds against super-linear formulas to strong lower bounds, including those
based on the techniques of this section (or [OPS19]). Along with Theorem 4.38, this
indicates that the usage of almost-formulas is unavoidable for magnification theorems
based on such techniques.
       Theorem 4.38 is proved using a highly-efficient construction of anti-checkers. Roughly
speaking, an anti-checker is a bounded multi-set S of input instances associated with a
hard function f such that every small circuit differs from f on some input in S. In more
detail, [LY94] established that for any function f on n inputs that cannot be computed
by circuits of size s, there exists a collection Sf containing O(s) strings such that every
circuit of size s/2n disagrees with f on at least one input in S. [OPS19] show an anti-
checker construction using highly efficient general circuits, assuming NP ⊆ P/poly. The
main technical result of this section is an iterative construction of anti-checkers which
builds on [OPS19], but ensures that very few gates in the circuit have fan-out larger than
1, assuming that NP ⊆ NC1 .

Lemma 4.39 (Anti-Checker construction). Suppose that NP ⊆ NC1 . Then, for every
                                                                                  λ
λ > 0, there exists a sequence of circuits {C2n }n∈N of size 2n+O(n ) which takes as input
                                                  λ
a truth table tt(f ) ∈ {0, 1}N , and outputs 2O(n ) strings Sf = {y1 , . . . , y2O(nλ ) } along
with the evaluations of f on these strings, f (y1 ), . . . , f (y2O(nλ ) ), such that if f is hard for
                      λ
circuits of size 2n , Sf is an anti-checker for f .
      Moreover, each yi , f (yi ) is generated by a sub-circuit of CN which takes as inputs
y1 , . . . , yi−1 , f (y1 ), . . . , f (yi−1 ) and tt(f ), such that the only gates in this sub-circuit with
fan-out > 1 are the inputs y1 , . . . , yi−1 , f (y1 ), . . . , f (yi−1 ).

       Our main contribution is the second part of Lemma 4.39, but we also give a more self-
contained proof. We use linear hash functions along with the assumption that NP ⊆ NC1 ,
to make the counting arguments in the proof constructive. Additionally, we use the
Valiant-Vazirani isolation lemma in the process of selecting the anti-checker instances,
to ensure that the anti-checker construction has an almost-formula structure.
       For the proof of Lemma 4.39, we need the following results. Firstly, we state the
classical Valiant-Vazirani isolation lemma.

Lemma 4.40 (Valiant-Vazirani isolation lemma (Lemma 17.19 in [AB09])). Let Hn,k be
a pairwise independent hash function collection14 from {0, 1}n to {0, 1}k , where 2 ≤ k ≤
  14
    A collection of functions Hn,k from {0, 1}n to {0, 1}k is called pairwise independent, if for every
x, x ∈ {0, 1}n with x 6= x0 , and for every y, y 0 ∈ {0, 1}k , Prh∼Hn,k {(h(x) = y) ∧ (h(x0 ) = y 0 )} = 1/22k .
    0



                                                       66
n + 1, and S ⊆ {0, 1}n such that 2k−2 ≤ |S| ≤ 2k−1 . Then

                  Pr {there exists a unique x ∈ S such that h(x) = 0k } ≥ 1/8
                 h∼Hn,k


We also need the following result for approximate counting using linear hash functions.

Lemma 4.41 ([Jer09] (Paragraph 2 in Section 3)). For any s ≤ 2n and ε > 0, let
c = 2(1/ε · (log log s + log(1/ε))), and tM = log(4sc ). If X ⊆ {0, 1}n such that |X| = s,
then there exists matrices A1 , . . . , AtM ∈ {0, 1}tM ×cn such that

      • Each Ai : {0, 1}cn → {0, 1}tM defines a linear mapping from X c (the c times Carte-
         sian product of X) to {0, 1}tM .

      • For each Ai , where 1 ≤ i ≤ tM , there exists a set Xi ⊆ X c which is mapped
         injectively by Ai , i.e. for every x ∈ Xi and for every y ∈ X c , if y 6= x then
         Ai (y) 6= Ai (x). Moreover, ∪i Xi = X c .

       In particular, if |X| ≤ s, then there exists an injective mapping (provided by the Ai s)
from X c to a set of size at most tM · 2tM ≤ sc (1 + ε)c .

       The first part of the theorem is proved using the probabilistic method. Indeed, the
matrices A1 , . . . , AtM are picked uniformly at random and over the random choices of
these matrices, observe that the probability that there exists an element in X c which is
not mapped injectively by any Ai is very low. In other words, there exists a choice of
matrices, such that for each element in X c , there exists an Ai which injectively maps it
into {0, 1}tM .
       For the second part, consider the following mapping M from X c to a set A of size
tM 2tM , comprised of tM blocks of size 2tM each: M maps each element z ∈ X c into the
ith block in A, if Ai is the first matrix which maps z injectively (i.e. z ∈ Xi ). Since each
z ∈ X c is mapped injectively by some Ai , we see that M injects X c into a set of size at
most tM 2tM ≤ 4sc log(4sc ) ≤ sc (1 + ε)c , for the values of c and tM chosen.
      We build some notation before diving into the proof. For any function f on n inputs,
y1 , . . . , yi ∈ {0, 1}n and λ > 0, define Sf (y1 , . . . , yi ) as the set of circuits of size at
           λ
most 2n /2n which are consistent with y1 , . . . , yi on f , Rf (y1 , . . . , yi ) = |Sf (y1 , . . . , yi )|,
and τf (y1 , . . . , yi ) as the fraction of these circuits with respect to all the circuits of size
  λ
2n /2n.15 Note that, any circuit C is consistent with a set of inputs S on f , if C(z) = f (z)
for every z ∈ S. We also need the following combinatorial claim from [OPS19].
  15
     Of course, Sf , Rf and τf are also functions of the values of f on the yi ’s. We omit it in the notation
for simplicity.




                                                     67
Proposition 4.42 (Lemma 23 in [OPS19]). For every i ≥ 1, λ > 0, any function
                 λ
  / SIZE[2n ] and every y1 , . . . , yi−1 ∈ {0, 1}n , suppose that Rf (y1 , . . . , yi−1 ) ≥ 2n2 and
f ∈
τf (y1 , . . . , yi−1 ) ≤ (1 − 1/4n)i−1 . Then, there exists yi ∈ {0, 1}n such that τf (y1 , . . . , yi ) ≤
(1 − 1/4n)i−1 (1 − 1/2n).

Proof of Lemma 4.39. Suppose that NP ⊆ NC1 . For any λ ∈ (0, 1), let f be any function
                                                      λ
on n variables such that f 6∈ SIZE[2n /2n]. Let w = tt(f ) ∈ {0, 1}N be the input to
the circuit CN which we’ll construct. The construction of the circuit is iterative, where
at the ith -stage, yi ∈ {0, 1}n is added to the current anti-checker set {y1 , . . . , yi−1 }, by
maintaining the invariant that τf (y1 , . . . , yi ) ≤ (1 − 1/4n)i (if Rf (y1 , . . . , yi−1 ) ≥ 2n2 ).
                                                                                     λ
CN outputs y1 , . . . , yt along with f (y1 ), . . . , f (yt ), for t = 2O(n ) (the reason for this choice
of t will be seen later in the proof).
    Let t0 = t − 2n2 . Assume that for some stage i < t0 , Rf (y1 , . . . , yi−1 ) ≥ 2n2 , and at
the beginning of the ith -stage, we have generated y1 , . . . , yi−1 ∈ {0, 1}n as the current
instances in the anti-checker, such that τf (y1 , . . . , yi−1 ) ≤ (1 − 1/4n)i−1 (when i = 1, no
strings have been generated and trivially, all circuits are consistent with the anti-checkers
generated so far). Our goal is to find a string yi ∈ {0, 1}n such that τf (y1 , . . . , yi−1 , yi ) ≤
(1 − 1/4n)i . We call any such string yi as “good”.
       For any candidate y ∗ ∈ {0, 1}n , we first show the existence of a formula F that takes
an input w = (y1 , . . . , yi−1 , f (y1 ), . . . , f (yi−1 ), y ∗ , f (y ∗ )) of size O(tn) (the input is suitably
padded to achieve this length, if necessary), and checks if τf (y1 , . . . , yi−1 , y ∗ ) has shrunk
by a non-trivial factor. More formally,

                     τf (y1 , . . . , yi−1 , y ∗ ) ≤ (1 − 1/4n)i−1 (1 − 1/2n) =⇒ F (w) = 1
                                                                                                                      (4.1)
                     F (w) = 1 =⇒ τf (y1 , . . . , yi−1 , y ∗ ) ≤ (1 − 1/4n)i

       To construct the formula, we use the approximate counting method from Lemma 4.41,
                                                                                λ
by setting X as Sf (y1 , . . . , yi−1 , y ∗ ), ε = 1/4n, tM = 2O(n ) , and c = poly(n) (for a large
enough polynomial). If y ∗ is such that τf (y1 , . . . , yi−1 , y ∗ ) ≤ (1 − 1/4n)i−1 (1 − 1/2n),
then from Lemma 4.41, there exists matrices A1 , . . . , A2O(nλ ) such that X c is injectively
mapped into the Cartesian power (with exponent c) of a set of size (1 − 1/4n)i−1 (1 −
                         O(nλ )                           O(nλ )
1/2n)(1 + 4n) · 22                ≤ (1 − 1/4n)i · 22               . On the other hand, the existence of such
                                        ∗                      i
matrices witness τf (y1 , . . . , y ) ≤ (1 − 1/4n) (by definition). Furthermore, on input w,
the existence of such matrices is a Σ2p -property.16 Since NP ⊆ NC1 , we get a formula F
                                  λ
of size poly(n, t) = 2O(n ) which decides the existence of these matrices and thus, satisfies
the properties in Equation 4.1.
                                                                                                                      λ
  16
     Accept input w = (y1 , . . . , yi−1 , y ∗ , f (y1 ), . . . , f (yi−1 ), f (y ∗ ))
                                                                                    Wt(padded to length O(tn) = 2
                                                                                                                  O(n )
                                                                                                                        ), if
                                    t×cn             c                          c
∃ matrices A1 , . . . , At ∈ {0, 1}      , ∀x ∈ X , ∀y1 , . . . , yt ∈ X , i=1 (x 6= yi =⇒ Ai (x) 6= Ai (yi )). This
is a Σ2p property.


                                                             68
    From Proposition 4.42, observe that for wi−1 = (y1 , . . . , yi−1 , f (y1 ), . . . , f (yi−1 )), there
exists y ∗ ∈ {0, 1}n such that τf (y1 , . . . , yi−1 , y ∗ ) ≤ (1 − 1/4n)i−1 (1 − 1/2n), i.e. there
exists y ∗ such that F (wi−1 , y ∗ , f (y ∗ )) = 1. To pick a good yi , we use F in an exhaustive
search over all n-bit strings, along with Lemma 4.40 to isolate a good string and make
its selection simpler. In more detail, for any z ∈ {0, 1}n , k ≤ n + 1 and h ∈ Hn,k , where
Hn,k is an efficiently computable, pairwise independent hash function family from {0, 1}n
to {0, 1}k , define

                        F k,h (wi−1 , z, f (z)) = F (wi−1 , z, f (z)) ∧ (h(z) = 0k )                        (4.2)

The input to F k,h is of size O(tn). On input z, h(z) = 0k can be checked using a
                                                                                     λ
poly(n)-sized formula (again, since NP ⊆ NC1 ). Thus, F k,h is a formula of size 2O(n ) .
    From Lemma 4.40, we see that for any fixed wi−1 , if h is picked uniformly at random
from Hn,k and k is also chosen randomly from {2, . . . , n+1}, then with probability at least
                                                                                                λ
1/8n, there is a unique z satisfying Equation 4.2. Randomly picking 2d·n many tuples
(k, h) (where the constant d in the exponent is large enough), implies that the probability
                                                                                                           d·nλ
that F k,h does not have a unique solution for any of them is at most (1 − 1/8n)2                                 <
    d·nλ
 − 2 8n                                                                     λ
2          . Thus, we can non-uniformly fix a set R of 2O(n ) tuples such that for each wi−1 ,
at least one tuple (k, h) from R will ensure that F k,h (wi−1 , z, f (z)) has a unique satisfying
assignment.
    Consequently, for every (k, h) in R, and every j ∈ {0, 1}log n , we define the following
formula Djk,h on input wi−1 , which outputs the j th -bit of a candidate element for the
anti-checker.
                                                   _
                               Djk,h (wi−1 ) =              (bj ∧ F k,h (wi−1 , b, f (b)))                  (4.3)
                                                 b∈{0,1}n
                                   λ                                                                              λ
Note that Djk,h is 2n+O(n ) -sized formula. Going over all tuples in R, we get 2O(n )
candidate strings, one of which is assured to be good as there exists at least one tuple
                                                                                                                  λ
(k, h) ∈ R such that F k,h has a unique solution. Since NP ⊆ NC1 , given the list of 2O(n )
                                                                                                                  λ
candidate strings, selecting a good yi from this list can be done by a formula of size 2O(n ) .
Having yi , a formula of size N log N with access to tt(f ) outputs f (yi ). Overall, yi , f (yi )
                                                     λ
can be generated by a circuit of size at most 2n+O(n ) , using wi−1 as input.
    The iterative process for constructing an anti-checker is as follows. For any i < t0 , we
check if Rf (y1 , . . . , yi−1 ) ≥ 2n2 . Given input wi−1 , one can check if Rf (y1 , . . . , yi−1 ) ≥ 2n2 ,
                                                                                                           λ
using an NP-property. Since NP ⊆ NC1 , this can be done using a formula of 2O(n ) . If
                                           λ
this is true, then a circuit of size 2n+O(n ) generates yi , f (yi ) such that τf (y1 , . . . , yi ) ≤
(1 − 1/4n)i .
                         O(nλ )          O(nλ ) /4n
    Since (1−1/4n)2               < 1/22              , the number of steps t0 after which Rf (y1 , . . . , yi ) <
                      O(nλ )
2n2 is at most 2               . At this stage, the remaining circuits can be generated by a Σ2p

                                                            69
algorithm as a string σ (which encodes at most 2n2 many circuits) (see Lemma 21 of
[OPS19]) on input wt0 . Since NP ⊆ NC1 , σ can be generated by a formula of size at
            λ
most 2O(n ) . For each of these circuits, we use a similar strategy as earlier, of using
the Valiant-Vazirani isolation lemma over each element in R and generate an instance
on which the circuit does not agree with f . The only difference is that instead of the
formula F k,h , we use a new formula E k,h for each (k, h) ∈ R, which takes an encoding
                            λ
of a circuit A of size 2n /2n, an input x ∈ {0, 1}n to A and f (x) as inputs, and accepts
                                                                                                           0
iff (A(x) 6= f (x)) ∧ (h(x) = 0k ).17 It is worth noting that we generate σ using input wt
                                                             λ
each time E k,h is computed, which is still at most 2n+O(n ) many times. Thus, for each
                                                                      λ
remaining circuit A in σ, we get a formula of size 2n+O(n ) which outputs an anti-checker
element on which A does not agree with f , using NP ⊆ NC1 . The number of anti-checker
                                                              λ
elements generated is at most t = t0 + 2n2 = 2O(n ) .
                                                                                       λ
   Put together, the anti-checkers are generated by a circuit CN of size at most 2n+O(n ) .
                                          λ
Furthermore, the circuit has a 2O(n ) -almost-formula structure, since all the intermediate
computations are done by formulas (many of which crucially use NP ⊆ NC1 ), and the
only gates with fan-out larger than 1 are those which generate yi and f (yi ).

We now prove the hardness magnification result.

Proof of Theorem 4.38. The proof follows from a similar approach in [OPS19] (see Theo-
                                                          √       √         √
rem 4). We prove that if NP ⊆ NC1 , MCSP[2 n /2n, 2 n ] ∈ 2O( n) -Almost-Formula[N 1+ε ]
for every ε > 0. The idea is that on input tt(f ) ∈ {0, 1}N , we first use NP ⊆ NC1 in
Lemma 4.39, to get an anti-checker {y1 , . . . , yt } and its evaluations f (y1 ), . . . , f (yt ) for
        √                    √                                        √
t = 2O( n) , using an 2O( n) -almost-formula of size 2n+O( n) .
  We then reduce gap MCSP to the following problem L (also called as Succinct-MCSP):
On input (1n , 1s , 1t , (x1 , b1 ), . . . , (xt , bt )), where each xi ∈ {0, 1}n and bi ∈ {0, 1}, accept
if and only if it is of the right format and there exists a circuit E over n variables of size
at most s, such that E(xi ) = bi for every 1 ≤ i ≤ t. Note that this problem is in NP, and
from our assumption can be computed by formulas of polynomial size.
   The reduction passes the anti-checker {y1 , . . . , yt } along with f (y1 ), . . . , f (yt ) to L,
                √                    √
with s = 2 n /2n and t = 2O( n) , and outputs its answer. If f can be computed by a
circuit of size s, then for any choice of y1 , . . . , yt , L accepts it. On the other hand, if L
                                                 √
cannot be computed by circuits of size 2 n , every circuit of size s fails on at least one of
the yi ’s and thus, L always rejects its input.
    Furthermore, since the input length to L is O(tn), there exists a formula of size
                    √
poly(t, n) = 2O( n) which decides L. Composing this formula into the reduction, we get
  17
     Such a formula exists since the circuit value problem, which takes as inputs x ∈ {0, 1}n and a suitable
encoding of an n-variate circuit A of size s, and outputs A(x), is P-Complete, and NP ⊆ NC1 .



                                                     70
      √                                 √                                       √        √
an 2O( n) -almost-formula of size 2n+O( n) ≤ N 1+ε which computes MCSP[2 n /2n, 2 n ],
for every ε > 0. Note that the construction from Lemma 4.39 ensures that the only gates
with fan-out > 1 are those which compute yi , f (yi ), for each i ≤ t.

   Items 2 [RR97] and 4 [HS17, OPS19] follow from known results. Next, we show Item
3, a lower bound for Parity against almost-formulas.
   Let F be a t-almost-formula. Moving bottom-up, observe that each gate G which has
fan-out > 1 is computed by a formula whose inputs are either the original inputs or other
gates with fan-out > 1. We call such a maximal formula as a principal formula at G.

                                        / nε -Almost-Formula[n2−6ε ]
Lemma 4.43. For any 0 < ε < 1/6, Parity ∈

Proof. For some small enough ε > 0, let t = nε . Suppose that Parity can be computed by
t-almost-formulas {Gn } of size at most n2−6ε . We show that this implies the existence of a
                                                                                       ε
sequence of formulas {Fn } of size n2−5ε which compute Parity on at least (1/2 + 1/2n +1 )-
fraction of the inputs.
   Observe that Gn has at most t gates with fan-out > 1, i.e. it has at most t principal
formulas F1 , . . . , Ft (assuming some pre-defined ordering). Thus, there exists a constant
vector a ∈ {0, 1}t , such that for at least 2n /2t many inputs y ∈ {0, 1}n , Fi (y) = ai for
every 1 ≤ i ≤ t. Further, let b ∈ {0, 1} be the majority output of Gn over the rest of the
inputs (inputs y such that there exists some Fi for which Fi (y) 6= ai ).
    The formula Fn gets a and b as non-uniform advice, and on input x ∈ {0, 1}n , checks
if each principal formula Fi (x) = ai . If this is the case, then F fixes the gates in the
original almost-formula with its corresponding constants and computes the output using
the resulting formula, otherwise it outputs b. Clearly, the size of Fn is at most n2−5ε , and
                                                  ε
it approximates Parity on at least (1/2 + 1/2n +1 )-fraction of the inputs.
    On the other hand, recall from Lemma 4.32 that any function f on n inputs which
can be computed by a formula of size s, is pointwise approximated by a real, multilinear
                       √
polynomial of degree O( s) up to an additive error of 1/3. Further, this can be gener-
alised to saying that f can be approximated up to a pointwise additive error of 1/2r , by
                                 √
a real polynomial of degree O(r s) (cf. Fact 5.9 in [Tal17a]). However, [KR13] (Section
1.2) state that this implies that any formula of size o ( nr )2 computes Parity on at most
                                                               

(1/2 + 1/2r+O(1) )-fraction of the n-bit inputs. Taking r = n2ε , we see that any formula of
                                                      2ε
size o(n2−4ε ) computes Parity on at most (1/2+1/2n +O(1) )-fraction of the inputs, leading
at a contradiction.




                                             71
 4.5.2        Locality Barrier for Almost-Formula Lower Bounds Above
              the Threshold
 This section captures an instantiation of the locality barrier for HM Frontier C. Recall
 the definition of principal formulas of an almost-formula from the last section. Let F be
 a t-almost-formula. Each gate G which has fan-out > 1 is computed by a formula whose
 inputs are either the original input variables or other gates with fan-out > 1. Any such
 a maximal formula is called as a principal formula at G.

 Theorem 4.44 (Locality Barrier for HM Frontier C). The following results hold.
                                                              √           √
(C1O ) (Oracle Circuits from Magnification) MCSP[2 n /2n, 2 n ] is computable by oracle
          √                                 √                                  √
       2O( n) -almost-formulas of size 2n+O( n) with oracle gates of fan-in 2O( n) , such
       that the oracles are only at the bottom layer of any principal formulas.

(C3O ) (Extension of Lower Bound Techniques) For every 0 < ε < 1/8, Parity 6∈ nε -Almost-
       Formula[n2−8ε ], even if the almost-formulas are allowed to use arbitrary oracle gates
       of fan-in < nε which are present only at the bottom layer of any principal formulas.

 Proof. The first item follows by inspecting the proof of Theorem 4.38. We see that
          √         √                            √                                             √
 MCSP[2 n /2n, 2 n ] is computable by 2O( n) -almost-formulas {FN } of size 2n+O( n) with
                               √
 local oracles of fan-in 2O( n) . Moreover, the only gates of fan-out larger than 1 are the
 gates outputting the anti-checker elements y1 , . . . , y2O(√n) with bits f (y1 ), . . . , f (y2O(√n) ).
 We want to show that the local oracle gates are only at the bottom of principal formulas.
 In order to achieve this we need to modify formulas FN slightly.
       First, note that FN has an oracle gate which is applied on top of the final anti-checker
 y1 , . . . , y2O(√n) with bits f (y1 ), . . . , f (y2O(√n) ). In order to ensure that this oracle is at
 the bottom of a principal formula that computes a gate with fan-out > 1, we simply
 add dummy negation gates to the output gate, and the gates computing the anti-checker
 y1 , . . . , y2O(√n) with bits f (y1 ), . . . , f (y2O(√n) ), if necessary.
       Second, note that each anti-checker element yi+1 , along with f (yi+1 ) is generated as
 follows: (1) If Rf (y1 , . . . , yi ) ≥ 2n2 , then a subformula F1 generates (yi+1 , f (yi+1 )) (2)
 or else, Rf (y1 , . . . , yi ) < 2n2 , and a subformula F2 generates at most 2n2 anti-checker
 elements. In both cases, the predicates Rf (y1 , . . . , yi ) < 2n2 are checked by an oracle.
    In case 1, for every (k, h) ∈ R and 1 ≤ j ≤ n, Djk,h is a subformula of F1 with oracles
                                                                                                     √
 at the bottom, as seen in the proof of Lemma 4.39. This process generates a set of 2O( n)
 candidate anti-checker elements. F1 chooses a good string by applying another oracle. In
 order to ensure that the latter oracle gate is at the bottom of a principal formula, we add
 dummy negation gates to the gates generating the potential good strings. This increases
                                                                      √
 the number of gates with fan-out larger than 1 only by 2O( n) .

                                                     72
   In case 2, a similar analysis as case 1 works, where for each subformula which generates
candidate anti-checker elements for each remaining circuit, we ensure that the oracles are
at the bottom by asking them to perform both tasks: choose the next remaining circuit
A and compute (A(x) 6= f (x)) ∧ (h(x) = 0k ) on a given input x (and fixed (k, h) ∈ R).
The oracle selecting the right anti-checker element from the set of potential instances is
also treated in the same way as in case 1. All in all, we obtain an almost-formula with
the desired structure.

   The second item is proved in analogous fashion to Lemma 4.43. Suppose that Parity
has nε -almost-formulas of size n2−8ε , with local oracles at the bottom of principal formu-
las. Since there are only nε gates of fan-out > 1, we can replace these gates by constants
and use ideas seen earlier to obtain formulas Fn of size n2−7ε with local oracles at the
                                                          ε
bottom computing Parity with probability ≥ 1/2 + 1/2n +1 .
   Let L0 (f ) be the size (i.e. the number of leaves) of the smallest formula with local
oracles at the bottom computing f . Now any function f : {−1, 1}n → {−1, 1} computed
by an oracle formula, where any oracle gate has fan-in at most nε and is located at the
                                                              p
bottom, can be approximated by a polynomial of degree O(tnε L0 (f )) up to pointwise
error of 2−r (cf. Lemma 4.33 for some intuition about this). This implies that any formula
of size o((n/r)2 (1/nε )2 ) with local oracles at the bottom computes Parity with probability
at most 1/2 + 1/2r+O(1) (for large enough t). Taking t = n2ε , we see that any such
                                                                             2ε
oracle formula of size o(n2−6ε ) computes Parity on at most (1/2 + 1/2O(n ) )-fraction of
the inputs, leading to a contradiction.


4.6      HM Frontier for Gap MCSP and One-sided Error
         Randomised Formulas
A one-sided error randomised formula of size s is a distribution F over De Morgan
formulas of size s [CJW20]. Any Boolean function f over n inputs is said to be computed
by F, if for every x ∈ {0, 1}n

   • if f (x) = 1, then PrF ∼F {F (x) = 1} = 1.

   • if f (x) = 0, then PrF ∼F {F (x) = 0} ≥ 0.9.

   Define GapANDN as the promise problem on N bits such that it outputs 1 when all
input bits are 1, and outputs 0 when at most 1/10 of the input bits are 1. W.l.o.g.
we assume that a one-sided error randomised formula is equivalent to a GapANDO(N ) -
Formula[s] circuit. In one direction, given such a circuit, the uniform distribution over
the formulas which are inputs to the GapANDO(N ) gate gives a one-sided randomised

                                             73
formula over Formula[s]. Indeed, for any input x, if f (x) = 1, then the sampled formula
always outputs 1, whereas it outputs 0 with probability at least 0.9, if f (x) = 0.
       In the other direction, given a randomised formula F of size s (although with a
slightly less error of at most 0.09 when f (x) = 0), one can sample O(N ) many formulas
and use an argument akin to Adleman’s trick for non-uniform derandomisation, to obtain
a GapANDO(N ) -Formula[s] circuit.
       We first establish HM Frontier D in Section 4.6.1. Following this, we show that known
lower bound techniques by [Hås98] and [CKLM19] localise in Section 4.6.2.

4.6.1        Establishing HM Frontier D
We first prove the following hardness magnification theorem.

Theorem 4.45 (HM for worst-case MCSP via kernelisation). If there exists ε > 0, such
            1/3
that MCSP[2n ] 6∈ GapANDO(N ) -Formula-XOR[N ε ], then NQP 6⊆ NC1 .

The proof follows by an adaptation of the kernelisation-based approach from [CJW19].

Proof of Theorem 4.45. We prove the contrapositive of the statement. Define s(n) =
  1/3
2n and S as the set of truth tables which can be computed by circuits of size at most
s(n). Let EN : {0, 1}N → {0, 1}M be the error-correcting code from Theorem 4.29, where
M = M (N ) = b · N for some constant b > 0.
       For a positive integer T to be fixed later, we define a family of functions {Hv :
{0, 1}N → {0, 1}T }, where each function is specified by a seed v of length T log M . For
any v and input x ∈ {0, 1}N , Hv computes EN (x), splits v into (v1 , . . . , vT ) where each
vi ∈ [M ] and outputs h = (EN (x)v1 , . . . , EN (x)vT ). Informally, Hv (x) computes the
codeword EN (x) and outputs a T -length random projection of EN (x), specified by the
indices in the uniformly random seed v.
   Firstly, observe that with high probability over the random choice of the seed v, every
input x ∈ S is mapped to a distinct string in {0, 1}T by Hv .18 Indeed, for any pair of
inputs x, y ∈ S where x 6= y, since the minimum distance for the code generated by
EN is greater than 2δ, for the constant δ > 0 given by Theorem 4.29, Pri∈[M ] {EN (x)i =
EN (y)i } ≤ (1 − 2δ). Thus, Prv {Hv (x) = Hv (y)} ≤ Prv {∀i ∈ [T ], EN (x)vi = EN (y)vi } ≤
(1 − 2δ)T ≤ e−2T δ . Setting T = c · s(n) log s(n) for a large enough constant c > 0 and
using a union bound over all pairs of strings in S (of size |S|
                                                                
                                                             2
                                                                  ), with probability at least
0.99 over the choice of v, for each pair of distinct x, y ∈ S, Hv (x) 6= Hv (y). Let v ∗ be
such a good seed.
  18
    One can consider {Hv } as a k-perfect linear hash function family of seed length T log M , i.e. for
every subset S of inputs of size at most k = 2s(n) log s(n) , there exists a seed v such that Hv is injective
over S.


                                                     74
   Next, define the language L : [M ]T × {0, 1}T × [M ] × {0, 1} → {0, 1} as follows. An
input w ∈ L, if w is of the form (v, h, i, a) and there exists y ∈ {0, 1}N such that y ∈ S,
                                                                        1/3 )
Hv (y) = h and EN (y)i = a. Since, T = O(s(n) · poly(n)) = 2O(n                 , we see that L ∈ NQP.
   Suppose that NQP ⊆ Formula[nk ], for some constant k > 0. For any ε > 0, we
construct M = O(N ) Formula-XOR circuits C1 , . . . , CM of size N ε each, such that for any
x ∈ S, Ci (x) = 1 for all i ∈ [M ], and otherwise Ci (x) = 0 for at least a constant fraction
of the i’s. Indeed, for any i ∈ [M ], Ci (x) gets v ∗ as non-uniform advice, computes Hv∗ (x)
using T XOR gates and then outputs L(v ∗ , Hv∗ (x), i, EN (x)i ). The input length to L is
O(T log N ) = N o(1) and since L can be computed by formulas of size O(T k ), each Ci is a
Formula-XOR circuit of size N ε .
   For the correctness of the reduction, if x ∈ S, L accepts (v ∗ , Hv∗ (x), i, EN (x)i ) for
every i ∈ [M ], by just making the non-deterministic guess as x. On the other hand, if
x 6∈ S, the choice of v ∗ ensures that there exists at most one y ∈ S such that Hv∗ (x) =
Hv∗ (y). For the case that there exists no such y, L rejects (v ∗ , Hv∗ (x), i, EN (x)i ) for every
i. Otherwise, since x 6= y, there exists some j ∈ [M ] such that EN (x)j 6= EN (y)j and L
rejects the input (v ∗ , Hv∗ (x), j, EN (x)j ). In particular, it is worth noting that if x 6∈ S, L
rejects (v ∗ , Hv∗ (x), i, EN (x)i ) for at least a constant fraction (a 2δ-fraction) of the i’s.
   Finally, we construct M many Formula-XOR circuits D1 , . . . , DM , where each Di runs
Ci over constantly many independently sampled seeds and reduces the error to at most
0.09 when x 6∈ S (we fix constantly many good seeds in the non-uniform advice v ∗ ).
Thus, we have M many Formula-XOR circuits D1 , . . . , DM of size O(N ε ) each, such that
if x ∈ S, then Di (x) = 1 for all i ∈ [M ], and else Di (x) = 0 for at least 0.91 fraction of the
i’s, which is nothing but a one-sided error randomised Formula-XOR[N ε ] circuit. This in
turn means that we get a GapANDO(N ) -Formula-XOR[N ε ] circuit computing MCSP[s].

  Since XOR gates can be computed by formulas of quadratic size, Theorem 4.45 im-
mediately proves item D1.
                                                            1/3
Corollary 4.46. If there exists ε > 0, where MCSP[2n              ] 6∈ GapANDO(N ) -Formula[N 2+ε ],
then NQP 6⊆ NC1 .

   Theorem 4.45 also gives an alternative way of proving Item 1 in HM Frontier B, i.e.
Theorem 4.28. This can be achieved by replacing the GapAND-gate with the standard
AND gate, for derandomising the randomised formula in the proof.
   Regarding the other items in HM Frontier D, items D2 ([RR97]) and D4 ([CJW20])
follow from known results. In particular, item D4 is proved by techniques which build on
similarly proved lower bounds in [HS17, OPS19], via iterated pseudo-random restrictions.
Finally, both lower bounds in item D3 which are implicit in previous works [Hås98,
CKLM19] are also implied by stronger results proved in Section 4.6.2.

                                                75
 4.6.2     Locality Barrier for Randomised Formula Lower Bounds
           Above the Threshold
 In this section we capture an instantiation of the locality barrier for HM Frontier D.

 Theorem 4.47 (Locality Barrier for HM Frontier D). The following hold:

(D1O ) (Oracle Circuit Construction from Magnification) There exists ε, β > 0 and an
                                   1/3
       oracle O, such that MCSP[2n ] ∈ GapANDO(N ) -ON β -Formula[N 2+ε ].

(D3O ) (Extension of Lower Bound Techniques - 1) For every β > 0, every 1 > ε > β and
                               / GapANDO(N ) -ON β -Formula[N 3−ε ].
       any oracle O, Andreev2N ∈

(D3O ) (Extension of Lower Bound Techniques - 2) For every β > 0, every 1 > ε > 3β and
       any oracle O, MCSP[2n /poly(n)] ∈
                                       / GapANDO(N ) -ON β -Formula[N 3−ε ].

 Proof of Item 1 of Theorem 4.47. The first item can be observed directly from the con-
 struction given in Corollary 4.46.

    Define Andreev’s function as Andreev2N : {0, 1}2N → {0, 1}, where Andreev takes two
 inputs x, y ∈ {0, 1}N and does the following. It partitions x into log N blocks x1 , . . . , xlog N
 of size r = N/ log N each and computes j = (XOR(x1 ), . . . , XOR(xlog N )). It then treats
 y as a truth table of a function fy : {0, 1}log N → {0, 1} and outputs yj .
    Classical results by [Hås98, Tal14] show that Andreev2N cannot be computed by sub-
 cubic formulas, using the fact that any small-sized formula shrinks significantly under a
 suitably chosen random restriction (Theorem 4.10). In Item 2 of Theorem 4.47, we show
 that this lower bound technique localises, even for the case of GapAND-Formulas.

 Proof of Item 2 Theorem 4.47. For some β > 0, suppose Andreev2N can be computed by a
 GapANDO(N ) -ON β -Formula formula of size at most N 3−ε . Apply a p-regular truly random
 restriction ρ sampled from Rp over the variables in x, for p = O(log N log log N )/N .
    Fix the inputs in y to some string in {0, 1}N . Observe that with probability at least
 0.95, each block xi has a variable which is unrestricted by ρ. Next, under the application
 of ρ, we use Theorem 4.10 to see that every ON β -Formula F of size N 3−ε collapses to
 an ON β -Formula of size at most N 1−ε · poly(log N ) in expectation. In particular, every
 oracle formula Fi which is an input to the GapAND gate collapses in expectation. Using
 Markov’s inequality (Lemma 2.5), we see that for each oracle formula Fi , there exists a
 fixed restriction ρi such that, for a large enough c > 0, L(Fi |ρi ) ≤ c · N 1−ε · poly(log N )
 over log N variables. Thus, there exists a GapANDO(N ) -ON β -Formula[N 1−ε · poly(log N )]
 formula over log N variables that computes fy .



                                                 76
   Now, observe that if f is computed by a GapANDO(N ) -ON β -formula of size s(N ), then
there exists a (deterministic) ON β -formula of size s(N ) which 0.9-approximates f . Using
this fact, for every y ∈ {0, 1}N , there exists an ON β -Formula[N 1−ε · poly(log N )] formula
which 0.9-approximates fy .
   To finish the argument, observe that the number of ON β -Formula[N 1−ε · poly(log N )]
                                                  1−ε+β ·poly(log N )
formulas over log N inputs is at most 2N                                . Using an argument similar to
that of Lemma 2.8, there exists a function over log N variables which cannot be 0.9-
approximated by such formulas, which leads to a contradiction.

   We also localise the [CKLM19] technique for showing MCSP[2n /n4 ] lower bounds
against cubic-sized formulas.

Proof of Item 3 Theorem 4.47. Firstly, we observe that an extension of the pseudoran-
dom generator construction of [CKLM19] also works for formulas with an oracle top gate.
We provide a brief sketch of this, as most of the proof remains the same.
   Firstly, observe that pseudorandom shrinkage lemma from [IMZ19] (Lemma 4.8) ex-
tends directly to our case as well, which means under a suitable p-regular pseudorandom
                                    2/3
restriction samplable using 2O(log s) bits, any ON β -Formula of size s collapses to an ON β -
                      2/3                                   √
Formula of size 2O(log s) · p2 · s, for any s ≥ N and p ≥ 1/ s, with high probability over
                                                                                                                 2/3
the restrictions. In particular, for p = 1/s1/3 , we get an ON β -Formula of size s1/3 ·2O(log                         s)

with high probability.
   Following the techniques of [CKLM19], we use this pseudorandom shrinkage lemma
                                                                           2/3
to construct a PRG of seed length r = O(T + s1/3 · 2O(log                        s)
                                                                                      ) that 0.1-fools the class
ON β -Formula[s], where T is the size of the encoding of an ON β -Formula which has shrunk
under the application of the pseudorandom restriction. Moreover, their construction is
such that the circuit complexity of the output of the generator (seen as a truth table) is
just O(r · poly(log N )).
   Since any ON β -Formula[s] can be specified using O(s log s · N β ) many bits, we have
                    2/3
T = O(s1/3 · 2O(log s) · N β ). Thus, for every s ≥ N , there exists a PRG G : {0, 1}r →
{0, 1}N that 0.1-fools ON β -Formula[s] where:
                                            2/3
   • The seed length r = O(s1/3 · 2O(log          s)
                                                       · N β ).
                                                                                                     2/3
   • For every z ∈ {0, 1}r , there exists a circuit of size at most O(s1/3 · 2O(log                        s)
                                                                                                                · Nβ ·
      poly(log N )) which takes input j ∈ [log N ] and outputs the j th -bit of G(z).

In particular, when s = N 3−ε , the seed length is r = N 1−Ωβ,ε (1) and the circuit complexity
of G(z) is O(N 1−Ω(1) ).




                                                  77
    Suppose that MCSP[2n /n4 ] can be computed by GapANDM -ON β -Formula[N 3−ε ] for-
mula C, where M = O(N ). Let C1 , C2 , . . . , CM be the ON β -Formula[N 3−ε ] formulas which
feed into the GapAND gate in C.
   Firstly, observe that since C computes MCSP[s], we have that Prx {C(x) = 1} ≤ o(1).
By definition, we have that if C(x) = 1, then Ci (x) = 1 for all i ∈ [M ]. On the other
hand, if C(x) = 0, then Ci (x) = 1 with probability at most 0.1. Putting all this together,
we have
                                 Pr         {Ci (x) = 1} ≤ o(1) + 0.1 ≤ 0.2
                          i∈[M ],x∈{0,1}N

    Furthermore, since G(z) has circuit complexity N 1−Ω(1) for any z ∈ {0, 1}r , we have
that C(G(z)) = 1 for every z. In particular, this means that Ci (z) = 1, for every
i ∈ [M ], z ∈ {0, 1}r .
                                          Pr         {Ci (G(z)) = 1} = 1
                                   i∈[M ],z∈{0,1}r

    Using these equations together and averaging over i ∈ [M ], there exists an i such that

                          Pr     {Ci (x) = 1} −          Pr {Ci (G(z)) = 1} ≥ 0.8
                      x∈{0,1}N                        z∈{0,1}r


In other words Ci is distinguisher for G, which is a contradiction.

   Finally, we show that there is a language in E which cannot be computed by sub-
cubic GapANDO(N ) -formulas, but it can be computed in ON o(1) -Formula[N 2 ]. Therefore,
this lower bound does not localise in the sense of Theorem 4.47.

                                                     / GapANDO(N ) -Formula[N 3−ε ]
Theorem 4.48. There is a language L ∈ E, such that L ∈
for all constants ε > 0, but L ∈ ON o(1) -Formula[N 2 ].

Proof. The function L is very similar to Andreev’s function over 2N inputs (we assume
N is a power of 2 for simplicity). For the second input to Andreev2N , we want to find a
function fh : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} which cannot be 0.9-approximated by N 1−ε/2 formulas in
2O(N ) time (such a function exists by a simple counting argument as seen earlier). To find
fh , we simply enumerate all possible functions f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}, and check whether it
                                                                   n
can be 0.9-approximated by an N 1−ε/2 size formula. There are 22 = 2N many functions
                               1−ε/2 )          1−ε/2 ·poly(log(N ))
on n bits and (N 1−ε/2 )O(N              = 2N                          many formulas of size N 1−ε/2 . Thus,
a straightforward implementation of the algorithm runs in 2O(N ) time.
   For the first input x ∈ {0, 1}N , L partitions x into log N blocks x1 , x2 , . . . , xlog N , of
length N/ log N . L then computes i ∈ {0, 1}log N as i = XOR(x1 ), XOR(x2 ), . . . , XOR(xm ).
It then outputs fh (i). It is easy to verify that L ∈ E and L ∈ ON o(1) -Formula[N 2 ].
    Now, suppose L can be computed by GapANDO(N ) -formulas of size at most N 3−ε .
If we apply a suitable random restriction keeping exactly one variable from each block

                                                        78
alive, we obtain a GapANDO(N ) -Formula[N 1−ε · poly(log(N ))] formula for fh (similar to
Item 2 from Theorem 4.47). This implies that there is an N 1−ε · poly(log(N ))-size formula
0.9-approximating fh , which is a contradiction.


4.7      HM Frontier for (n − k)-Clique and AC0
We first establish HM Frontier E in Section 4.7.1. Following this, we show that known
lower bound techniques for AC0 via random restrictions localise in Section 4.7.2.

4.7.1     Establishing HM Frontier E
Recall that we consider graphs on n vertices, described using an adjacency matrix of size
m = Θ(n2 ). An `-clique is a subset of the vertices S such that each pair of vertices in S
has an edge between them. The `-clique problem is defined as: Given an input graph G
over n vertices, does G have a clique of size at least `?
   We first prove the magnification result in HM Frontier E1.

Proposition 4.49. Let k(n) = (log n)C , for some arbitrary C ∈ N. If for every d ≥ 1,
                                            / AC0d [m1+ε ], then NP 6⊆ NC1 .
there exists ε > 0 such that (n − k)-Clique ∈

Proof. The proof follows by a reduction to a similar magnification theorem by [OS18a]
                                                                             / AC0d [m1+ε ],
(Theorem 7): If for every d ≥ 1, there exists ε > 0 such that k-Vertex-Cover ∈
then NP * NC1 .
   Any graph G on n vertices has a clique of size ≥ n − k iff its complement graph G has
an independent set of size ≥ n − k. In turn, the latter statement holds iff G has a vertex
cover of size ≤ k. Thus, the reduction takes the negation of its input literals and checks
if it has a vertex cover of size ≤ k. In other words, the AC0 -complexities of (n − k)-Clique
and k-Vertex-Cover are the same. Thus, the lower bound for (n − k)-Clique implies the
magnification theorem for k-Vertex-Cover by [OS18a].

   Under the Exponential Time Hypothesis (ETH), it is known that k-Vertex-Cover can-
not be computed in time 2o(k) poly(m) (see [IPZ01], Theorem 29.5.9 in [DF13]). Thus,
if k = ω(log n), it is plausible that k-vertex cover problem is not in P. The proof of
Proposition 4.49 implies that the complexities of (n − k)-Clique and k-Vertex-Cover for
non-monotone computations are equivalent. As a consequence, we observe Item E2 of
the frontier using a similar hypothesis for non-uniform computations.

Proposition 4.50. Suppose that ETH for non-uniform circuits holds. Then (n − k)-
Clique ∈
       / P/poly, for ω(log n) ≤ k ≤ n − ω(log n).



                                             79
 Further discussion on the conditional hardness of k-Vertex-Cover that also applies to
 (n − k)-Clique can be seen in [OS18a].
     Item E3 is well-known [Ajt83, FSS84, Yao85, Hås86]. The next proposition implies
 unconditional monotone circuit lower bounds for detecting large cliques in E4.

 Proposition 4.51 ([AJ08], Section 9.2 in [Juk12]). For any k ≤ n/2, every monotone
                                                  1/3 )
 circuit computing (n − k)-Clique requires 2Ω(k           gates.

     Interestingly, the problem can be solved by (bounded depth) polynomial size monotone
                 √
 circuits if k ≤ log n [AJ08].

 4.7.2     Locality Barrier for AC0 Lower Bounds Above the Thresh-
           old
 This section captures an instantiation of the locality barrier for HM Frontier E.

 Theorem 4.52 (Locality Barrier for HM Frontier E). The following results hold.

(E1O ) (Oracle Circuits from Magnification) There exists an oracle O such that, for each
       k = (log n)C and every large enough depth d, (n − k)-Clique ∈ (AC0d )O [m1+εd ], where
       εd → 0 as d → ∞, and the corresponding circuit employs a single oracle gate O of
       fan-in at most O((log n)4C ).

(E3O ) (Extension of Lower Bound Techniques) Parity ∈  / (AC0 )O [poly(n)] if the total number
       of input wires in the circuit feeding the O-gates is n/(log n)ω(1) .

 Proof. The first item follows by inspection of the proof of Proposition 4.49. This in
 turn uses the oracle circuit construction from [OS18a]. Recall that the circuit in [OS18a]
 simulates the well-known kernelisation algorithm for vertex cover highly efficiently. This
 algorithm takes a graph G over n vertices and produces a smaller instance H over O(k 2 )
 vertices, with a parameter k 0 ≤ k such that H has a k 0 -sized vertex cover iff G has k-sized
 vertex cover. Thus, the construction passes an adjacency matrix description of H of size
 O(k 4 ) and k 0 as inputs to an oracle O which computes k 0 -vertex cover, and outputs O’s
 answer on this. The correctness of the construction follows from the transformation of an
 (n − k)-clique instance to that of k-vertex cover in Proposition 4.49, and consequently the
 equivalences which imply that H has a k 0 -sized vertex cover iff G has an (n − k)-clique.
     The second item follows from the simulation of oracle circuits via interactive compres-
 sion games (see Proposition 5.1 in [OS15]) and lower bounds on the communication cost
 for the latter. They show that one can view an oracle circuit as an interactive protocol
 between 2 parties, where one party is restricted to computation within a fixed circuit class
 and the other has unbounded computational power. The total fan-in of all the oracle gates

                                              80
in the circuit is the number of bits communicated to the party with unbounded power.
Using this connection with the main result from [CS12], which uses random restrictions
to show that any AC0 -compression game (restricted party can only make computations
in AC0 ) for Parity requires at least n/(log n)ω(1) bits to be communicated, we observe the
desired lower bound.

   Informally, the main difficulty with using random restrictions in HM Frontier E, is
that as soon as the Boolean circuit gets simplified so that the oracle gate O is only fed by
input literals, just setting the O(log n)4C literals eliminates the oracle gate. Sacrificing
such a small number of variables wont affect a typical worst-case lower bound based on
the random restriction method.


4.8     Locality Barrier for Lower Bounds Below the
        Threshold
The localisations presented in this section show that one cannot obtain strong circuit
lower bounds by “lowering the threshold” in certain hardness magnification proofs. In
other words, the localisations of the lower bound techniques in this section rule out a
family of potential approaches for establishing strong lower bounds by magnifying an
already known (weak) lower bound for a variant of MCSP or MKtP. As a consequence
of one of our results (Theorem 4.59 in Section 4.8.2), we also refute the Anti-Checker
Hypothesis from [OPS19].

4.8.1     Locality barrier for AC0 lower bounds via pseudorandom
          restrictions
Consider the following hypothesised approach to show that NP 6⊆ NC1 : Construct a
sequence of oracle AC0 -circuits of linear size which compute MKtP[log4 N, 2 log4 N ], where
the oracle gates access some O ∈ NP and have fan-in poly(log N ). Existence of such
circuits implies that O cannot be computed by formulas of size nk , for any k > 0.
Indeed, if this was not true, then we could first use Lemma 4.14 to get an AC0d simulation
for the NC1 circuit computing O for a large enough d and then, replace each oracle
in C with this circuit, to get a constant depth circuit of size N 1+o(1) which computes
MKtP[log4 N, 2 log4 N ]. This would contradict the MKtP lower bound against AC0 in
Theorem 4.15.
   We show that the pseudorandom restriction method used to show lower bounds for
MCSP or MKtP against AC0 (in [CKLM19] and Theorem 4.15) can be localised. This
refutes the existence of such AC0 circuit constructions using local oracles for MKtP and


                                            81
MCSP, even when the oracles are arbitrary. Consequently, this excludes magnification
theorems which can be proved by approaches that unconditionally give such oracle circuit
constructions. The main result of the section is the localisation of Theorem 4.15.
                                                                                       Qd
Theorem 4.53. For every constant d > 1, and O1 , . . . , Od ∈ N such that                 i=1 Oi   ≤
N/ log6d N , MKtP[log6 N, 2 log6 N ] cannot be computed by oracle AC0 -circuits of polyno-
mial size and depth d, where the oracle fan-in in the ith layer is Oi .

A similar result extends for the MCSP lower bound in [CKLM19] (Theorem 3) as well.

Remark 4.54. We remark that the constraint on oracles in the above theorem is incom-
parable to the second item of 4.52. Here we focus on the maximum oracle fan-in at each
level, while the focus there is on the total fan-in of all oracles. A lower bound result for an
explicit problem with parameters similar to Theorem 4.53 is not known for AC0 [2] oracle
circuits (see Section 5 in [OS15] for results in this direction).

   For the localisation of the lower bound, we use a k-wise independence generator to
sample pseudorandom restrictions in the derandomised switching lemma.
   We first prove a version of derandomised switching lemma for functions which are
computed by feeding the outputs of m shallow decision trees into an arbitrary oracle.

Lemma 4.55. Let O : {0, 1}m → {0, 1} be an arbitrary function and D1 , . . . , Dm be
decision trees of depth r over variables x1 , . . . , xN . Define F (x) = O(D1 (x), . . . , Dm (x)).
Then, for every t ∈ N and for every r(t + 1)-wise independent p-regular pseudorandom
restriction D,
                                                                            t+1
                                                                  2mpe2 r
                                                              
                                 Pr {DTdepth (F |ρ ) > t} ≤
                                ρ∼D                                t+1
Proof. Take any fixed restriction ρ : [N ] → {0, 1, ∗}. To analyse DTdepth (F |ρ ), we direct
our focus to the decision tree Te|ρ which computes F |ρ as defined below.

   • Te|ρ first runs D1 |ρ . In other words, for any variable xj queried by D1 , if ρj ∈ {0, 1},
     then D1 |ρ proceeds by setting xj = ρj and otherwise, it queries xj on both values.
     At the end of each decision tree path τ1 , Te|ρ starts the simulation of D2 |ρτ1 .

   • Continuing in this fashion, for every 2 ≤ i ≤ m, at the end of each decision tree
     path τi in the simulation of Di |ρ,τ1 ,...,τi−1 , Te|ρ proceeds by simulating Di+1 under the
      restriction ρ, τ1 , . . . , τi .

   • At the end of the simulation, for any path P in the tree Te|ρ , let aP = (a1 , . . . , am )
      be the outputs of D1 |ρ , . . . , Dm |ρ obtained by setting variables according to the path
      P. At the end of P, the leaf is set to the value O(aP ).

                                                    82
   Let depth(Te|ρ ) be the decision tree depth of Te|ρ . Clearly, DTdepth (F |ρ ) is at most
depth(Te|ρ ) and it is enough for us to upper bound Pr{depth(Te|ρ ) > t}.
   Observe that depth(Te|ρ ) > t iff there exists a path z of length t + 1 which occurs as
the prefix of some computational path in Te|ρ . For any z ∈ {0, 1}t+1 , define Az as this
event.

                  Pr {depth(Te|ρ ) > t} = Pr {∃z ∈ {0, 1}t+1 such that Az }
                 ρ∼D                      ρ∼D
                                            X
                                        ≤         Pr {Az }
                                                             ρ∼D
                                                z∈{0,1}t+1


where the second inequality holds by the union bound.
   Fix any z ∈ {0, 1}t+1 . For ρ ∼ D, consider the computation path traversed by Te|ρ
when its first (t + 1) queries are answered according to z. This implies that there exists
w ≤ t + 1 and decision trees D10 , . . . , Dw0 , such that Te|ρ makes its first (t + 1) queries in
these trees and answers according to z.
   Now, for any such w ≤ t + 1 and D10 , . . . , Dw0 , if Te|ρ were to be simulated only on
D10 , . . . , Dw0 by answering according z, its depth would still be at least t + 1. Since D is
r(t + 1)-wise independent, the probability that this happens is at most
                                      ˙        t+1
                               t+1     wr    pewr
                           p              ≤            ≤ (per)t+1
                                      t+1    t+1

Using a union bound over all possibilities, we have
                                   X
          Pr {depth(Te|ρ ) > t} =           Pr {Az }
           ρ∼D                                         ρ∈D
                                          z∈{0,1}t+1
                                                       t+1  
                                             X         X    m
                                      ≤                     · (per)t+1
                                                       w
                                       z∈{0,1}t+1 w=1
                                                      t+1                       t+1
                                                                         2mpe2 r
                                                                      
                                        t+1       me              t+1
                                      ≤2 ·                 · (per) =
                                                t+1                       t+1



We next need the following results on k-wise independent distributions fooling CNFs.
                                                             S
                                                                           
Lemma 4.56 ([Baz09, Tal17b]). Any O log                      ε
                                                                     · log S -wise independent distribution
ε-fools CNFs (or DNFs) of size S.

We now prove the main result of the section.

Proof of Theorem 4.53. Towards a contradiction, let C be an oracle AC0 -circuit on N
inputs of size S and depth d computing MKtP[log6 N, 2 log6 N ], where the oracle fan-in


                                                       83
in the ith layer is Oi and S = N c for any constant c > 0. For each i ∈ [d], let Si be the
number of gates in layer i in C.
                                            2     2
   Define t = 3c log N, ε0 = 2−32c log N and p = 2−q = 1/120c log N = 1/40t. Let D
be the k-wise independent p-regular
                                 t pseudorandom
                                                         restriction which is obtained from
                                 S·2 ·2t(q+1)              t   t(q+1)
                                                                                 3
Lemma 4.8, where k = O log            ε0
                                                · log S · 2 · 2        · q = O(log
                                                                             e       N ). The
                                                               4
seed length for sampling D is r = O(k · q · log N ) = O(log
                                                         e       N ).
   The proof is very similar to that of Lemma 4.19 and proceeds in d iterations. In
the ith iteration, we apply a composition of mi = log1/p Oi + 1 independently sampled
pseudorandom restrictions drawn from D, to the circuit C. This composition denoted by
ρi , is a k-wise independent pi -regular pseudorandom restriction, where pi = pmi = p/Oi .
The proof proceeds by maintaining the invariant that with high probability, at the end
of the ith iteration the functions computed by the gates in level i can be computed by
decision trees of depth t (at the beginning, we treat the input variables as decision trees
of depth 1).
   In iteration i, assume that after the previous iterations of restrictions, each input to
the gates at level i can be computed by a decision tree of depth t. We have the following
cases:

   • Since k > t(t + 1), we apply Lemma 4.55 to see that under the application of ρi ,
         every oracle gate in level i whose inputs are depth t decision trees can be computed
         by a decision tree of depth larger than t, with probability at most
                                                  t+1
                                    2Oi pi e2 t
                                                                                            
                                                                    2 t+1
                                                                                       1
                           Si                            ≤ Si 2pe           ≤ Si
                                     t+1                                               N 2c

   • The function computed by any AND/OR gate φ in level i whose inputs are depth
     t decision trees, is equivalent to a CNF/DNF of width t and size at most S · 2t .
         From Lemma 4.56, observe that D ε0 -fools CNFs/DNFs of size S · 2t · 2t(q+1) . Using
         this within Lemma 4.17 (derandomised switching lemma for CNFs/DNFs), the
         probability that φ|ρi can be computed by a decision tree of depth greater than t is

                             ≤ Si · 22t+1 (5pt)t + ε0 · 2(t+1)(3t+log S)
                                                                         

                             ≤ Si · 22t+1 (5t/40t)t + ε0 2(3c log N +1)(10c log N )
                                                                                    
                                                                            
                                   
                                     1−t        31c2 log2 N
                                                                        1
                             ≤ Si · 2 + ε0 2                  ≤ Si ·
                                                                       N 2c

         Note that, although we refer to φ being restricted by ρi , we only use one of the mi
         pseudorandom restrictions.




                                                         84
   Define the restriction ρ as the composition of ρ1 , . . . , ρd . Using a union bound, the
probability that C|ρ shrinks to a depth t decision tree, is at least 1 − 2S · N −2c . When
S = N c , with probability at least 3/4 over ρ, Cρ can be computed by a depth t decision
tree.
     Let m be the total
                     Q number of pseudorandom restrictions applied to C. Now, m =
Pd                       d
   i mi = d + log1/p     i=1 Oi  ≤ log1/p N − 3d. Thus, the probability p∗ that any
variable is not restricted is p∗ = pm ≥ p−3d /N . Since k ≥ 2, ρ is also a p∗ -regular
pairwise independent distribution. Thus, using Chebyshev’s inequality (Lemma 4.6), the
probability that at least p∗ N/2 variables are left unrestricted after the application of all
the restrictions is at least 3/4. Put together, this implies the existence of ρ such that
C|ρ can be computed by a decision tree of depth t and at least p∗ N/2 variables are left
unrestricted.
   We now construct a YES instance wY and a NO instance wN such that C(wY ) =
C(wN ) and this contradicts the fact that C computes MKtP[log6 N, 2 log6 N ]. Firstly,
                                                                       5
define wY ∈ {0, 1}N as ρ ◦ 0N . Since the seed length is r · m = O(log
                                                                 e       N ) for N large
enough, and there exists an algorithm that computes each bit of ρ in time poly(r) · m
                                                                        5
(cf. Lemma 4.8), we see that wY is a YES instance, i.e. Kt(wY ) = O(log
                                                                  e       N ) ≤ log6 N . On
the other hand, let W be the set of variables queried by the decision tree of depth t com-
                                                                             3d
puting C|ρ . The number of assignments over ρ−1 (∗) \ W is at least 2O(log        N )/2−O(log N )
                                                                                                    ≥
    6
                                                                    ρ−1 (∗)\W
22 log N +1 . This implies the existence of an assignment h ∈ {0, 1} , such that any
                  N                              −1
string in {0, 1} which agrees with h over ρ (∗) \ W has Kt complexity larger than
2 log6 N . wN is extended from ρ by fixing every variable in W to be 0 and the remaining
variables to be h, to get a NO instance. Now, since wY and wN agree on ρ−1 ({0, 1}) ∪ W
and C becomes a constant when set according to this assignment, C(wY ) = C(wN ).

4.8.2     The Sub-Quadratic Formula Lower Bound of [HS17]
In this section, we prove that the nearly quadratic formula size lower bound of [HS17]
localises, and thereby proving the third item of Theorem 4.1. By localising [HS17], we
exclude a family of magnification theorems obtained by approaches that unconditionally
produce formulas with oracles, and essentially address a question from [OPS19]. It also
suggests that the consideration of almost-formulas in HM Frontier C (Section 4.5) is
unavoidable.
   Before stating the main theorem of this section, we need to establish the following
complexity measure on oracle formulas.




                                             85
Definition 4.57 (Size Measure for Oracle Formulas). For any integer t > 1 and any
oracle formula F with oracle gates to O having fan-in B, define Formulat (F ) as follows:
                       (
                        Formula   (F1 ) + Formulat (F2 ), if F = F1 ∧ F2 or F1 ∨ F2
                                tP
       Formulat (F ) =              B
                        B t−1 ·     i=1 Formulat (Fi ) , if F = O(F1 , . . . , FB )


We say that a function f ∈ FormulaO  t [s], if there exists an integer B = B(N ) and a
sequence of oracle formulas {FN } with oracle gates to O having fan-in B, such that FN
computes fN for every N large enough, and Formulat (FN ) is at most s(N ).

   Informally, for any oracle formula F having oracle gates to O with fan-in B, Formulat (F )
is the size of the De Morgan formula obtained by replacing every oracle gate in F with
an equivalent formula of size B t , which reads each of its B inputs exactly B t−1 times.

   One plausible approach for proving strong circuit lower bounds is to show a highly-
                                                                √
efficient small fan-in oracle formula construction for MCSP[2 n ] and lower the magnifica-
                                                                            √
tion threshold to known sub-quadratic formula lower bounds for MCSP[2 n ] by [HS17].
This approach can be formalised as:
                                                   √
Proposition 4.58. For any t > 0, if MCSP[2 n ] ∈ FormulaNP
                                                        t+1 [N
                                                               2−ε
                                                                   ] for some ε > 0
(formulas which have oracle access to some language in NP), then NP * Formula[nt ].

Proof. Suppose that NP ⊆ Formula[nt ]. Let {FN } be the sequence of NP-oracle formu-
                     √
las computing MCSP[2 n ]. By adding enough dummy leaves, any language in NP can
be computed by formulas of size nt+1 which reads each input exactly nt times. Replac-
ing every NP-oracle gate in F with these formulas, we get a formula of size N 2−ε that
                   √
computes MCSP[2 n ], which contradicts the [HS17] formula size lower bound.
                                                            √
   In particular, Proposition 4.58 implies that if MCSP[2 n ] ∈ FormulaNP
                                                                       t+1 [N
                                                                              2−ε
                                                                                  ] for every
t > 0, then NP 6⊆ NC1 .
   Our main result in this section rules out the existence of such magnification approaches
even when t = 3, by localising the MCSP lower bound by [HS17], with a mild constraint
on the adaptivity of the oracle circuits (maximum number of oracles along any path in
the formula). Of course, this refutes the existence of such oracle formula constructions
           √
for MCSP[2 n ] for any t ≥ 4.

Theorem 4.59 (Localising the [HS17] lower bound). There exists a universal
constant c, such that for all constants ε > 0 and every oracle O, MCSP[nc , 2εn/3 ] 6∈
FormulaO
       3 [N
            2−ε
                ], where the adaptivity of the oracle formulas is at most o(log N/ log log N ).
                              √
   In other words, MCSP[2 n ] cannot be computed by oracle formulas F , such that
Formula3 (F ) ≤ N 2−ε and adaptivity of F is at most o(log N/ log log N ).

                                              86
Remark 4.60. Note that for any F , under the assumption that Formula3 (F ) ≤ N 2−ε ,
the adaptivity of F can be at most O(log N ).

   One important consequence of Theorem 4.59 is that it refutes the Anti-Checker Hy-
pothesis from [OPS19].

The Anti-Checker Hypothesis [OPS19] For every λ ∈ (0, 1), there exists ε > 0 and
                                                                                                1−ε
a collection Y = {Y1 , . . . , Y` } of sets Yi ⊆ {0, 1}n , where ` = 2(2−ε)n and each |Yi | = 2n ,
for which the following holds.
                                                     λ
   If f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} and f 6∈ SIZE[2n ], then some set Y ∈ Y forms an anti-checker
                                               λ
for f , i.e. for each circuit C of size 2n /2n, there is an input y ∈ Y such that C(y) 6= f (y).

Corollary 4.61. The Anti-Checker Hypothesis is false.

Proof. [OPS19] show that the Anti-Checker Hypothesis implies that for some ε > 0,
          1/3      2/3
MCSP[2n         , 2n     ] can be solved by an oracle formula F of size N 2−ε , with N 2−ε many NP-
                                        1−ε
oracle gates of fan-in poly(n) · 2n           = N o(1) , which are present only in the layer above the
                                                                                          1/3      2/3
leaves. In particular, this implies that Formula3 (FN ) ≤ N 2−ε+o(1) and MCSP[2n                , 2n     ]∈
FormulaNP
       3 [N
            2−ε+o(1)
                     ]. This leads to a contradiction, as such oracle formulas are ruled out
by Theorem 4.59.

   We are now ready to prove Theorem 4.59. We first give a high level overview of
the proof. The argument is similar to [HS17, OPS19], who show sub-quadratic formula
lower bounds for MCSP (and MKtP) using an iterative restriction process. Suppose there
exists an oracle formula F over N inputs, such that Formula3 (F ) ≤ N 2−ε and adaptivity
o(log N/ log log N ) that computes MCSP[nc , 2εn/3 ].
   For k small enough (k = poly(log N )), we apply r ≈ logk (N 2−ε ) many pseudorandom
restrictions ρ1 , . . . , ρr on F , which are independently sampled from a √1k -regular k-wise
independent distribution D, given by Lemma 4.8.
   To analyse the size of F under the influence of ρ1 , . . . , ρr , we define a potential function
Φ. For any oracle formula, Φ is defined in a bottom-up manner, building on inductive
blocks which we call as maximal sub-formulas. The potential Φ of an oracle formula is a
random variable which will be defined such that it is not just a function of the structure
of the formula, but also is dependent on the pseudorandom restrictions which have been
applied so far.
   Crucially, for any oracle formula F , we require Φ to satisfy the following properties:

   1. When F is hit by a p-regular pseudorandom restriction from D, Φ shrinks by a
                                                         √
      factor close to p2 in expectation (note that p = 1/ k).



                                                         87
   2. With high probability, for every iteration of the restriction, and every maximal
      sub-formula G of F , if Φ = 0, then G has shrunk “significantly”, i.e. depends on
      “very few” variables. This notion of high shrinkage depends on the structure of G
      and will be defined more precisely soon.

   3. Either Φ = 0 or Φ ≥ 1. From the second item, this implies that if F has not shrunk
      significantly, then Φ(F ) ≥ 1.

   We use a case-based analysis based on the structure of the oracle formula to inductively
define Φ which satisfies these properties. In particular, Φ(F ) is defined in such a way that
it is closely related to Formula3 (F ) and thus, is at most N 2−ε+o(1) at the beginning (in
fact, as we shall soon see, the motivation for defining the measure Formula3 (F ) is based
on our inductive definition of Φ(F )).
   Using the properties of Φ, we show that after roughly r rounds of restrictions from
D, Φ(F ) becomes 0 with high probability because of its shrinkage under pseudorandom
restrictions. This means that F depends on very few variables (say poly(log N )), with
high probability. Further, we get a final composed restriction which has a low circuit
complexity. On the other hand, we show that the composition of the r restrictions
leaves a 1/N Ω(1) -fraction of the variables unrestricted with high probability. As seen
earlier, we can easily extend the composed restriction to a YES instance wY and a NO
instance wN , such that F accepts them both. This contradicts the fact that F computes
MCSP[nc , 2εn/3 ].
   Before diving into the proof, we need the following lemmas from [IMZ19].

Lemma 4.62 (Lemma 4.3 in [IMZ19], [Tal14]). For any positive k and any formula F
on a set of variables x1 , . . . , xN with L(F ) ≥ k, there exists at most 6L(F )/k formulas Gi
with L(Gi ) ≤ k, where the Gi may consist of some variables in addition to the original
input variables of F (called special variables), such that the following holds: For any
                                                0
                          P
restriction ρ, L(F |ρ ) ≤  i L(Gi |ρ0 ), where ρ (xj ) = ρ(xj ) for xj ∈ {x1 , . . . , xN }, and
ρ0 (j) = ∗ otherwise. Moreover, each Gi depends on at most 2 special variables.

   The special variables here refer to the roots of other sub-formulas in the collection
which were at the bottom of Gi in the original formula F .
    Since the number of special variables S is just 2, we can use a constant-sized formula
for the addressing function over S, to construct a formula computing Gi |ρ over all possible
assignments to S. This leads us to the following shrinkage under expectation result for
k-wise independent pseudorandom restrictions.




                                              88
Lemma 4.63 (Lemma 27 in [HS17] (based on [IMZ19, KRT17])). Let F be any formula
                                                          √
over N inputs and k ∈ N such that L(F ) ≥ k. If D is a (1/ k)-regular k-wise independent
distribution, then Eρ∈D [L(F |ρ )] ≤ 72 · L(F )/k.
Proof of Theorem 4.59. Let FN be anoracle
                                        formula, with oracle access to some function
O. Let k = log3 N and let D be a            √1
                                              k
                                                  -regular k-wise independent distribution over
restrictions on N variables, from Lemma 4.8. For r will be set later, we apply r indepen-
dent pseudorandom restrictions ρ1 , . . . , ρr , each identically distributed according to D, to
the oracle formula F .
   Define a maximal sub-formula of F as any oracle sub-formula of F which is either
(a) rooted at an oracle gate (b) rooted at a gate whose parent is an oracle gate, or
(c) the formula F itself. For any maximal sub-formula G of F and for any integer
0 ≤ i ≤ r, define Φ(G, ρ1 , . . . , ρi ) as a real-valued random variable, which defines the
potential function of G after the first i pseudorandom restrictions ρ1 , . . . , ρi . Maximal
sub-formulas form the inductive blocks used in the construction of Φ(F ). Note that,
Φ(F ) and Φ(F, ρ1 , . . . , ρr ) are the potentials of F at the beginning and the end of the
restriction process.
   Next, we say that a sub-formula G is “tiny” if (a) the top gate is an oracle and G
depends on at most log N variables, or else (b) it depends on at most ctiny · k number of
variables, for some constant ctiny we define later. These parameters ensure that in the
case analysis for the inductive construction of Φ(F ), any maximal sub-formula becomes
tiny with high probability, under the pseudorandom restriction.
   Now, recall the properties required from Φ. For any oracle formula F ,
   1. Eρ∼D [Φ(F |ρ )] ≤ ckF · Φ(F ), where cF is a constant which depends on F , but is upper
      bounded universally by a constant.

   2. With probability at least 1 − pF , for every iteration 1 ≤ i ≤ r and every maximal
      sub-formula G of F , if Φ(G, ρ1 , . . . , ρi ) = 0, then G is tiny, where pF ∈ [0, 1] depends
      on F and is upper bounded by N −2 .
      Furthermore, Φ(G, ρ1 , . . . , ρi ) is either 0 or at least 1.
   We next construct the potential function Φ. For any oracle formula F , let G be any
maximal sub-formula of F . Consider the following cases for G.

Case I: G is a Pure Formula
   This forms the simplest case and we can directly use known techniques here. Suppose
G is a pure formula (formulas with no oracles) of size S. Then,
                                     (
                                       S    if S > 80k,
                             Φ(G) =
                                       0    otherwise.

                                                  89
       We now see that Φ(G) easily satisfies the properties. Indeed, the first property is
satisfied because of Lemma 4.63. Thus, when S ≥ 80k, the expected size of G under
ρ ∼ D drops by a factor k/cG (cG = 72). The second and third properties are easily
satisfied by the definition, by setting pG = 0 and ctiny to be larger than 80.

Case II: G is an Oracle Gate
       Suppose G is a pure oracle gate O with fan-in T , i.e. each input to O is just an input
variable. We set the potential as:
                                         (
                                          T 2 k 3 if T > log N,
                                  Φ(G) =
                                          0       otherwise.

After each restriction ρ, we set Φ(G|ρ ) to Φ(G)/k, with cG = 1.                     In other words,
                                       i
Φ(G, ρ1 , . . . , ρi ) is set to Φ(G)/k . Furthermore, if for some 1 ≤ i ≤ r, Φ(G, ρ1 , . . . , ρi ) is
less than 1, then φ(G, ρ1 , . . . , ρi ) is set to 0 henceforth. The definition of Φ ensures the
first property.
       To show the second item, observe that Φ(G) becomes 0 after at least R = 2 logk T
many restrictions.19 The composition of these restrictions is a k-wise independent re-
striction which keeps a variable unrestricted with probability at most 1/T . Thus, when
Φ(G, ρ1 , . . . , ρR ) becomes 0, the probability that the restricted formula depends on more
than log N variables is at most :
                                log N        log N
                           T      1           e            1
                                ·        ≤               ≤ 4
                         log N    T         log N         N
Setting pG = 1/N 4 , we see that with probability at least 1 − pG , Φ(G, ρ1 , . . . , ρR ) = 0
implies that G|ρ1 ,...,ρR is tiny.

Case III: G is a Formula with a Top Oracle Gate
       Consider the case where G is an oracle formula with a top oracle gate of fan-in T .
Let G1 , . . . , GT be the maximal sub-formulas feeding into the oracle gate and let Φ(Gj )
be their respective potentials. Note that Case II is a special case.
   We proceed with the process of applying restrictions iteratively. At the beginning,
the potential of G is set as:
                                              T
                                                                   !
                                              X
                             Φ(G) = max              Φ(Gj ), 1/k       · T 2 · k4
                                               j=1
                  PT
       Whenever     j=1 Φ(Gj ) first   becomes 0, say after the ith restriction, the potential
                              2 3
Φ(G, ρ1 , . . . , ρi ) is set to T k . Note that, this holds even when i = 0, i.e. Φ(Gj ) = 0 for
  19
    For our purposes, it is enough if Φ(G) = T 2 , if T > log N . The potential used above is to maintain
consistency with Case III.


                                                     90
all 1 ≤ j ≤ T to begin with. Going further, we reduce the potential by a factor of k after
each restriction until it becomes less than 1, beyond which it is set to 0 every time. Note
that cG is set to max1≤j≤T cGj .
    The first property holds for Φ by the inductive nature of its construction. Indeed,
suppose that each Φ(Gj ) reduces by a factor of k/cGj in expectation, after each restriction
from D. When Tj=1 Φ(Gj ) > 0, we see that after each restriction, Φ(G) drops by a
                  P

factor at most k/ maxj cGj = k/cG in expectation. When Tj=1 Φ(Gj ) = 0, our definition
                                                           P

of Φ(G) ensures this property holds. Finally, for the case where Tj=1 Φ(Gj ) > 0 before
                                                                   P

the restriction and 0 after, one can see that Φ drops from at least T 2 k 4 to at most T 2 k 3 .
    Next, suppose that Φ(G) becomes 0 after R restrictions from D, for some R ∈ N.
Observe that this happens only when Tj=1 Φ(Gj ) becomes 0 after i restrictions, for some
                                         P

i < R. When Tj=1 Φ(Gj , ρ1 , . . . , ρi ) = 0, with probability at least 1 − Tj=1 pGj , each
               P                                                            P

of the sub-formulas is tiny. At this stage, the oracle gate at the top depends on at most
O(T ·k) many variables and its potential is set to T 2 k 3 now.20 Thus, when Φ(G, ρ1 , . . . , ρR )
becomes 0 following a further set of restrictions, the probability the oracle depends on at
most log N variables is at most 1/N 4 using an argument similar to that of case II (the
pure oracle case). Setting pG = Ti=1 pGi + 1/N 4 , we see that property 2 holds.
                               P


Case IV: G is a Formula with Oracle Leaves
   For this case, we treat G as an oracle formula whose leaves are either literals or oracle
gates, ignoring the sub-formulas rooted at the oracle gates. Intuitively, this case occurs
when the potential function for the maximal sub-formulas associated with the oracle
leaves have already been constructed and we need to use them as inductive blocks to
build Φ(G). Observe that Case I is a special case of this.
   Suppose G is an oracle formula of size S, with m oracle leaves O1 , . . . , Om . Let Φ(Oi )
be the potential of the sub-formula corresponding to Oi . Also, let cO be the maximum of
the cOi s of the sub-formulas associated with the oracle leaves.
   At the end of each pseudorandom restriction, whenever an oracle formula with a
top oracle gate depends on at most b = 10 variables, we transform the oracle gate
into a formula of size 2b . This ensures easier dealing of oracle gates when they become
very small, since they have now become constant-sized formulas. Now, the difficulty in
analysis arises when we have many oracle leaves which have become tiny (depend on at
most log N variables), but still have not collapsed to b variables. Such oracle formulas
have their potentials down to 0, and yet in total, could be supported on many variables.
We explicitly keep track of such oracles. Define an oracle leaf as active if it has not been
  20
     Analogous to Case II (the pure oracle case), a potential of O(T 2 k 2 ) would be sufficient here, as this
would mean the probability of leaving a variable unrestricted by the composition of all the restrictions
is at most 1/T k. We use T 2 k 3 for notational convenience (to eliminate the constant in the potential).


                                                     91
transformed into a formula of size at most 2b yet. Let mtiny be the number of active tiny
oracles, i.e. oracle leaves which have become tiny but have not been transformed to a
2b -sized formula.
   As before, we proceed with the process of applying restrictions iteratively. At the
beginning, the potential of G is set as:
                                            m
                                                     !
                                           X
                                      2
                                               Φ(Oj ) · k 4
                      
                      S + mtiny · k +                      if S > 80k,
                      
                      
                      
                                            j=1 !
             Φ(G) =                      m
                                       X
                                 2
                      mtiny · k +         Φ(Oj ) · k 4     otherwise.
                      
                      
                      
                                        j=1

   To show shrinkage under expectation of Φ(G) under ρ ∼ D, we first consider the
formula itself and suppose that S > 80k. The number of active oracles (oracles which
have not collapsed to a constant-sized formula yet) are at most (m − mtiny ) + mtiny . Using
Lemma 4.62, we see that the formula of size S can be split into 6S/k sub-formulas of
size at most k, where each formula is connected to at most two other formulas in the
collection. Now, there are at least 6S/k − m sub-formulas of size at most k which do not
contain an active oracle leaf. Thus, the total size of all these formulas under ρ is at most
O(S/k) from Lemma 4.63. For those sub-formulas which contain an active oracle leaf,
the total size is at most m · O(k) after ρ (the constant term accounts for when an active
oracle leaf collapses to a formula over at most b variables).
   Next, we consider the active tiny oracles. Observe that the probability that an active
tiny oracle, which depends on at most log N variables, ends up having larger than b
variables under ρ is at most
                      
                 log N
                         · k −b/2 ≤ (e log N/b)b · k −b/2 ≤ (1/ log5 N ) ≤ 1/k
                    b
Thus, after the application of ρ, the number of active tiny oracles becomes at most
mtiny
 k
      + (m − mtiny ) in expectation.    Finally, by the induction over the maximal sub-
formulas, every Φ(Oj ) reduces by a factor of cO /k in expectation after ρ.
   Using the fact that m
                        P
                          j=1 Φ(Oj ) ≥ m − mtiny , the expected potential of G under ρ is
at most
                             m
                                                    !                m
                                                                              !
                 S          X                                mtiny X
           ≤ c1 · + c2 · k      Φ(Oj ) + mtiny          +         +     Φ(Oj ) · k 2
                 k          j=1
                                                              k     j=1
                        m
                                 !
                      X             cO 4
                   +       Φ(Oj ) ·     ·k
                      j=1
                                     k
                                              m
                                                            !
                 S                c2 + 1      X                          cO + c2 /k 2 + 1/k
           ≤ c1 · + mtiny · k 2 ·        +          Φ(Oj )      · k4 ·
                 k                   k        j=1
                                                                                  k

                                              92
Setting cG = max(c1 , c2 + 1, cO + c2 /k 2 + 1/k), we show that Φ reduces by a factor cG /k
in expectation.
   For the second property, observe that Φ(G) becomes 0 only after S ≤ 80k at some
point, in addition to mtiny and m
                                P
                                  j=1 Φ(Oj ) becoming 0. In particular, this implies that
the oracles have further collapsed to formulas over b variables. Since, each transformed
oracle adds at most 2b leaves, when Φ(G) becomes 0, the size of the whole formula is at
most 2b · 80k and thus, it is tiny by setting ctiny = 2b · 80. We set pG = m
                                                                          P
                                                                            i=1 pOi .


   We are now ready to prove the MCSP lower bound. For some constant c which will be
fixed later, suppose that there exists ε > 0, oracle O, and a sequence of O-oracle formulas
{FN } that computes MCSP[nc , 2εn/3 ], such that Formula3 (FN ) ≤ N 2−ε and its adaptivity
is a(N ) = o(log N/ log log N ). The value of pF ≤ N 2 · N −4 ≤ 1/N 2 .
    Furthermore, we see that the maximum value of cF is obtained when Case IV induc-
tively repeats itself at each layer of adaptivity, i.e. for each oracle gate, at least one of
its inputs is fed by a maximal sub-formula which satisfies the structure analysed in Case
IV. Thus, cF can be upper bounded as

       cF ≤ max{c1 , c2 + 1, 72} + a(N )(c2 /k 2 + 1/k) ≤ max{c1 , c2 + 1, 72} + o(1)

which is a constant. Note that the constant 72 comes from Case I.
   Next, observe that Φ(F ) ≤ Formula3 (F ) · k O(a(N )) ≤ N 2−ε+o(1) . Intuitively, the induc-
tive definition of Φ for a formula F with a fan-in T oracle gate at the top (Case III), is
the measure of each input sub-formula repeated exactly T 2 times (ignoring the poly(k)
term). In other words, Φ can be viewed as the size of the De Morgan formula obtained
by transforming an oracle into an equivalent formula of size T 3 , where each of the T
inputs occurs exactly T 2 times. Furthermore, since a(N ) = o(log N/ log log N ), k O(a(N ))
is constrained to be at most N o(1) .
   From property 1, Φ(F ) drops by a factor k/cF in expectation, after each restriction
from D. Thus, after r = d2 logk/cF N e + 3 many restrictions, the expected value of
Φ(F, ρ1 , . . . , ρr ) is less than 1/20. Applying Markov’s inequality, with probability at least
0.95 − pF ≥ 0.9, there exists a restriction ρ (which is a composition of r independent
restrictions) such that F |ρ depends on at most O(k) many variables.
    Furthermore, the composition of r independent restrictions ρ keeps a variable un-
restricted with probability at least k −r/2 and since k ≥ 2, ρ is pairwise independent.
Expanding this using the definition of r, we see that k −r/2 ≥ ((cF )r · k 3 · Φ(F ))−1/2 ≥
N (2−ε+o(1))(−1/2) ≥ 1/N 1−ε/2+o(1) . This equation holds because r = O(log N/ log log N )
and thus, (cF )r = N o(1) . Using Chebyshev’s inequality (Lemma 4.6), we see that with
probability at least 0.9, |ρ−1 (∗)| ≥ N ε/2−o(1) . Put together, we see that there exists a


                                               93
fixed restriction ρ such that F |ρ is at most O(k) and ρ leaves at least N ε/2−o(1) variables
unrestricted.
   The contradiction is proved in a similar manner to the lower bounds seen earlier. We
construct wY = ρ ◦ 0N which is a YES instance, because from Lemma 4.8 we see that the
circuit complexity of wY is at most poly(log N ) · r ≤ nc , for some c ≥ 1 which is fixed
to be large enough. Let U be the variables on which F |ρ depends on. After setting the
                                                ε/2−o(1) −O(poly(log N ))            ε/3 log N )
variables in U to 0, there exists at least 2N                               > 2O(N                 many ways of
assigning variables in V = ρ−1 (∗) \ U , where the latter quantity is the number of circuits
on n inputs of size at most N ε/3 . Thus, there exists an assignment h to the variables
in V , such that any N -length truth table which agrees with h has circuit complexity at
least N ε/3 . In particular, we extend ρ to get a NO instance wN by fixing U to 0 and the
remaining variables in ρ−1 (∗) to h. Since F |ρ only depends on U , it accepts both wY and
wN , which contradicts the fact that F computes MCSP[nc , 2εn/3 ].


4.9      Concluding Remarks and Open Problems
Hardness magnification shows that obtaining a refined understanding of weak compu-
tational models is an approach to major complexity lower bounds, such as separating
EXP from NC1 . As discussed in Sections 3.1.2 and 4.1.1, its different instantiations are
connected to a few basic questions in Complexity Theory, including the power of non-
monotone operations, learnability of circuit classes, and pseudorandomness.
  One of the main conceptual contributions of this chapter is to identify a challenge
when implementing this strategy for lower bounds. Quoting the influential article [RR97]
that introduced the natural proofs barrier,

   “We do not conclude that researchers should give up on proving serious lower bounds.
Quite the contrary, by classifying a large number of techniques that are unable to do the
job we hope to focus research in a more fruitful direction.”
                                                             Razborov and Rudich [RR97, Section 6]

We share a similar opinion with respect to hardness magnification and the barrier iden-
tified in this chapter. While locality provides a unified explanation for the difficulty of
adapting combinatorial lower bound techniques to exploit most (if not all) known mag-
nification frontiers, it might be possible to discover new HM frontiers whose associated
lower bound techniques in Item 3 are sensitive to the presence of small fan-in oracles.
   [Oli19] provides one such instance, by introducing a randomised analogue of Kt com-
plexity called MrKtP and showing that it exhibits magnification phenomena similar to
MKtP. In particular, if MrKtP has a super-linear lower bound against Formula-XOR, then


                                                 94
Promise-BPE * NC1 . The proof does provide a circuit construction for MrKtP with oracle
gates of small fan-in. Nevertheless, an unconditional uniform complexity lower bound for
MrKtP in the same paper, via an indirect diagonalisation argument that explores the
theory of pseudorandomness, does not extend to algorithms with small fan-in oracles.
Very simply put, this is because the easiness of MrKtP does not help us much when try-
ing to diagonalise against computations with small-fan in oracles, as the problem refers
only to standard computations. This shows the existence of lower bound techniques and
computational problems that, together, can be sensitive to local oracles.
   It would also be useful to investigate the locality of additional lower bound techniques.
Can we, for example, come up with non-localisable lower bounds similar to Theorem 4.48
which would be above the magnification threshold and work for a problem more closely
related to the one from the corresponding HM frontier?
    Alternatively, it might be possible to establish magnification theorems using a tech-
nique that does not produce circuits with small fan-in oracles. Furthermore, recent works
suggest approaches such as the Explicit Obstructions framework by [CJW20], or the meta-
computational view of PRG constructions by [Hir20b], as potential ways of bypassing the
locality barrier.
   Even if one is pessimistic about these possibilities, we believe that an important contri-
bution of the theory of hardness magnification is to break the divide between “weak” and
“strong” circuit classes advocated by the natural proofs barrier. Magnification indicates
that investigating specific computational problems can actually make a big difference,
and perhaps the computational problem for which the lower bound is being shown can-
not be left out of the picture. For example, while strong lower bounds are known for
problems like Majority against a weak class like AC0 [2], showing even weak lower bounds
for a seemingly harder problem like MKtP[(log N )d ] against a weaker class like AC0 -XOR
has seemed out of reach so far.
   In this sense, we believe that the theory of magnification has allowed us take a second
look at combinatorial lower bound methods and natural proofs, and try to understand
why showing lower bounds for certain problems is harder than others, and that it deserves
further investigation.




                                            95
Chapter 5

The Structure of Learnability
beyond P/poly

5.1      Introduction
What is the complexity of learning polynomial-size circuits? Despite extensive research
on this question, our knowledge is still fairly sparse. For weak concept classes such as
decision trees [LMN93, KM93], DNFs [LMN93, Jac97] or even constant-depth circuits
with parity gates [CIKK16], reasonably efficient learning algorithms under the uniform
distribution are known for various models of learning. For stronger concept classes,
learning is believed to be hard, but the evidence for this is not as strong as one might
hope. Cryptographic assumptions such as the existence of one-way functions are known
to imply that learning polynomial-size circuits is hard [KV94a, GGM86]. However, we
still seem far from showing that PAC-learning polynomial-size circuits is NP-hard - indeed
[ABX08] give negative results for certain kinds of black-box reductions to learning.
   In this chapter, we adopt a fresh perspective of approaching the learnability question
from above, i.e. via circuit classes which are more powerful than P/poly. We consider
commonly held beliefs about the complexity of learning, and establish these beliefs un-
conditionally for strong concept classes such as PSPACE/poly and EXP/poly. Of course
the very learnability of these concept classes has some unlikely implications, e.g. that
these classes are approximable by efficient Boolean circuits. The point is that this is still
consistent with our complexity-theoretic understanding, and we would like to know what
current techniques are capable of proving unconditionally about learning. Partly this
is to understand the limitations of current techniques, and partly this is to understand
what structural properties of the stronger concept classes enable us to show unconditional
results about them.
   We begin by outlining our main results and comparing them with previous work.



                                             96
5.1.1      Unconditional results for hardness of learning
Our first set of results deals with unconditional hardness of learning circuit classes. Most
complexity theorists believe that learning polynomial-size circuits is unconditionally hard,
but of course proving this is at least as hard as the P vs NP problem. We ask: what is
the smallest concept class C/poly1 for which we can prove learning to be hard? Clearly,
if we can prove that C/poly cannot be approximated by efficient circuits, i.e. there does
not even exist a good hypothesis for all concepts in the class, then hardness of learning
follows. This observation implies for example that learning MAEXP is hard, by using
known circuit lower bounds for this class [BFT98].
    But can we show hardness of learning unconditionally for some concept class where it
is consistent with our current understanding of complexity theory that a good hypothesis
exists for every concept in the class? We give an affirmative answer by ruling out PAC-
learning with membership and equivalence queries unconditionally for the class BPE/poly.
    The notion of PAC-learning C/poly, for a uniform class C above P such as EXP or BPE,
can have different interpretations. In this chapter we use the definition of efficiently PAC-
learning a class C/poly, as one which runs in poly(n) time using P/poly as its hypothesis
class (assume that the accuracy ε and confidence δ are both 1/poly(n)).
    To motivate this, note that standard definitions for PAC-learning (cf. [KV94b]) con-
sider the task of learning to be efficient if it is polynomial in the size of the target concept
over n inputs (where ε and δ are both 1/poly(n)) and the hypothesis class is P/poly.2
Following this, we can consider efficient PAC-learning for weaker classes (like P/poly) as
learning in poly(n) time using P/poly-hypotheses, and see that this naturally extends to
the concept class C/poly as the size of the target concept is still polynomial in the input
size n. Alternatively, one can also consider polynomial time learners where the hypothesis
has a polynomial size description, but should be evaluated with respect to an oracle to
some function in C. The learning algorithms could also have access to more resources,
for example have access to some C-oracle or even have the ability to run in 2n /nω(1) time.
For the classes C we consider, PAC-learnability of C/poly in poly(n) time using P/poly-
hypotheses is still consistent with our current understanding of complexity theory (as we
do not have any unconditional average-case lower bounds for C against P/poly), and as
such, we use this interpretation of learning C/poly for proving unconditional results.
    1
      For any uniform complexity class C, define the class C/poly as the set of languages L for which there
is a C-machine M and a family of strings {an }, where an ∈ {0, 1}poly(n) , such that for every x ∈ {0, 1}n ,
x ∈ L ⇐⇒ M accepts (x, an )
    2
      In general, the definition requires the hypothesis class H to be polynomially evaluatable, which means
that there exists an algorithm that on input any instance x ∈ {0, 1}n and an encoding of the hypothesis
h ∈ Hn , outputs the value h(x) in time polynomial in n and the size of the hypothesis encoding. It is
well known that P/poly is polynomially evaluatable.



                                                    97
       BPE/poly can equivalently be defined as the class of languages computable by poly-
nomial size circuit families with oracle gates to some function in BPE, with the oracle
query size restricted to O(n). We prove the unconditional hardness of learning BPE/poly
in polynomial time using membership queries even over the uniform distribution using
P/poly as the hypothesis class. Hardness of exactly learning BPE/poly with membership
and equivalence queries, even using randomised algorithms follows directly from this via
[Ang88].

Theorem 5.1. For every constant k ∈ N, BPE/poly cannot be (1/2 − 1/nk , 1/n)-learnt
over the uniform distribution using membership queries by randomised learning algorithms
running in polynomial time.

       To prove this, we adapt techniques used by [KKO13, OS17] to show that randomised
PAC-learning algorithms imply circuit lower bounds. [TV07] show the existence of a
PSPACE-Complete function f ∗ which is in DSPACE[n], such that f ∗ is downward self-
reducible and self-correctible (see Section 5.2 for definitions). Using the techniques of
[KKO13], along with the fact that f ∗ belongs to BPE, we see that PSPACE collapses
to BPP. Using a padding argument and diagonalising DSPACE[2O(n) ] against functions
which can be approximated by polynomial-sized circuits, we obtain a contradiction to
the fact that for every function in BPE/poly, the learner gives a hypothesis circuit which
approximates it well.

5.1.2        Robustness of learning
We believe that polynomial-size circuits are hard to learn in a robust sense, i.e. that the
precise details of the learning model do not matter. Hardness should hold irrespective
of whether we consider PAC-learning or learning over the uniform distribution, worst-
case learning or average-case learning over some samplable distribution on concepts, and
whether or not the learning model is allowed to use membership queries. We do not
know how to show that this robustness holds for P/poly, but we are able to show it
unconditionally for EXP/poly and PSPACE/poly.
       Consider the class EXP/poly, which can be equivalently defined as the circuit class
 EXP
P /poly, i.e. the class of languages that can be computed by a polynomial sized circuit
family with EXP oracle gates.
       Showing non-trivial derandomisation of BPP, i.e. EXP 6= BPP, is one of the most
fundamental questions in complexity theory.3 We prove that the problem of non-trivial
derandomisation of BPP is equivalent to the hardness of learning EXP/poly efficiently
   3
    It is worth mentioning that [IW01] show that EXP 6= BPP is equivalent to the fact that BPP can be
derandomised on average in deterministic sub-exponential time (over infinitely many input lengths).


                                                 98
in most standard models of PAC-learning. In addition, these results extend to not just
showing that EXP/poly is hard to learn in the worst-case, but also on average with respect
to quasi-polynomially samplable distributions over EXP/poly (or polynomially samplable
distributions depending on the function representation output by the sampler). This
also gives us an intriguing situation, where hardness of learning EXP/poly using random
examples also implies the hardness of learning EXP/poly using membership queries.
   The following results are stated for hardness of strong learning. However, they also
hold for the setting of weak learnability, by standard equivalences between weak learning
and strong learning for PAC-learners [FS97].

Theorem 5.2 (Equivalences for hardness of learning EXP/poly). The following
statements are equivalent.

 (a) Non-trivial derandomisation of BPP: EXP 6= BPP.

 (b) Hardness of PAC-learning EXP/poly in the worst-case using random
     examples : For every large enough constant c, EXP/poly is not (1/nc , 1/20n)-
     PAC-learnable in polynomial time using random examples.

 (c) Hardness of PAC-learning EXP/poly in the worst-case using membership
     queries: For every large enough constant c, EXP/poly is not (1/nc , 1/20n)-PAC-
     learnable in polynomial time using membership queries.

 (d) Hardness of PAC-learning EXP/poly on average using random examples:
     For every large enough constant c, EXP/poly is not (1/nc , 1/20n)-PAC-learnable in
     polynomial time on average using random examples, with respect to polynomially
     samplable distributions over EXP/poly.

 (e) Hardness of PAC-learning EXP/poly on average using membership queries:
     For every large enough constant c, EXP/poly is not (1/nc , 1/20n)-PAC-learnable in
     polynomial time on average using membership queries, with respect to polynomially
     samplable distributions over EXP/poly.

   A contrasting result to this is the equivalence between the existence of one-way func-
tions (OWFs) and the hardness of learning P/poly in polynomial time on average us-
ing random examples, with respect to polynomially samplable distributions over P/poly
[IL90, BFKL93]. Theorem 5.2 not only lends an analogous equivalence between a com-
plexity theoretic assumption that BPP has a non-trivial derandomisation and the hard-
ness of learning EXP/poly in polynomial time on average using random examples, but also
extends this equivalence to hardness of learning EXP/poly efficiently in the worst-case.


                                           99
Note that such an equivalence between the existence of OWFs and hardness of learning
P/poly efficiently in the worst-case has been open for decades.4
       Furthermore, our proof techniques also let us extend all these equivalences to the case
where C = PSPACE.

Corollary 5.3. The following statements are equivalent.

   1. PSPACE 6= BPP.

   2. For every large enough constant c, PSPACE/poly is not (1/nc , 1/20n)-PAC-learnable
      in polynomial time using random examples (also using membership queries).

   3. For every large enough constant c, PSPACE/poly is not (1/nc , 1/20n)-PAC-learnable
         in polynomial time on average using random examples (also using membership
         queries), with respect to polynomially samplable distributions over PSPACE/poly.

       Essentially, the proof of showing conditional hardness of PAC-learning EXP/poly uses
the fact that strongly learning EXP/poly using random examples over the uniform dis-
tribution implies that EXP = BPP. This also means that the hardest distribution to
learn EXP/poly is over the uniform distribution. The same ideas hold for PAC-learning
EXP/poly using membership queries too.
   Our techniques used to show these equivalences are inspired from results on uniform
derandomisation by [IW01, TV07], which were further used by [FK09, KKO13] to show
circuit lower bounds based on the existence of learning algorithms. We use special proper-
ties of functions in EXP and PSPACE like downward self-reducibility and self-correctibility
to show that learning these functions would imply a collapse for EXP or PSPACE to BPP.

5.1.3        Reducing Succinct Search to Decision for Learning
Recently, [CIKK16] established an important connection between natural proofs and
learning. They showed that natural proofs of strong lower bounds against a circuit class
C/poly imply efficient learning algorithms for C/poly over the uniform distribution with
membership queries, as long as the class C/poly satisfies some mild closure properties.
One way to interpret their result is as an approximate search to decision reduction for
learning. The decision version of learning polynomial-size circuits is the language MCSP
consisting of truth tables of functions that have small circuits, i.e. for which a good hy-
pothesis exists. The search version is to find a small circuit for a positive instance of
MCSP. [CIKK16] show that if MCSP is polynomial-time decidable (which implies the ex-
istence of natural proofs against P/poly), then the search version of MCSP can be solved
   4
    In particular, we do not know if hardness of learning P/poly efficiently using random examples in
the worst-case implies OWFs.


                                                100
approximately, in the sense that we can efficiently compute a polynomially larger sized
circuit that approximates the truth table well.
   The language RKt (resp. RKS ) of strings with high Kt complexity (resp. high KS
complexity) plays an analogous role to MCSP in the theory of learning EXP/poly (resp.
PSPACE/poly). We ask if search to decision reductions can be established for these
languages as well. However, it is unclear a priori what it would mean to solve search
efficiently for a problem that does not have polynomial-size proofs or witnesses. We
introduce the notion of succinct search. To efficiently solve a search problem succinctly
is to efficiently compute for any YES instance of the problem, a circuit that encodes
a possibly exponential-size proof for the instance. We use the PCP theorem for NEXP
[BFL91] and the Easy Witness Lemma [IKW02] to show that for the classes PSPACE, EXP
and NEXP, efficient decidability of the class is equivalent to efficiently solving succinct
search for every language in the class. We then use results from [ABK+ 06] to argue that
for RKt and RKS , efficient solvability is equivalent to solving succinct search efficiently.
Note that this connection is for succinctly solving the search problem exactly rather than
just for approximate search as in [CIKK16].
Theorem 5.4 (Equivalence of Succinct Search and Decision for Learning EXP/poly
and PSPACE/poly). Let L be RKt or RKS . L ∈ BPP iff for each polynomial time verifier
V for L, succinct search is efficiently solvable for L with respect to V .

5.1.4     Barriers for Establishing NP-Hardness of Learning.
We next look at questions pertaining to hardness of learning classes of the form C/poly,
where C ⊆ PH. We focus on the hardness of PAC-learning C/poly with random examples.
In this section, we consider the limitations of proving the NP-Hardness of PAC-learning
NP/poly, i.e. the class of polynomial size non-deterministic circuits, using random exam-
ples, via a black-box reduction from deciding SAT.
   Informally, a black-box reduction from problem A to B, solves A given access to
any oracle solving B. Black-box reductions have been ubiquitously used in complexity
theory to prove conditional lower bounds. However, for many fundamental questions in
complexity theory, there have been results showing why such reductions are limited in
power. Various works have conditionally ruled out special-cases of black-box reductions
for showing average-case hardness of NP [FF93, BT06], existence of one-way functions
[AGGM06, ABX08, BB15] and the existence of hitting set generators [HW19], from hard-
ness of SAT.
   For the case of showing hardness of learnability, a B-adaptive black-box reduction R
from some language L to PAC-learning a class C using random examples is defined by
two phases

                                            101
   • The first phase consists of B adaptive rounds of probabilistic polynomial time algo-
        rithms, each of which generates queries to the learner oracle. Each round uses the
        input z to the reduction, fresh randomness and the hypotheses returned by the C-
        learner oracle in the previous rounds, and constructs joint distributions (that serve
        as example oracles for the learner). It then samples labeled examples independently
        from them as queries to the learner oracle.

   • In the second phase, a probabilistic polynomial time algorithm takes all the hy-
        potheses from the first phase and decides whether z ∈ L, with high probability.

   [ABX08] study the question of the existence of black-box Turing reductions from any
language in NP to PAC-learning P/poly using random examples. They consider a strongly
black-box reduction, where a reduction is strongly black-box if it runs correctly given any
oracle for the learner, as well as the hypotheses output by the learner and for a special
case of such a reduction, where the access to the learner and the hypothesis oracles is
additionally non-adaptive, show that such a reduction from SAT to PAC-learning P/poly
using random examples collapses NP to CoAM (which implies a collapse of PH to the
second level). Additionally, they show that if any language L reduces to PAC-learning
P/poly using random examples via an O(1)-adaptive black-box reduction, then the hard-
ness of L implies the existence of an auxiliary-input one-way function (which is a major
breakthrough in cryptography if L = SAT).5
      We define a natural special-case of such a reduction, called an oblivious strongly black-
box reduction, where the obliviousness of a reduction implies that the queries made to the
learner do not depend on the input z to the reduction and try to understand its limitations
for showing NP-hardness of PAC-learning NP/poly. At a first glance, ruling out oblivious
reductions may seem very restrictive, since ideally, one would like to allow reductions
whose queries to the learner can depend on the input to the reduction. However, we
observe the proof of Corollary 5.3 which shows hardness of PAC-learning PSPACE/poly
assuming PSPACE 6= BPP and reformulate it as an oblivious black-box reduction of the
form defined above. In particular, for f ∗ being the PSPACE-Complete function given by
[TV07] which is downward self-reducible and self-correctible, we observe that

Lemma 5.5. There exists an oblivious, n-adaptive, strongly black-box reduction from de-
ciding f ∗ to learning PSPACE/poly using random examples over the uniform distribution.

      On the other hand, for the case of learning NP/poly using random examples, we show
that oblivious strongly black-box reductions from SAT imply a collapse of the polynomial
hierarchy. Our main result for the section is
  5
   They also show the impossibility of Karp reductions from SAT to PAC-learning P/poly using random
examples, unless NP collapses to SZKA.


                                               102
Theorem 5.6 (Informal). If there exists an oblivious, poly(n)-adaptive, strongly black-box
reduction from deciding SAT to learning NP/poly using random examples over polynomi-
ally samplable distributions, then PH collapses to the third level.6

       Theorem 5.6 implies that standard techniques that are useful for worst-case to average-
case reductions, pseudo-random generator constructions from uniform hardness assump-
tions and in particular, hardness of efficiently PAC-learning classes like PSPACE/poly,
cannot be used to show the NP-hardness of PAC-learning NP/poly in polynomial time
using random examples.
       Theorem 5.6 compares to some previous results in the following way:

    • It shows a conditional impossibility result by ruling out a restricted version of
         adaptive, strongly black-box reductions to learning P/poly using random examples,
         in contrast to [ABX08], who only rule out fully non-adaptive, strongly black-box
         reductions, from a slightly weaker assumption (NP 6⊆ CoAM).

    • Furthermore, the result by [HW19] which conditionally rules out a non-adaptive
         black box reduction from deciding SAT to breaking a Hitting Set Generator (HSG),
         in turn rules out fully non-adaptive, strongly black-box reductions from SAT to
         learning NP/poly using membership queries over the uniform distribution (by suit-
         ably changing the definition of the reduction to the learner).
         Indeed, the ideas of [IW01] can be used to show that hardness of learning NP/poly
         using membership queries over the uniform distribution, implies the existence of a
         hitting set generator which hits sufficiently dense circuits. We strengthen this ob-
         servation by not only extending the reduction to a restricted version of the adaptive
         case, but also by ruling out a weaker reduction to learning NP/poly with random
         examples.

    • In a similar way, [GV08] conditionally rule out the existence of mildly adaptive (each
         query length up to n, where n is the length of the input instance, appears in very few
         levels of adaptivity), strongly black-box reductions from an EXP-Complete problem
         to learning NP/poly using membership queries (and in fact, learning EXP/poly).
         Our result rules out the restricted cases of mildly adaptive, strongly black-box
         reductions which show the NP-hardness of learning NP/poly using random examples
         and hence, is a conceptual strengthening of [GV08], as we rule out a hardness result
         from a stronger assumption.
   6
    We actually show a stronger result that the existence of such a reduction implies that NP ⊆ CoAMpoly ,
where CoAMpoly is the class of languages recognised by constant-round CoAM protocols with advice, where
we require proper acceptance/rejection probabilities only when the advice is correct.


                                                  103
It is worth noting that our result has no implications for showing the impossibility of
adaptive, black-box NP-Hardness reductions which imply the average-case hardness for
NP [FF93, BT06], existence of one-way functions [AGGM06, ABX08] or the existence of
HSGs [GV08, HW19].

   Overview of the proof : The proof of Theorem 5.6 builds on the Feigenbaum-
Fortnow [FF93] protocol, which simulates a type of non-adaptive randomised reduction
A from SAT to an NP problem Q, by an AM protocol with polynomial-sized advice, and
shows that coNP ⊆ NP/poly.7
   Suppose that on input x, A makes q non-adaptive queries to Q, sampled independently
from certain distribution X. Very briefly, their AM protocol does the following. For K
large enough, the verifier first generates K tuples of q non-adaptive queries by running
A(x) independently K times. The verifier asks the prover to send a witness to each query
which is a YES instance (which it can verify easily). This ensures that the prover cannot
cheat if the query is a NO instance and the only way it can cheat is by claiming a YES
instance to be a NO instance. Now, if the verifier has the proportion p of YES instances
of Q over the distribution X, then with high probability it knows that the number of YES
                                                                      √
instances among the Kq queries is concentrated around q · (pK ± O( K)). The verifier
answers with a reject if the number of YES instances is much lesser than pqK.
       The honest prover answers each query correctly (with correct witnesses if necessary)
and with high probability, the number of YES instances are close to the expectation.
Hence, the verifier can pick any of K runs of A(x) using the prover’s answers to its
queries and the output will be correct with high probability. On the other hand, with
                                                                   √
high probability, the cheating prover cannot cheat on more than O(q K) YES instances,
                                               √
with high probability. If we choose K >> O(q K), then on most of the K independent
runs of A, all its queries are answered correctly and the reduction gives the correct answer.
Thus, if we pick one of the runs at random and get A(x) by using the prover’s answers
to its queries, the verifier answers wrongly with low probability.
       Consider an oblivious, B-adaptive, strongly black-box reduction R from L to an oracle
which learns NP/poly. Suppose we are able to fix S1 , . . . , St , which are sets of labeled
examples drawn independently from the joint distributions (X1 , f1 (X1 )), . . . , (Xt , ft (Xt )),
such that f1 , . . . , ft ∈ NP/poly, and are the queries made to the learner. Furthermore,
let h1 , . . . , ht be a set of fixed hypotheses circuits, some of which are used to generate
S1 , . . . , St , such that each hi (1 − ε0 )-approximates fi over Xi , for some ε0 > 0. Because
R is strongly black-box, each hypothesis is also accessed as an oracle and we see that
L is decided by the algorithm M in the second phase, which has access to h1 , . . . , ht .
   7
    Their motivation (and [BT06]) was to rule out certain kinds of non-adaptive, worst-case to average-
case black-box reductions for NP.


                                                 104
Now, the t oracles to M can be replaced by a single oracle O which takes as input i ∈ [t]
and y ∈ {0, 1}n , and outputs hi (y) (O can be thought of as a table with t rows and 2n
columns). We then adapt the techniques of [FF93] to design an AM protocol for L with
polynomial sized advice, where the verifier expects that the prover answers according to
O.
   The obliviousness of the reduction helps us in fixing the queries made by R, and
implicitly, the corresponding hypotheses output by the oracle. In other words, this helps
us fix the proportions of YES instances for each fi non-uniformly, as the queries generated
to the learner do not depend on the input to the reduction. We do this by inductively
fixing the queries made by the reduction starting from the first round of adaptivity. Fixing
a “good” polynomial-sized random string r∗ used by the first phase non-uniformly (using
Adleman’s trick), we first get the queries to the learner made in the first round.
   For any other round b ≥ 2, assume that the queries to the learner up to round (b − 1)
and the functionality of the hypothesis oracles used to generate them up to round (b − 2)
are fixed. Using the fact that r∗ is also fixed, we can consider the set of all tuples of
joint distributions that can be generated in the bth round depending on the answers to
the oracle queries of the hypotheses seen so far, and arbitrarily choose one of them.
Note that, this implicitly fixes the functionality of the hypothesis oracles for the queries
generated in round b − 1. We continue this process and fix all the queries made to the
learner in all the rounds from the first phase.


5.2      Preliminaries
5.2.1     Samplability and Learnability
Let C = {Cn }, where Cn ⊆ Fn is a class of functions over {0, 1}n and D = {Dn } be a
distribution family over {0, 1}∗ , where Dn is a distribution over {0, 1}n .
    For definitions on worst-case learnability we refer the reader to Section 2.2. To define
learnability on average, let P = {Pn } be a distribution ensemble over C, where Pn is a
distribution over Cn .
Definition 5.7 (Samplable distributions). Let P be a distribution ensemble over C.
For N = 2n and any non-decreasing function S(N ) ≥ N , we say that P is samplable in
time S(N ), if there exists a randomised algorithm A that uses m(N ) bits of randomness
(where m(N ) ≤ S(N )) to output a string of length N , such that A(1N , y) is distributed
identically to Pn over the random choice of y ∈ {0, 1}m(N ) , and A runs in time S(N ).
   In other words, if y is picked uniformly at random from {0, 1}m(N ) then the output of
A(1N , y) is a truth table from Cn , that is distributed according to Pn . Furthermore, we
say that P is polynomially samplable if S(N ) = poly(N ).

                                             105
Remark 5.8. For the special case where C is a class of fixed polynomial size circuits like
SIZE[nk ] (or SIZEEXP [nk ]) for any arbitrarily fixed k, we define a circuit representation
scheme for Cn given by the set Rn ⊂ {0, 1}r(n) , where r(n) = O(nk log n), such that every
σ ∈ Rn is mapped to a C-circuit encoding of a function in Cn . Note that this mapping is
onto and each function in Cn could have many representations in Rn . We also assume
that there exists a uniform circuit sequence in C, which interprets this encoding as a
C-circuit and evaluates computations given this encoding.
   Now, we can define a distribution ensemble P over C, where each Pn is a distribution
over the C-circuit encodings, which implicitly defines a distribution over Cn (under the
mapping). We also define S(r(n))-samplability of P, if there exists a randomised algo-
rithm A running in time S(r(n)) such that for every n ∈ N, A(1r(n) , y) is distributed
identically to Pn over the random choice of y ∈ {0, 1}m(n) .

Definition 5.9 (Average-case learnability [BFKL93]). Let C be a class of Boolean
functions and P = {Pn } be a distribution ensemble over C. For any 0 < ε, δ < 1/2, we
say that C is (ε, δ)-PAC-learnable in T (n) time on average using random examples with
respect to P, if there exists a randomised algorithm A running in time at most T (n) such
that

   • For every large enough n, for any fixed f drawn according to Pn , for every Dn over
       {0, 1}n , A takes 1n , a set of m = m(n) labeled samples (x1 , f (x1 )), . . . , (xm , f (xm ))
       where each xi ∼ Dn , ε, δ and w ∈ {0, 1}∗ (internal randomness) as its inputs, and
       outputs the description of a circuit h such that
                                                              
                            Pr        Pr {h(y) = f (y)} ≥ 1 − ε ≥ 1 − δ
                               f ∼Pn       y∼Dn
                            w∈{0,1}∗
                          x1 ,...,xm ∼Dn


   • A runs in time at most T (n).

   Furthermore, for any 0 < ε, δ < 1/2, we say that C is (ε, δ)-PAC-learnable in T (n)
time on average using random examples with respect to polynomially samplable distribu-
tions over C, if there exists a learning algorithm A that runs in time T (n) such that for
every polynomially samplable distribution ensemble P over C, we have that for every large
enough n, A (ε, δ)-PAC-learns Cn on average using random examples with respect to Pn .

   We can naturally extend this definition to average-case learning C with respect to P
using random examples drawn from a fixed distribution like Un , or average-case PAC-
learning C using membership queries.



                                                  106
5.2.2     Self-Reducibility
In our reductions, we use the following special properties of a function.

Definition 5.10 (Downward self-reducibility). A function fn : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} is
downward-self-reducible if there is a deterministic polynomial time algorithm A such that
for all x ∈ {0, 1}n , Afn−1 (x) = fn (x).

Definition 5.11 (Self-Correctibility). A function f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} is said to be self-
correctible if there exists a constant c ≥ 0 and a probabilistic polynomial-time algorithm
A such that, for every large enough n, for any function O : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} that agrees
with fn on at least (1 − 1/nc )-fraction of the inputs of length n, we have that Pr{AO (x) =
fn (x)} ≥ 2/3 for any x ∈ {0, 1}n .

   Babai et al. [BFNW93] show that any function g on n Boolean inputs can be trans-
formed into a function g ∗ on n inputs from a large enough finite field, such that g ∗
coincides with g on the subset {0, 1}n . In particular, they show that

Theorem 5.12 ([BFNW93]). There exists an EXP-Complete problem g ∗ which is self-
correctible.

   Furthermore, Trevisan and Vadhan [TV07] construct a PSPACE-Complete problem
which is based on a careful arithmetisation and padding of TQBF (using the interactive
proof system for PSPACE), which has both these special properties.

Theorem 5.13 ([TV07]). There exists a PSPACE-Complete language f ∗ ∈ DSPACE[n]
that is both self-correctible and downward self-reducible (DSR).

We also use the following collapse result.

Lemma 5.14. If EXP ⊆ P/poly, then EXP = PSPACE. In particular, the function f ∗
(from Theorem 5.13) is complete for EXP.


5.3      Unconditional Results for Hardness of Learning
Firstly, we show the hardness of learning BPE/poly over the uniform distribution using
membership queries by randomised polynomial time algorithms. The proof of this result
uses the following lemma from [KKO13].

Lemma 5.15. Let C be any circuit class, s : N → N be a size function and f ∗ be the
PSPACE-Complete problem from Theorem 5.13. There exists constant c ∈ N such that if
C[s(n)] is learnable up to error n−c in time T (n), then at least one of the following holds:

                                             107
   • f∗ ∈
        / C[s(n)].

   • f ∗ ∈ BPTIME[poly(T (n))].

Proof of Theorem 5.1. Towards a contradiction, assume that there exists constants k, d ≥
1 and a randomised learning algorithm A which learns BPE/poly in O(nd ) time using
membership queries over the uniform distribution, up to error 1/2 − 1/nk and confidence
1/n, for every large enough input length n. By non-uniformly fixing a good random
string for the learner, we ensure that for some constant c = c(d) and every function
g ∈ BPE/poly, A always outputs a hypothesis circuit of size O(nc ) which computes g on
at least (1/2 + 1/nk )-fraction of n-length inputs. Thus, for every function in BPE/poly,
there exists a family of polynomial size circuits {hn } which (1/2 + 1/nk )-approximates
it, where hi is the hypothesis output by the learner on input length i.
   We next show that the existence of such a learner implies the existence of a function
in BPE which cannot be (1/2 + 1/nk )-approximated by polynomial sized circuits. Con-
sider the PSPACE-Complete function f ∗ from Theorem 5.13 which is computable in time
DSPACE[n]. f ∗ is in BPE/poly (since f ∗ can be computed in E) and we use the learning
algorithm for BPE/poly in Lemma 5.15 to see that PSPACE ⊆ BPP. Using a padding
argument we observe that DSPACE[2O(n) ] ⊆ BPE. From Lemma 2.8, we see that there
exists a function which cannot be (1/2 + 1/nk )-approximated by circuits of size nlog n .
We can easily construct a Turing Machine which lexicographically searches for a truth
table of a function on n inputs which cannot be (1/2 + 1/nk )-approximated by nlog n sized
circuits in 2O(n) space and answers according to the first one it finds. From this we have
that DSPACE[2O(n) ], and thus BPE/poly cannot be (1/2 + 1/nk )-approximated by nlog n
sized circuits, which leads to a contradiction.

Remark 5.16. [OS17] show that if for each c, a circuit class C[nc ] is (1/2 − 1/nc , 1/n)-
learnable using membership queries over the uniform distribution in 2n /nω(1) time, then
                                               / C[nk ] (Theorem 12). For any c, the
for each k, there exists Lk ∈ BPE such that Lk ∈
idea of picking C[nc ] = SIZEBPE [nc ] with linear-sized queries to BPE oracles and using the
learning algorithm A which learns BPE/poly in their result to achieve a contradiction (as
any function in BPE can be computed by constant sized SIZEBPE -circuits with linear-sized
oracle queries) does not work, as [OS17] crucially uses that C[nc ] has to be a subset of
       0
SIZE[nc ] for some c0 = O(c).
   On the other hand, Theorem 4 in [FK09] shows that if C is learnable using membership
queries over the uniform distribution in polynomial time then BPE 6⊆ C[poly(n)]. Proving
Theorem 5.1 by setting C as BPE/poly, again does not really work, as [FK09]’s result only
holds true when C ⊆ P/poly, as it depends on the collapse of EXP to P/poly.


                                            108
   Additionally, we also observe that the class E/poly cannot be learnt by deterministic
learners using membership queries in 2n /n time up to constant error over the uniform
distribution. E/poly can equivalently be defined as the class of languages which can be
computed by polynomial-sized circuit families with oracle access to some function in E,
with the constraint that the oracle queries are of size O(n).
   We first rule out deterministic exact learners for E/poly in Angluin’s model of learning
[Ang88], i.e. the learners have access to a membership oracle, as well as an equivalence
oracle, where the learner presents a hypothesis circuit to the equivalence oracle, and
receives yes if the hypothesis exactly computes the target concept, or otherwise, receives
a counter-example for the hypothesis.
Proposition 5.17. There exists no deterministic exact learners for E/poly using mem-
bership queries and equivalence queries which run in time O(2n /n).
Proof. The proof follows easily from [KKO13]. They show that if there exists a deter-
ministic exact learner that learns a circuit class C[s(n)] in 2n /n time using membership
and equivalence queries, then there exists a function in E which cannot be computed by
C-circuits of size s(n). Using E/poly for C, we observe that there exists no deterministic
exact learners which learn E/poly using membership queries and equivalence queries in
2n /n time, because, otherwise, we would end up showing that there exists a function in
E which cannot be computed by E/poly, which is trivially false.

   We extend this result to rule out any deterministic learners for E/poly, i.e. even
learners which can output an approximate hypothesis.
Proposition 5.18. For every constant δ ∈ [0, 1/2 − 1/n), E/poly is hard to learn up to
error δ over the uniform distribution using membership queries by deterministic learning
algorithms which run in time 2n /n.
Proof. Towards a contradiction assume that there exists a constant δ > 0 and a deter-
ministic learner A running in time T (n) = 2n /n which learns E/poly using membership
queries over the uniform distribution up to an error δ. For every n, let L be the language
consisting of only those strings in {0, 1}n which are not queried by A, when all of A’s
queries are answered with 0. Since A runs in time T (n), it is the clear that L ∈ E and
the size of L−1 (0) ≤ 2n /n. However, since A only queries those inputs which are not in
L, it cannot distinguish between the all zeros function 0 and L. Indeed, if A returns a
hypothesis h1 which is (1 − δ)-close to 0, then h1 agrees with L on at most a δ + 1/n
fraction of the inputs. Similarly, if A returns a hypothesis h2 which is (1 − δ)-close to L,
then h2 agrees with 0 on at most a δ + 1/n fraction. In either case, A can learn exactly
one of L or 0, which contradicts our assumption that A learns every function in E/poly
with error at most δ.

                                            109
   Both propositions can also be extended to show similar results for unconditional
hardness of learning PSPACE/poly by deterministic polynomial time learners.


5.4      Robustness of learning
We first establish the equivalences in Theorem 5.2 for hardness of learning EXP/poly.

Lemma 5.19. Let BPP = EXP. Then, for every c > 0, EXP/poly can be (1/nc , 1/20n)-
PAC-learnt using random examples in time polynomial in n.

Proof. Firstly, we show that if BPP = EXP, then for every c > 0, we can (1/nc , 1/20n)-
learn P/poly in the worst-case using random examples over any arbitrary distribution D.
We consider the following search problem Π. On input y = h1n , 1s(n) , (x1 , b1 ) . . . (xm , bm )i,
where xi ∈ {0, 1}n and bi ∈ {0, 1}, if there exists a circuit C on n inputs of size at most
s(n) such that C(xi ) = bi for all i ∈ [m], then Π(y) outputs an encoding of C. The input
length to Π is t(n) = O(s(n) + n · m(n)). If s(n) = poly(n), then Π is in EXP as we can
exhaustively search through all circuits on n inputs of size s(n) and check if it is consistent
                                                                                               
with bi on each x1 , . . . , xm in time 2O(s(n) log s(n)) · O(m(n) · s(n)) = O 2t(n) poly(t(n)) .
Since EXP = BPP, there exists a randomised algorithm A which runs in time poly(t(n))
over inputs of length t(n), that outputs a circuit Cn of size at most s(n) consistent with
bi on each x1 , . . . , xm , if there exists one.
    Following this, we use an argument based on Occam’s razor [KV94b], to see that
for every ε, δ > 0 and k ≥ 0, a consistent learner (a learner which always outputs a
hypothesis which is correct on all the input examples) A (ε, δ)-learns SIZE[nk ] in the
worst-case using random examples drawn from any fixed distribution Dn over {0, 1}n ,
if m = O 1ε (nk log n + log 1δ ) . For any fixed c > 0, when ε = 1/nc and δ = 1/20n,
                              

m(n) = O(nc+k+1 ). Thus, for every n, every k ≥ 0 and every f ∈ SIZE[nk ], using
m = O(nc+k+1 ) many random examples drawn from Dn and their labels f (x1 ), . . . , f (xm ),
the randomised algorithm A runs in time poly(n) and outputs a circuit of size O(nk ) which
is (1 − ε)-close to f , with probability at least (1 − δ).
   Finally, observe that if BPP = EXP, then EXP ⊆ P/poly, which in turn implies
that EXP/poly ⊆ P/poly. In other words, this means that there exists some constant
k ≥ 0 such that EXP/poly ⊆ SIZE[nk ]. This proves the lemma, as A can be used to
(1/nc , 1/20n)-learn EXP/poly in poly(n) time using random examples drawn from any
fixed distribution Dn .

Lemma 5.20. Let EXP 6= BPP. Then, there exists constant c > 0 such that EXP/poly
is not (1/nc , 1/20n)-learnable in the worst-case using random examples from the uniform
distribution in time poly(n).

                                                110
Proof. Towards a contradiction assume that there exists a constant a > 0 and an O(na )-
time learner A that (1/nc , 1/20n)-learns EXP/poly using random examples over Un , for
all c > 0. We first show that the existence of the learner A for EXP/poly implies that
EXP ⊆ P/poly. Let g ∗ be an EXP-Complete problem which is self-correctible, whose
existence is given by Theorem 5.12, with c1 ≥ 0 being the corresponding constant. Use A
to (1/nc1 , 1/20n)-learn g ∗ using random examples over the uniform distribution. Let A0
be the algorithm which takes as input y ∈ {0, 1}n in addition to the inputs of A and runs
the learner A, following which it returns the evaluation of the hypothesis circuit output
by A on the input y. In other words, for every n ∈ N, we have
                                                                                             
                       0 n            ∗                       ∗             ∗              c1
        Pr       Pr {A (1 , w, (x1 , g (x1 )), . . . , (xm , g (xm ), y) = g (y)} ≥ 1 − 1/n
    w∈{0,1}r(n)      y∼Un
   x1 ,...,xm ∼Un

                    ≥ 1 − 1/20n

where both r(n) and m = m(n) = poly(n).
  By amplifying the correctness of A0 using standard techniques, we can then non-
uniformly fix the random strings w, x1 , . . . , xm and the values of g ∗ on each xi to get
a polynomial sized circuit C, which takes input y ∈ {0, 1}n and outputs the answer
of A0 on the advice string and y. Thus Cn agrees with g ∗ on at least (1 − 1/nc1 )-
fraction of the inputs. Using Cn with the random self-reduction of g ∗ (and fixing another
“good” random string non-uniformly in the resulting algorithm), we get a polynomial-
sized circuit which computes g ∗ on every input and by the EXP-Completeness of g ∗ , we
see that EXP ⊆ P/poly.
    Since EXP ⊆ P/poly, we use Lemma 5.14 to observe that the PSPACE-Complete prob-
lem f ∗ given by Theorem 5.13 is now an EXP-Complete problem that is both downward
self-reducible and self-correctible. Let c2 be the constant associated with the self-corrector
for f ∗ . For any integer k, given a procedure Bk which computes f ∗ on every instance of
size k with high probability, we use A together with the downward self-reduction for f ∗ ,
followed by the self-corrector for f ∗ to obtain a procedure Bk+1 that computes f ∗ on any
input of size k + 1. We use this inductively, to compute f ∗ on n inputs in probabilistic
polynomial time.
   More precisely, consider the following algorithm Bn which computes f ∗ on a given
input x ∈ {0, 1}n and does the following. First, it starts with a procedure Bk0 , for a
constant k0 , which can be computed easily using a look-up table. Assuming that we have
the procedure Bk for some input length k ≤ n, we show how to construct the procedure
                                                              ∗
Bk+1 inductively. We use the learner A to learn the function fk+1 up to error 1/k c2 . For
every input f ∗ (y) passed to A, where y is sampled from Uk+1 , we use Bk in the downward
self-reduction of f ∗ to compute f ∗ (y). A outputs a hypothesis hk+1 which computes fk+1
                                                                                      ∗




                                             111
on at least a (1 − 1/(k + 1)c2 )-fraction of the inputs with high probability. We now use
the self-corrector for f ∗ to obtain from hk+1 a procedure Bk+1 which is correct on every
input of size k + 1 with probability 1 − γ (by using standard error reduction arguments),
for some γ > 0 which we pick later. Repeating this process at most n times, we obtain
Bn .
   First, we show that Bn outputs f ∗ (x) with probability at least 2/3. Let d(n) be the
                                                 ∗
number of queries made by the DSR to the oracle fn−1 to compute f ∗ (x). The idea
is that at each stage k, Bk fails only if at least one of m(n) · d(n) queries answered
by Bk−1 is incorrect, which happens with probability at most m(n)d(n)γ ≤ 1/20n for
γ = 1/(20nm(n)d(n)), or if A fails to output the right hypothesis, which happens with
probability at most 1/20n. Thus, the total failure probability at each stage is at most
1/10n and over the n stages, using the union bound, the total failure probability is at
most 1/10 + γ ≤ 1/3.
   Next, we observe that every stage Bk runs in time poly(k). It is easily seen that
Bk0 runs in constant time. Assume that Bk−1 runs in poly(k − 1) time. At stage k, the
time taken to compute f ∗ on m(k) many inputs of length k is O(m(k) · d(k) · poly(k −
1)) ≤ poly(k). After this, A takes O(k d ) time to output hk of size at most k d , which is
used by the poly(k)-time self-corrector to compute f ∗ on all inputs of size k with high
probability. Thus, Bk runs in time poly(k) ≤ poly(n). Since there at most n stages, the
total running time of Bn is poly(n). This shows that f ∗ ∈ BPP, contradicting the original
assumption.

Lemma 5.21. Suppose that EXP/poly is (1/nc , 1/20n)-learnable in the worst case for
every constant c > 0 over the uniform distribution Un using membership queries in time
poly(n). Then, EXP = BPP.

Proof Sketch. The proof is very similar to that of Lemma 5.20. Assume that there exists
a poly(n)-time learner A that (1/nc , 1/20n)-learns EXP/poly over Un for every c > 0,
for every large enough input length n. We learn the function g ∗ (given by Theorem
5.12) using A. Let hn be a circuit of polynomial size output by A as the hypothesis,
with probability at least (1 − 1/20n). From the guarantees of the learner, we see that
any hn output by A computes g ∗ with error at most 1/nc1 (after non-uniformly fixing
its randomness). Let h0n be the polynomial-sized circuit which uses hn with the self-
corrector for g ∗ (and non-uniformly another random string for the resulting algorithm)
and computes g ∗ on length n. Thus, there exists a sequence of polynomial size circuits
{h0n }n∈N which computes g ∗ on every large enough n. Since g ∗ is EXP-Complete, we see
that EXP ⊆ P/poly.



                                           112
   We now use A to learn the PSPACE-Complete problem f ∗ given by Theorem 5.13.
Using similar ideas as Lemma 5.20, we see that f ∗ ∈ BPP. Since EXP has now collapsed
to PSPACE we see that EXP = BPP.

   Below, we show that learning EXP/poly on average using random examples, with
respect to quasi-polynomially samplable distributions over EXP/poly, implies that EXP =
BPP. See Remark 5.23 for a natural extension of this result to polynomially samplable
distributions over EXP/poly.

Lemma 5.22. Suppose that for every constant c > 0, EXP/poly is (1/nc , 1/20n)-learnable
on average using random examples from the uniform distribution Un in time poly(n), with
respect to quasi-polynomially samplable distributions over EXP/poly. Then, EXP = BPP.

Proof Sketch. Again, the proof strategy is very similar to that of Lemma 5.20. Let A
be a poly(n)-time learner such that for every quasi-polynomially samplable distribution
ensemble P over EXP/poly, A (1/nc , 1/20n)-learns EXP/poly using random examples from
Un , with respect to P, for all c > 0. Formally, we have

          Pr          {A(1n , ε, δ, w, x1 , f (x1 ), . . . , xm , f (xm )) is (1 − ε)-close to f } ≥ 1 − δ
          f ∼Pn
       w∈{0,1}∗
     x1 ,...,xm ∼Un


for sufficiently large n.
   We first show that the existence of A implies EXP ⊆ P/poly. Indeed, consider the
quasi-polynomially samplable distribution P supported only on the function g ∗ given by
Theorem 5.12, defined by the algorithm AP which takes as inputs 1N and outputs the
truth table of g ∗ on n inputs by running the EXP-machine which computes g ∗ on every
input in {0, 1}n . Clearly, the running time of the sampler is quasi-polynomial in N . From
our assumption in the lemma and since P is supported only on g ∗ , A outputs a hypothesis
which is (1 − 1/nc1 )-close to g ∗ with probability at least 1 − 1/20n. Using the same idea
as Lemma 5.20, we show that EXP ⊆ P/poly.
   Following this, we design a similar quasi-polynomially samplable distribution D sup-
ported on the PSPACE-Complete problem f ∗ given by Theorem 5.13. Since EXP ⊆
P/poly, we see that f ∗ is also EXP-Complete. Again, since D is supported only on f ∗ , A
can be used to output a hypothesis which approximates f ∗ with high probability and fol-
lowing from the ideas used earlier, we show that f ∗ ∈ BPP proving that EXP = BPP.

   Using the proof strategy of Lemma 5.21, we can also show a natural extension of
Lemma 5.22 for average-case learning using membership queries as well.




                                                       113
Remark 5.23. We also extend lemma 5.22 to the case where the samplable distribution
is over SIZEEXP [nk ]-circuit encodings in Rn ⊆ {0, 1}r(n) , where r(n) = O(n2k+1 ). In
such a case, we only need poly(n)-time learnability of SIZEEXP [nk ] using random examples
over Un with respect to polynomially samplable distributions over Cn , to show that
EXP = BPP.
   Indeed, for the distribution P over SIZEEXP [nk ] supported only on the function g ∗ (or
                                                k
f ∗ ) used in the proof, the sampler A0P takes 1n as input and outputs a SIZEEXP [nk ]-circuit
encoding of g ∗ which is just an EXP-oracle gate on n inputs and this encoding is of size
O(n2 ). The running time of this sampling algorithm is polynomial in the input size.

Using these lemmas, we now prove Theorem 5.2.

Proof of Theorem 5.2. We only establish equivalences with respect to strong learning,
since the AdaBoost algorithm [FS97] shows an equivalence between weak and strong
learning. In other words, from any polynomial time (1/2−1/nc , 1/10n)-PAC-learner using
random examples (or membership queries), we can get a polynomial time (1/nc , 1/10n)-
PAC-learner using random examples (or membership queries), by application of the boost-
ing algorithm. The following implications establish the desired equivalences.

(b) =⇒ (a), (c) =⇒ (a): The contrapositives of each of these implications follow from
Lemma 5.19. In particular, PAC-learning EXP/poly with error at most 1/nc using random
examples, implies PAC-learnability of EXP/poly using membership queries, where the
queries are just made on the random examples given to the learner.

(d) =⇒ (b), (e) =⇒ (c): Follows from the definitions, since PAC-learning EXP/poly in the
worst case in poly(n) time using random examples implies PAC-learnability for EXP/poly
on average in poly(n) time using random examples, for any distribution over EXP/poly.
A similar implication holds for learning with membership queries too.

(a) =⇒ (b): Suppose EXP/poly is (1/nc , 1/10n) PAC-learnable in polynomial time using
random examples over every arbitrary distribution, for any c. In particular, this means
that EXP/poly can be (1/nc , 1/10n)-learnt in polynomial time using random examples
over the uniform distribution. The implication follows from the contrapositive of Lemma
5.20.

(a) =⇒ (c): Similar to the previous implication, we see that EXP/poly is (1/nc , 1/10n)-
learnable in polynomial time using membership queries over the uniform distribution.
The implication holds from the contrapositive of Lemma 5.21.

(a) =⇒ (d), (a) =⇒ (e): The implications follow from Lemma 5.22 (and Remark 5.23)
and its corresponding extension to learning on average with membership queries.


                                             114
5.5      Reducing Succinct Search to Decision
The key concepts in this section are verifiability and succinct search. We define verifiers
first.

Definition 5.24. Given language L ⊆ {0, 1}∗ and polynomial-time computable relation
V (·, ·), we say that V is a verifier for L if for each x ∈ {0, 1}∗ , x ∈ L iff ∃yV (x, y).
    Given language L, a verifier V for L, and function f : N → N, we say that L
has f (n)-size proofs with respect to V , such that for each x ∈ {0, 1}∗ , x ∈ L implies
∃y, |y| ≤ f (|x|) : V (x, y). We say that L has f (n)-size proofs if there is a verifier V for
L such that L has f (n)-size proofs with respect to V .
    Given language L, a verifier V for L and a machine class D, we say that L has
D-computable proofs with respect to V if there is a machine M ∈ D such that for each
x ∈ {0, 1}∗ , x ∈ L implies V (x, M (x)). We say that L has D-computable proofs if there
is a verifier V for L such that L has D-computable proofs with respect to V .

    Note that NP is the class of languages with polynomial-sized proofs, NEXP is the class
of languages with exponential-sized proofs, and for D ∈ {EXP, PSPACE}, D is the class of
languages with D-computable proofs (where we abuse notation and use D to refer both
to a machine class and to the set of languages computable by such machines).
    Next we define succinct search. We will assume w.l.o.g that the proof size for any
verifier is a power of 2 – this can be ensured by padding the proof if necessary.

Definition 5.25. Given language L and verifier V for L, we say that succinct search
is easy for L with respect to V if there exists a probabilistic polynomial-time machine N
such that for each x ∈ L, there is a V -proof y such that with probability 1 − o(1), N (x)
outputs a circuit C for which tt(C) = y.

    Thus succinct search is easy for L with respect to a verifier V if there is a probabilis-
tic polynomial-time machine outputting compressed descriptions of V -proofs with high
probability for any positive instance of L.
    Using the downward self-reducibility of SAT, it is straightforward to see that NP ⊆
BPP iff for each L ∈ NP and for every verifier V such that L has poly-size proofs with
respect to V , succinct search is easy for L with respect to V . We now show analogous
results for PSPACE, EXP and NEXP. First we show for each of these classes that easiness
of the class implies easiness of succinct search.
    We need the Easy Witness Lemma of Impagliazzo, Kabanets and Wigderson [IKW02].

Lemma 5.26 (Easy Witness Lemma [IKW02]). If NEXP ⊆ P/poly, then for each L ∈
NEXP and for each verifier V for L such that L has exponential-size proofs with respect
to V , for each x ∈ L, there is a polynomial-size circuit Cx such that V (x, tt(Cx )) holds.

                                              115
Lemma 5.27. The following implications hold:

  1. Let D ∈ {PSPACE, EXP}. If D = BPP, then for each L ∈ D and for each verifier
      V such that L has D-computable proofs with respect to V , succinct search is easy
      for L with respect to V .

  2. If NEXP = BPP, then for each L ∈ NEXP and for each verifier V such that L has
     exponential-size proofs with respect to V , succinct search is easy for L with respect
      to V .

Proof. We establish the first item. Let D ∈ {PSPACE, EXP}, and assume D = BPP. Let
L ∈ D and V be a verifier for L such that L has D-computable proofs with respect to V .
We construct a probabilistic poly-time machine N such that for each input x ∈ L, there
is a V -proof w such that with high probability tt(N (x)) = w. Let M be a D-machine
outputting V -proofs for positive instances of L.
   Consider the language L0 = {hx, ii | i th bit of M (x) is 1}. Since M is a D machine,
we have that L0 ∈ D. By assumption, D = BPP, therefore there is a probabilistic poly-
                                                                              2
time machine N 0 deciding L0 . Assume w.l.o.g that N 0 has error at most 2−|y| on any input
y. Given input x, N operates as follows. It first computes a probabilistic poly-size circuit
C 0 simulating N 0 . This can be done using the standard efficient conversion of efficient
algorithms into small circuits. It then hardwires x into the first part of the input for C 0 ,
obtaining a circuit Cx0 . It then fixes the random input of the circuit Cx0 to a uniformly
                                               0
generated random string r to obtain a circuit Dx,r , which it outputs. Since the error of N 0
                     2
is smaller than 2−|y| on any input y, by a simple union bound, with probability 1 − o(1)
                                         0
over the choice of the random string r, Dx,r correctly computes the ith bit of M (x) for
each i ∈ [m]. For x ∈ L, V (x, M (x)) holds, and therefore N efficiently solves succinct
search for L with respect to V .
   We establish the second item. Assume NEXP = BPP and let L ∈ NEXP and V
be a verifier for L such that L has exponential-size proofs with respect to V . Since
NEXP = BPP, we have that NEXP ⊆ P/poly. By Lemma 5.26, there is a polynomial p
such that for each x ∈ L, there is a circuit Cx of size at most p(|x|) such that V (x, tt(Cx ))
holds.
    Consider the language L0 = {hx, ii | There exists circuit Cx of size p(|x|) such that
V (x, tt(Cx )) is 1, and the ith bit of the lexicographically first such circuit is 1}. Clearly
L0 ∈ EXP, just by enumerating circuits of size p(|x|) in lexicographic order and finding
the first one encoding a V -proof for x, if one exists. Since EXP = BPP, there is a prob-
abilistic poly-time machine N 0 deciding L0 with error exponentially small. We construct
a probabilistic poly-time machine N as follows: on input x, N runs N 0 on hx, ii for each
i at most the description length of a circuit of size p(|x|). It outputs the circuit C whose

                                             116
description has its ith bit set to 1 iff N 0 accepts hx, ii. Since N 0 has error exponentially
small, we have that with error exponentially small, N outputs a circuit C encoding a
V -proof of x, and therefore N efficiently solves succinct search for L with respect to
V.

  For the reverse directions, we use the PCP characterisation of NEXP [BFL91, FRS94],
where we only require a polynomial upper bound on query complexity of the verifier.

Theorem 5.28 (PCPs for NEXP [BFL91, FRS94]). Let L ∈ NEXP. There is a proba-
bilistic poly-time oracle machine V 0 such that:

     1. For each x ∈ L, there is y of length exponential in |x| such that V 0 (x) accepts with
        probability at least 2/3 when given oracle access to y.

     2. For each x 6∈ L and for all y, V 0 (x) accepts with probability at most 1/3 when given
        oracle access to y.

     We now show that easiness of succinct search implies easiness of decision for any
L ∈ NEXP.

Lemma 5.29. Let L ∈ NEXP and V be any verifier such that L has exponential-size
proofs with respect to V . If succinct search is easy for L with respect to V , then L ∈ BPP.

Proof. Let L ∈ NEXP. We show that L ∈ BPP. By Theorem 5.28, there is a probabilistic
poly-time oracle machine V 0 such that if x ∈ L, there is y of length exponential in |x|
for which V 0 accepts with high probability on x when given oracle access to y, and if
x 6∈ L rejects with high probability irrespective of the oracle. Let r(|x|) = poly(|x|) be
the number of random bits used by V 0 .
                                                                             r(|x|)
   Now consider a verifier V for L which given input x and proof y 0 = hy, 12       i (in
other words, y is padded with the total number of random choices; proof size is still
exponential in |x|), accepts iff y 0 is in the specified format and V 0 (x) accepts with oracle
y on a majority of its computation paths. Since succinct search is easy for L with respect
to V , there is a probabilistic poly-time machine N such that for input x ∈ L, there is a
V -proof y 0 for x such that with high probability tt(N (x)) = y 0 . We define a probabilistic
poly-time machine W that on input x simulates V 0 (x) as follows. It first runs N (x) to
find a circuit C. It then runs V 0 (x), answering all oracle calls to y by simulating C on
input corresponding to the bit of y 0 that is queried (after suitably padding the oracle
query to y). It accepts iff V 0 (x) accepts.
     If x ∈ L, by using the assumption that N solves succinct search, W (x) accepts with
probability close to 2/3. If x 6∈ L, W (x) rejects with probability close to 2/3 since
the circuit C output by N (x) corresponds to some purported V 0 -proof, and every such
V 0 -proof is rejected with high probability by V when given oracle access to the proof.

                                               117
Theorem 5.30. The following statements are true.

  1. Let D ∈ {PSPACE, EXP}. D = BPP iff for each L ∈ D and for each verifier V for
      L such that L has D-computable proofs with respect to V , succinct search is easy
      for L with respect to V .

  2. NEXP = BPP iff for each L ∈ NEXP and for each verifier V such that L has
     exponential-size proofs with respect to V , succinct search is easy for L with respect
      to V .

Proof. The forward directions of both items follow from Lemma 5.27. The backward
direction of the second item follows Lemma 5.29. The backward direction of the first
item follows from Lemma 5.29 and the fact that for D ∈ {PSPACE, EXP}, if L ∈ D
and V is a verifier for L such that L has D-computable proofs with respect to V , then
L ∈ NEXP and L has exponential-size proofs with respect to V .

Theorem 5.31. The following results hold.

  1. RKt ∈ BPP iff for each verifier V for RKt such that RKt has EXP-computable proofs
      with respect to V , succinct search is easy for RKt with respect to V .

  2. RKS ∈ BPP iff for each verifier V for RKS such that RKS has PSPACE-computable
      proofs with respect to V , succinct search is easy for RKS with respect to V .

Proof. The backward directions of both items follow from Lemma 5.29 and the facts that
RKt and RKS are in NEXP.
   For the forward direction of the first item, we use the result shown in [ABK+ 06]
(Section 5) that RKt ∈ BPP implies EXP = BPP. Combining this with the first item of
Lemma 5.27 completes the proof.
   For the forward direction of the second item, we use the result shown in [ABK+ 06]
(Theorem 33) that RKS ∈ BPP implies PSPACE = BPP. Combining this with the first
item of Lemma 5.27 completes the proof.


5.6      Barriers for Conditional Hardness of Learning
Firstly, we formally define what it means to have a Black-Box Turing reduction from a
language L to a PAC-learning algorithm for a class C. Fix the error of the learner to
be ε = 1/poly(n) (we ignore the confidence parameter, but this only makes our hardness
results stronger).




                                            118
Definition 5.32 (Turing Reduction to Learning C.). A B-adaptive black-box reduction
from deciding L to PAC-learning C using random examples up to error ε, is a tuple
of probabilistic polynomial time algorithms R = (T1 , . . . , TB , M ) where R is given an
input z ∈ {0, 1}n and randomness w ∈ {0, 1}∗ . For each query, R constructs a joint
distribution (X, f (X)) over {0, 1}r × {0, 1} for some r ≤ n and f ∈ C, samples a set
S = {(xi , f (x)i )}i≤poly(n) of independent labeled examples according to (X, f (X)) and
passes it to the learner. Let t(n) be the query complexity of each round of adaptivity. R
decides z by doing the following

   • For each 1 ≤ j ≤ B, Tj gets input z, fresh random bits from w and all the (j−1)·t(n)
     hypothesis circuits answered for the queries from the previous rounds (T1 only has
     z and randomness w as input), and outputs t(n) new queries Sj1 , . . . , Sjt to the
     learner, each of which are sets of labeled examples independently sampled from joint
     distributions (Xj1 , Yj1 ), . . . , (Xjt , Yjt ).

   • R only has oracle access to the learner.

   • M takes as input z, fresh random bits from w and the B · t(n) hypothesis circuits
     which are the answers given by the learner for all the queries asked by T1 , . . . , TB ,
     and outputs the answer.

   • The reduction guarantees that if for every oracle A that is a C-circuit learner, if
     every hypothesis circuit returned by the learner is (1 − ε)-close with respect to its
     corresponding query made in T1 , . . . , TB , then M (z) = L(z) with high probability
     over the internal randomness of the reduction R.

Definition 5.33. For any B-adaptive black-box reduction R = (T1 , . . . , TB ) from deciding
L to PAC-learning C using random examples up to error ε, we have

   • R is called strongly black-box, if T1 , . . . , TB , M only have oracle access to the
     hypothesis circuits, and M decides L for any (1 − ε)-close hypothesis circuit corre-
     sponding to each query made by T1 , . . . , TB .

   • If B = 1, we call the reduction as non-adaptive and if R is strongly black-box and
     M makes only non-adaptive queries to the hypothesis circuits, we call the reduction
     as fully non-adaptive.

   • R is oblivious, if T1 , . . . , TB output new queries using only fresh randomness from
     w as input and access to the hypotheses generated during the previous rounds. Fur-
     thermore, M accesses each hypothesis using non-adaptively generated, identically


                                                     119
      distributed samples made from the corresponding distribution over which each hy-
      pothesis is guaranteed to be a good approximation. In particular, the obliviousness
      of the reduction means that the queries to the learner do not depend on the input z.

   Unless mentioned we think of the query complexity t(n) = poly(n). It is worth to
note that since the algorithms T1 , . . . , TB are polynomial time algorithms, each joint
distribution (X, Y ) must be efficiently samplable.
   We first prove Lemma 5.5. This is a reformulation of the proof of Lemma 5.20 as a
black-box reduction from a PSPACE-Complete language to learning PSPACE/poly over
the uniform distribution.

Proof of Lemma 5.5. This a re-adaptation of the proof of Corollary 5.3. Consider R =
(T1 , . . . , Tn , M ) as an n-adaptive reduction from deciding f ∗ to learning PSPACE/poly us-
ing random examples over the uniform distribution, where T1 , . . . , Tn , M are probabilistic
polynomial time algorithms which are defined as follows.
   For every k ≤ n, Tk makes exactly one query to the learner which is the set of
examples Sk = {(xi , yi )}i≤poly(n) drawn from the joint distribution (Uk , f ∗ (Uk )), where Uk
is the uniform distribution over {0, 1}k . In the k th round of adaptivity, Tk only makes
oracle queries to the hypothesis hk−1 output in the last round. Indeed, let h0k−1 be the
oracle circuit which uses hk−1 as an oracle in the self-corrector algorithm for f ∗ , and
computes f ∗ on all k − 1 length inputs with high probability. It then outputs a set Sk
of independent labeled samples (xi , yi ), where each xi is sampled uniformly at random
from Uk and yi = f ∗ (xi ) computed by using the downward self-reducibility of f ∗ with
h0k−1 . M takes the final hypothesis hn output by the learner over n inputs and outputs
the value of the self-corrector of f ∗ with the oracle hn . The correctness of R and the
run-time analyses of T1 , . . . , Tn , M follow from the proof techniques of Lemma 5.20.
   We next show that R has the required properties. As the self-corrector and the down-
ward self-reduction for f ∗ work for any oracle which satisfy the appropriate constraints,
R is correct for any oracle which outputs any correct hypothesis for f ∗ with respect to
the uniform distribution (over different input lengths). Further, it makes only oracle
queries to the learner, as well as to all the hypothesis circuits h1 , . . . , hn . This makes
the reduction strongly black-box. By the property of the self-corrector, M only makes
queries sampled from Un to hn , which is the same as the query made to the learner. The
obliviousness now follows, since only f ∗ is learnt in each query, irrespective of the choice
of z.

   Our main result is the following.




                                              120
Theorem 5.34. There exists a universal constant c > 0 such that the following holds. For
any language L, ε0 = 1/nc and any B = poly(n), if there exists an oblivious, B-adaptive,
strongly black-box reduction from L to learning NP/poly using random examples over
polynomially samplable distributions up to error ε0 , then L ∈ AMpoly .

   Recall that the class AMpoly refers to the class of languages recognised by constant-
round interactive protocols with advice, where we require proper acceptance/rejection
probabilities only when the advice is correct. [FF93] show that AMpoly = NP/poly. Using
Theorem 5.34 with L = SAT, we get

Corollary 5.35. There exists a universal constant c > 0 such that the following holds.
For ε0 = 1/nc and any B = poly(n), if there exists an oblivious, B-adaptive, strongly
black-box reduction from deciding SAT to learning NP/poly using random examples from
polynomially samplable distributions up to error ε0 , then coNP ⊆ NP/poly.

   Corollary 5.35 implies Theorem 5.6 easily, since coNP ⊆ NP/poly implies ΣP3 = ΠP3
[Yap83].
   We now prove Theorem 5.34. For ease of presentation, we prove it for the case of
an oblivious, B-adaptive, strongly black-box reduction R = (T1 , . . . , TB , M ) from L to
learning NP/poly over the uniform distribution. This means that the queries generated
by the reduction to the learner are labeled examples drawn from the uniform distribu-
tion. The proof of Theorem 5.34 can be easily extended to the case where the reduction
makes queries to learn over any polynomially samplable distribution, rather than just the
uniform distribution.

Proof of Theorem 5.34. Let R = (T1 , . . . , TB , M ) be an oblivious, B-adaptive, strongly
black-box reduction from L to learning NP/poly using random examples over the uniform
distribution, where T1 , . . . , TB , M are probabilistic polynomial time machines.
    By using standard techniques (Adleman’s trick over R), we non-uniformly fix a random
string w1 to be used by T1 , . . . , TB , as advice to R. This ensures that for every input
z ∈ {0, 1}n , R decides z correctly with probability at least 1 − γ over M ’s randomness,
for some 0 < γ < 1/2.
    By fixing w1 non-uniformly, we also ensure that the queries made by the first round
of adaptivity T1 , get fixed. Let (X11 , Y11 ), . . . , (X1t , Y1t ) be the joint distributions which
are constructed by T1 , where for each i ∈ [t], X1i = Ur1i , the uniform distribution
over r1i bits for r1i ≤ n and Y1i = f1i (Ur1i ) for some f1i ∈ NP/poly. Define Q1 =
{(r11 , f11 ), . . . , (r1t , f1t )}.
   For any b ∈ [B], assume that the queries to the learner from the previous rounds
have been fixed as Qb−1 . Tb takes fresh randomness from w1 (which has non-uniformly


                                                121
been fixed) as input and has oracle access to the hypotheses, which (1 − ε0 )-approximate
each queried function in Qb−1 according to the uniform distribution over their respective
input lengths. Let Sb be the set of all tuples of joint distributions which can potentially
be queried by Tb to the learner based on the choices it makes after w1 and the hypoth-
esis oracles for the queries made up to Tb−2 have been fixed. Arbitrarily pick any such
tuple ((Urb1 , fb1 (Urb1 ), . . . , (Urbt , fbt (Urbt )) and fix Qb = Qb−1 ∪ {(rb1 , fb1 ), . . . , (rbt , fbt )}.
In other words, this implicitly means that there exist some choice of hypothesis or-
acles, each of which (1 − ε0 )-approximates the functions queried by Tb−1 , such that
along with the hypothesis oracles fixed in the previous rounds, Tb generates the tuple
((Urb1 , fb1 (Urb1 ), . . . , (Urbt , fbt (Urbt )).
   Let ` = Bt be the total number of learner queries made. For i ∈ [`], let {Dni } be the
sequence of non-deterministic circuits which verifies fi . Let pi be the probability that
fi accepts a string sampled from Uri , i.e. pi − Pry∼Uri {hi (y) = 1} ≤ ε0 . Finally, let q
be the number of non-adaptive queries M makes to each hypothesis hi according to the
distribution Uri .
    On input z ∈ {0, 1}n , non-uniform advice Dr11 , . . . , Dr`` , p1 , . . . , p` , and any error pa-
rameter 0 < δ < 1/2, the Arthur-Merlin protocol for L is as follows :
                                      2 2
    1. Verifier: Let K = 4qδ2` ln               2q`
                                                      
                                                 δ
                                                       . Run M independently K times. For each k ∈ [K],
        let V k = (v11
                    k             k
                       , . . . , v1q      k
                                     ), (v21            k
                                             , . . . , v2q              k
                                                           ), . . . , (v`1            k
                                                                           , . . . , v`q ) be the set of queries made by
                    th                                                   k             k
        M in the k run, where for every i ∈ [t], (vi1 , . . . , viq ) are the q queries of length ri
        made to hi . Send all the queries V 1 , . . . , V K to the prover.

    2. Prover: For each vijk , respond by saying if vijk ∈ fi and if so, provide a certificate
        that vijk ∈ fi which can be verified by Dri i .

    3. Verifier: Accept if all the conditions hold :

            • All certificates sent by the prover are valid (verified by the circuits Dr11 , . . . , Drt ` ).
                                                                 q               
                                                                             2`q
                                                                                 
            • For every 1 ≤ i ≤ `, at least q · pi K − ε0 K −         K ln δ          queries made
               to the prover for fi are answered by the prover as “yes”.
            • For k picked uniformly at random from [K], on input z and using the answers
               given by the prover for the oracle queries in V k , the output of the k th run of
               M is NO.


    Completeness: Let ε = γ + 2δ + 2q`ε0 . Pick c > 0 large enough, such that ε0 = 1/nc
makes ε = 1/poly(n). To show completeness, for any input z ∈ L, observe that an
honest prover would send correct answers for every query and corresponding certificates,

                                                            122
if necessary. Furthermore, if all queries are answered correctly, then M decides z correctly
with probability at least 1−γ on every run. Finally, observe that for each fixed i ∈ [`], j ∈
[q], the queries vij1 , . . . , vijK are independent and distributed identically according to Uri ,
with probability at least pi − ε0 of being a yes instance. Using Hoeffding’s
                                                                          p     inequality
                                                                                       
                                             δ
(Theorem 2.7), with probability at least (1- q` ), at least pi K − ε0 K −   K ln(2q`/δ) of
these queries are yes instances. By a union   bound, with probability
                                                            p         at least
                                                                             (1−δ/`), this
is satisfied for all j ∈ [q] and at least q · pi K − ε0 K −    K ln(2q`/δ)      many queries
made to fi are yes instances. Using a final union bound over all 1 ≤ i ≤ `, we see that
with probability at least (1 − δ), the threshold is satisfied for every function fi . Thus,
the verifier accepts z with probability at least 1 − δ − γ ≥ 1 − ε.

   Soundness: For any z ∈   / L, note that the cheating prover can only cheat by saying
“no” on a query which is a yes instance for any fi , which is ensured by the first condition.
Using Hoeffding’s inequality in the same way as above, we see that with probability
                                                                            
                                                               p
at least (1 − δ), for every 1 ≤ i ≤ `, at most q pi K + ε0 K +    K ln(2q`δ)   many
queries made to the prover for fi are yes instances. In particular, this means that with
probability
     p     at least (1 − δ),
                            the verifier ensures that the prover can cheat on at most
2q ·    K ln(2q`/δ) + ε0 K many yes instances for each fi . Thus, the probability that
there exists a run of M which consists of a query
                                                    to some fi on which the prover has
                          p
cheated is at most 2q` ·     ln(2q`/δ)/K + ε0 ≤ δ + 2q`ε0 for the value of K defined.
Thus, the overall probability that the verifier accepts is at most δ + γ + (δ + 2q`ε0 ) ≤
γ + 2δ + 2q`ε0 ≤ ε.

Remark 5.36. In addition, we can also extend the proof to the case where M still makes
non-adaptive queries but is not constrained distributionally in its access to all the hy-
potheses, by directly applying the techniques of [BT06] for the simulation of R in AMpoly .


5.7      Open Questions
Can we show the hardness of PAC-learning NP/poly efficiently using random examples
assuming that NP 6= BPP? A potential direction is to consider non black-box reductions
for the NP-hardness of PAC-learning NP/poly. This viewpoint has lent itself some success
in the case of worst-case to average-case reductions [GST07, Hir18, HW19, Hir20a, Hir20b]
and in our case, hardness of efficiently learning EXP/poly. Indeed, the reduction for
EXP/poly only works if the learning algorithm runs in polynomial time, although the
reduction still uses the learning algorithm as an oracle.8 Moreover, the proof of Lemma
   8
    We need EXP to collapse to PSPACE for the reduction to succeed. An efficient learner for EXP/poly
outputs polynomial-sized hypothesis circuits for any language in EXP. Using standard techniques, this
implies EXP ⊆ P/poly, which leads to the required collapse.


                                                123
3.6 from [CHO+ 20] shows a non black-box reduction from an approximate version of
MCSP to learning P/poly by sub-exponential-sized circuits (and thus, learning NP/poly
too).9 Note that, it is unclear if approximate MCSP is NP-Hard and this reduction does
not imply the NP-Hardness of PAC-learning NP/poly efficiently.
   Another important question is to explore an analogue of the collapse of PH for learn-
ability. In other words, does polynomial time learnability of NP/poly imply polynomial
time learnability of PH/poly? Note that, under a strong assumption of the existence of a
(possibly adaptive and non-relativisable) worst-case to average-case reduction for NP, we
can use the techniques in Lemma 5.20 along with the downward-self-reducibility of SAT
to show such a collapse.
    On the other hand, [Imp11] also shows that there exists an oracle O with respect
                                                              α
to which DistNPO ⊆ AvgPO and ΣO                   O n
                                    2 6⊆ HeurSIZE [2 ]. Essentially, this result negates
the existence of any relativisable reductions which show a statement analogous to the
PH collapse for average-case algorithms, i.e. if NP is easy on average, then Σ2 is easy on
average too. In a similar spirit, can we prove that no relativisable technique can show
that if NP/poly is learnable in polynomial time, then Σ2 /poly is learnable in polynomial
time as well?




   9
     The proof of Lemma 3.6 in [CHO+ 20] uses a different and slightly more complex technique involving
random sampling to estimate the closeness of the hypothesis, compared to the one in Section 3.3.


                                                 124
Chapter 6

Deterministic #SAT Algorithm for
AC0[2]

6.1      Introduction
Our understanding of the class of general Boolean circuits is very limited. We have no
super-linear lower bounds against them for any explicit function, nor do we have non-
trivial solutions for any of the meta-algorithmic tasks we have endeavoured to study in
this thesis. On the other hand, the situation is far better for more restricted classes of
circuits, especially circuits of constant depth where the gates have unbounded fan-in, both
with respect to lower bounds and to meta-computational questions.
   In this chapter, we focus on the class AC0 [2], i.e. constant-depth circuits with AND,
OR and XOR gates (or more generally, AND, OR and MODp gates for some prime p). This
is a class that has been intensively studied. Razborov [Raz87] and Smolensky [Smo87]
showed super-polynomial size lower bounds against this class for very simple functions
such as the Majority function and the MODq function where q is a prime different from 2.
As we discuss in Section 6.2, non-trivial randomised algorithms for deciding satisfiability
of circuits from this class are implicit in [Wil14b, LPT+ 17]. [CIKK16] also gave a quasi-
polynomial time algorithm for learning AC0 [2] circuits in the membership query model.
   However, there are still several gaps in our understanding of AC0 [2]. With regards to
lower bounds, we still do not have tight lower bounds for functions like Majority or MODq .
The Razborov-Smolensky approximation method yields size lower bounds of the form
     1/2(d−1) )
2Ω(n            for Majority against AC0 [2] circuits of depth d over n variables, and a standard
                                                                    1/(d−1) )
divide-and-conquer strategy yields an upper bound of 2O(n         . Recently, [OSS19]
                                                                e


showed that for large constant depths, this upper bound can be improved to 2O(n
                                                                            e 2/3(d−4) )
                                                                                         ,
                                1/2d−4
and the lower bound to 2Ω(n       )
                                    . Closing this gap in the exponent between upper
and lower bounds for Majority has been a long-standing open question in the complexity
theory of constant-depth circuits (for depths 3 and 4, [OSS19] show tight size bounds).


                                              125
Note that, in contrast, tight bounds are known up to constant factors in the exponent
                                                                                                  1/(d−1) )
when only AND and OR gates are allowed - Parity is known to have complexity 2Θ(n
in this simpler model [Ajt83, FSS84, Yao85, Hås86].
  With regard to meta-algorithmic tasks, despite the learning breakthrough of [CIKK16]
mentioned previously, the situation for pseudo-random generators (PRGs) and satisfia-
bility algorithms is still unclear. Very recently, [CR20, CLW20] used the algorithmic
method to show strong average-case lower bounds for ENP against AC0 [2] circuits of
sub-exponential size (and actually, ACC0 ), and consequently ENP -computable PRGs of
poly(log n) seed length, on almost every input length. In the case of satisfiability algo-
rithms, randomised algorithms improving non-trivially over brute force search are implicit
in previous work, but good deterministic algorithms were unknown prior to this work.
   Deterministic satisfiability algorithms are important for a couple of reasons. First,
they indicate an improved structural understanding of the circuit class in question, often
requiring new techniques to design. Second, they imply circuit lower bounds via the
connection of Williams [Wil13a] - such an implication is not known from randomised
algorithms.1
   Note that even under standard derandomisation assumptions, it is unclear how to
get a non-trivial deterministic satisfiability algorithm from a non-trivial randomised sat-
isfiability algorithm. The reason is that derandomisation inherently incurs a quadratic
slowdown. The deterministic simulation of a randomised algorithm running in time T
will take time at least T 2 when a PRG is used to do the derandomisation, as the range
of the PRG will have size at least T . This quadratic slowdown is unaffordable in the
parametric regime under consideration here - we are interested in algorithms running
in time 2n−g(n) , for some g(n) = o(n). Hence the determinisation procedure cannot be
black-box, but must rather use refined structural information about the circuit class in
question.
       The main result of this chapter is a deterministic algorithm for counting satisfying
assignments of AC0 [2] circuits that improves non-trivially over brute force search.

Theorem 6.1 (Main theorem). The following holds for some absolute constant ε0 > 0.
There is a deterministic algorithm that given an AC0 [2] circuit C over n variables such that
                                           1/d
C has depth at most d and size s ≤ 2(ε0 n) , counts the number of satisfying assignments
to C in time 2n−t where t = t(n, s, d) = n/O(log s)d−1 .

Remark 6.2. It is easy to generalise our results to work with AC0 [p] circuits for any fixed
prime p.
   1
     One-sided error randomised algorithms, and more generally, co-non-deterministic algorithms for
satisfiability for the circuit class also imply lower bounds via the result of Williams [Wil13a]. However,
it is easy to check that the previous randomised algorithms for AC0 [2] were two-sided error algorithms.


                                                  126
   In terms of parameters, the savings over brute force search matches the savings in the
randomised algorithm of [IMP12] for AC0 circuits when the circuit size is n1+Ω(1) . Thus
any further improvement in savings in our result would give a corresponding improvement
for AC0 algorithms, and moreover via the connection of Williams [Wil13a] to circuit lower
bounds, a strong improvement would give super-polynomial formula size lower bounds
for non-deterministic exponential time.
   Next, we use Theorem 6.1 to get better lower bounds against AC0 [2] circuits than
known before by using the connection of Williams [Wil13a]. In fact, we need a refinement
of the connection due to [BSV14]. Our lower bound holds for a language in ENP .

Theorem 6.3. For any positive integer d, there is a language in ENP which does not have
                                          1/(d+1) )
AC0 [2] circuits of depth d and size 2o(n             .

Remark 6.4. In very recent work [Vio20], Viola showed an improvement to Theorem
6.3. He showed the existence of a language in ENP which requires AC0 [2] circuits of depth
                    2  1/d−1
d and size 2Ω(n/ log n)      , for every constant d. This lower bound almost matches the
    1/d−1 )
2Ω(n          lower bounds for AC0 via switching lemma [Hås86].


6.2       Proof Outline for the Main Theorem
Our starting point is a randomised algorithm for the problem of checking satisfiability of
an AC0 [2] circuit C that runs in time 2n−m where m = n/O(log s)d−1 , and s, d represent
the size, depth of C respectively (we also assume that s is suitably upper bounded, but
we ignore it in this section). This algorithm is essentially due to Williams [Wil14b] and
Lokshtanov, Paturi, Tamaki, Williams and Yu [LPT+ 17], though it does not appear
explicitly in either of these works.
   The idea is to use a result of Razborov [Raz87] that essentially says that small AC0 [2]
circuits C can be “approximated” by polynomials of low degree. More formally, there is
a randomised algorithm that, when given a circuit C of size s over n variables, produces
a (random) polynomial P ∈ F2 [x1 , . . . , xn ] of degree O(log s)d−1 that agrees with the
value of a circuit C on any given input with good probability (say 0.9). Along with
a fast polynomial evaluation algorithm [Wil11], this immediately yields an enumeration
algorithm for C (i.e. an algorithm to output the truth table of C) that runs in time
poly(n)2n + poly(s), which beats (for large enough s) the trivial algorithm that simply
evaluates C on each input and hence takes time s · 2n . Repeating the algorithm poly(n)
times and taking the majority vote on each input, we get an enumeration algorithm that
works with high probability.



                                                127
       To obtain a randomised satisfiability algorithm that runs in better-than-brute-force
time, we use the above idea along with the “blowup-trick” [Wil14c, CW16, LPT+ 17].
For any a ∈ {0, 1}m , let Ca be the circuit obtained by setting the last m variables of C
to a. Note that the satisfiability of C can be computed by checking the satisfiability of
C 0 = a∈{0,1}m Ca , and C 0 is a circuit of larger size (s · 2m ) but fewer variables (n − m).
      W

We now run the enumeration algorithm above on C 0 to check if it is satisfiable. Since the
circuit is larger, the polynomial produced has larger degree: a careful analysis reveals the
degree to be m · O(log s)d−1 . Setting m = n/Θ(log s)d−1 , we obtain a polynomial of degree
 n, which can be computed in better-than-brute-force time. Running the enumeration
algorithm as above gives the required satisfiability algorithm for C, which now runs in
                    d−1
time 2n−n/Θ(log s)        .
    The above algorithm can further be modified to count satisfying assignments, by in-
stead defining C 0 = a Ca (a sum over Z) instead of using an OR. Now, an additional idea
                    P

is required since the polynomials Pa approximating each Ca are F2 -polynomials whereas
the sum is over the integers (in the satisfiability case above, the OR gate can further be
approximated by a constant-degree polynomial using an idea of Razborov [Raz87], but
this idea is not available here). What comes to our rescue is an idea of Toda [Tod91]
and its subsequent quantitative refinement due to Beigel and Tarui [BT94] which tells us
that we can simulate a sum (over Z) of K many F2 -polynomials of degree at most D as
a polynomial (over Z) of degree at most D log K. Using this idea, we are able to obtain
                       m2 · O(log s)d−1 . Overall, this yields an algorithm with slightly
a polynomial of degree √
                              n/Θ(log s)d−1
worse running time 2n−                        .
       These algorithms were partially derandomised by Chan and Williams [CW16] for the
case that the AC0 [2] circuits are k-CNFs and generalised by Lokshtanov et al. [LPT+ 17]
to the case of ANDs of degree-k polynomials.2 Chan and Williams [CW16] observed that
Razborov’s randomised construction of polynomials could be suitably derandomised using
ε-biased spaces [NN93] (which is nothing but the support of an ε-biased distribution).
Using this idea (and more work), it was shown that the number of satisfying assignments
to a set of degree k-polynomials in n variables could be computed in time 2n−n/Θ(k) , which
meets the running time of the satisfiability algorithm mentioned above in this special case.
       However, it is unclear how to extend the ideas to the setting of general AC0 [2] circuits
since these results used a very special property of the randomised polynomial construction
for a single OR gate (and, dually, a single AND gate): namely, that there is a constant-
degree polynomial whose bias perfectly predicts whether the input to an OR-gate is a 1
   2
    Note that any k-clause is in particular a degree-k polynomial and hence the latter result generalises
the former.




                                                  128
input or a 0 input.3 Unfortunately, such a strong property is not known for general AC0 [2]
circuits: the best we can hope for is to construct a polynomial that with high probability,
say 1 − ε, equals the output of the circuit on any given input, but then we have to pay
for this precision in terms of the degree of the polynomial constructed. Further, it is not
clear how to derandomise this general inductive construction.
       We start by derandomising the higher-depth random polynomial construction. Once
again, ε-biased distributions play a crucial role, and we need to further use derandomised
sampling using expanders for a near-optimal derandomisation. Using this along with
the idea of Beigel and Tarui [BT94]
                                 √ would yield a deterministic algorithm for counting
                                             n/Θ(log s)d−1
satisfying assignments in time 2n−                             .
                                                                              d−1
       However, we further improve the running time to 2n−n/Θ(log s)                , matching the running
time of the randomised algorithm for checking satisfiability. The principal idea here is to
observe (by looking inside the Razborov construction) that the polynomials Pa computed
for approximating the individual circuits Ca mentioned above have a very special form:
each Pa is a majority of ` = O(m) many polynomials Pa,1 , . . . , Pa,` of degree O(log s)d−1
each. We use this and some basic Fourier analysis of Boolean functions to write Pa as
a real-valued sum of polynomials of degree at most O(log s)d−1 ; this idea is inspired by
a recent result of Chen and Papakonstantinou [CP19], who use it to give an improved
depth-reduction result for constant-depth circuits with Modq gates for composite q. The
advantage of doing this is that the degree blow-up in the randomised #SAT algorithm
outline above is restricted to applying the idea of Beigel and Tarui, which means that
the degree drops to m · O(log s)d−1 . Setting m suitably, we now obtain a deterministic
                                               d−1
algorithm running in time 2n−n/O(log s)              .


6.3         Preliminaries
We will consider polynomials over the fields R and F2 . We identify F2 with {0, 1} in the
                      n
                          to denote ki=0 ni . All algorithms will be implemented in the
                                   P       
natural way. We use ≤k
standard Turing machine with RAM model.
   We recall that any function f : {0, 1}n → R, for any commutative ring R has a
unique representation as a multilinear polynomial. Given two such polynomials repre-
senting possibly different functions f1 and f2 , we can compute the multilinear polynomial
   3
       Briefly, the Razborov polynomial for the OR function on input bits x1 , . .P
                                                                                  . , xs is as follows. Choose
a1 , . . . , as ∈ F2 independently and uniformly at random and compute `(x) = i ai xi . Now, note that if
OR(x1 , . . . , xs ) = 1, then `(x) computes a uniformly random element of F2 and otherwise, `(x) = 0 with
probability 1.




                                                         129
corresponding to their product by multiplying the polynomials f1 and f2 and “multilin-
earising” by replacing each copy of x2i by xi . In particular, this idea yields the following
easy algorithm.

Fact 6.5. Let R be either F2 or Z. There is a deterministic algorithm which, when given
as input multilinear polynomials f1 , . . . , ft ∈ R[x1 , . . . , xn ] (as a sum of monomials) of
                                P
degree d1 , . . . , dt such that i di ≤ D, computes the multilinear polynomial corresponding
                                                                            n
                                                                              
to the product f = f1 · · · ft . The algorithm runs in time poly( ≤D           ) when R = F2 , and
                 n
                    
time poly( ≤D , B) when R = Z, where B is the bit-complexity of the coefficients of
f1 , . . . , f t .

6.3.1            Polynomials over F2 and Probabilistic polynomials
For our convenience, we recall the definition of probabilistic polynomials.

Definition 6.6 (Probabilistic Polynomials [Raz87, Smo87]). A probabilistic polynomial
from F2 [x1 , . . . , xn ] is a random multilinear polynomial P (chosen according to some
distribution) from F2 [x1 , . . . , xn ]. We say that P has degree at most D if the distribution
of P is supported on polynomials of degree at most D (or equivalently PrP {deg(P) ≤
D} = 1).
    We say that P is an ε-error probabilistic polynomial for a function f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}
if for each a ∈ {0, 1}n , we have PrP {P(a) 6= f (a)} ≤ ε.

6.3.2            Polynomials over R and Modulus-amplification
Section 2.5 defines the Fourier expansion of a Boolean function over the {−1, 1} basis.
In this section we given an analogous definition over the {0, 1} basis.
    Recall the following basic facts about writing Boolean functions as multilinear poly-
nomials over the reals. See, e.g. O’Donnell [O’D14] for proofs.

Fact 6.7. Let f : {0, 1}` → {0, 1} be any Boolean function.

     1. f can written as a unique real-valued linear combination
                                                      X
                                            f (x) =           αS χS (x)
                                                      S⊆[`]

                           L
          where χS (x) =       i∈S xi (note that we interpret χS (x) ∈ {0, 1} as a real number and
          the sum above is taken over R).

     2. For each S, αS ∈ [−1, 1] and is moreover an integral multiple of 2−(`+1) .



                                                  130
  3. There is a deterministic algorithm FC which, given as input f (via its truth table),
      computes all the above αS ’s in time 2O(`) .
                                                           P
We also define the Fourier l1 norm of f as kf k1 =         S |αS |.
   The following is a useful Modulus-amplification lemma due to Beigel and Tarui [BT94].
This particular version is from the work of Chan and Williams [CW16].

Lemma 6.8 (Beigel-Tarui [BT94]). For every positive integer t, the degree 2t − 1 poly-
nomial Ft (y) ∈ Z[y] defined by
                                                     t−1       
                                                 t
                                                     X     t+j−1
                          Ft (y) = 1 − (1 − y)                        yj
                                                     j=0
                                                               j

has the property that for all b ∈ Z,

   • if b ≡ 0 (mod 2), then Ft (b) ≡ 0 (mod 2t ), and

   • if b ≡ 1 (mod 2), then Ft (b) ≡ 1 (mod 2t ).

   Many satisfiability algorithms for circuits are based on evaluating multivariate poly-
nomials efficiently over grids. The following lemma can be found in, e.g. [Wil11].

Lemma 6.9 (Fast Polynomial Evaluation). There is a deterministic algorithm FPE,
which given as input a multilinear polynomial P ∈ Z[x1 , . . . , xn ] as a sum of monomials,
computes the values (P (a))a∈{0,1}n in time poly(n, B) · 2n where B is an upper bound on
the bit complexity of the coefficients of P .

6.3.3     Small-biased generators
Recall the notion of an ε-biased generators from Definition 4.3, which are generators that
ε-fool parities.
   For any subspace W of {0, 1}n , define the indicator function 1W : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} as
1W (z) = 1 if and only if the vector z ∈ W . From an Observation in O’Donnell’s book
[O’D14], we see that

Proposition 6.10 (Proposition 3.11 of [O’D14]). Let W be a subspace of {0, 1}n and
W⊥ be its orthogonal complement such that dim(W⊥ ) = k. Then, the constant term in
the Fourier expansion of the indicator function 1W is 21k . Moreover, k1W k1 = 1.

   The proof for Proposition 6.10 is based on the fact that a vector z ∈ W if and only if
the dot product of z with every basis vector of W⊥ is 0.
   De, Etesami, Trevisan and Tulsiani [DETT10] observed that ε-biased generators also
fool functions with small Fourier l1 -norm.

                                                131
Lemma 6.11 (Lemma 2.5 of [DETT10]). Let G : {0, 1}r → {0, 1}n be an ε-biased
generator. For every function f : {0, 1}n → R we have,

                          Ey∼Ur [f (G(y))] − Ex∼Un [f (x)] ≤ εkf k1

   From Proposition 6.10 and Lemma 6.11, we state the following useful corollary.

Corollary 6.12. Let W be a subspace of {0, 1}n , such that the co-dimension of W is k
and let G : {0, 1}r → {0, 1}n be an ε-biased distribution. Then
                                                              
                                                 1       1
                            Pr {G(y) ∈ W } ∈        − ε, k + ε
                           y∼Ur                 2k      2
   Intuitively speaking, Corollary 6.12 states that an ε-biased generator also ε-fools con-
junctions of parities.

6.3.4     Expanders
Proofs of the following well-known facts may be found in the monograph of Hoory, Linial
and Wigderson [HLW06].
   Given an undirected ∆-regular multigraph G, we denote by A(G) its adjacency matrix
and A(G)
    e    = (1/∆)A(G) its normalised adjacency matrix. Then, we have the following.

   • The all-1s vector v ∈ Rn is an eigenvector of A(G)
                                                   e    with eigenvalue 1.

   • G is connected if and only if v is the only such eigenvector (up to scalar multipli-
      cation).

Definition 6.13 (Expanders [HLW06]). An undirected multigraph G is an (N, ∆, λ)-
expander if it is a ∆-regular connected graph on N vertices (which we will identify with
[N ]), and all the eigenvalues (counted with multiplicity) of A(G)
                                                              e    other than 1 are bounded
by λ in absolute value.
   Let {Gn }n≥1 be a sequence of expander graphs with Gn being an (f (n), ∆, λ)-expander
for some increasing function f : N → N and constants ∆ and λ. We say that {Gn }n≥1
is explicit if there is a deterministic algorithm that, when given as input n, produces the
graph Gn in time poly(n, f (n)).

   We use Reingold, Vadhan and Wigderson’s [RVW02] explicit construction for an ex-
pander graph.

Theorem 6.14 ([RVW02]). For every fixed λ > 0, there exists a constant ∆ > 0 and an
explicit sequence of expander graphs {Gn }n≥1 , where Gn is a (2n , ∆, λ)-expander graph,
for some large enough constant ∆. Further, we can assume that ∆ is a power of 2.

                                            132
   We will need the following expander-based Chernoff bound due to Gillman [Gil98].
The version below is due to Healy [Hea08].

Theorem 6.15 ([Gil98, Hea08]). Let G be an (N, D, λ)-expander graph and let S ⊆ [N ]
be a subset of the vertices of G such that |S| = βN. Consider the natural `-step random
walk on G defined by choosing a uniformly random vertex u1 ∈ [N ] and repeatedly choosing
random neighbours ` − 1 times to obtain a (random) sequence (u1 , . . . , u` ) of vertices of
G. Let XS denote the number of i ∈ [`] such that ui ∈ S. For any fixed ρ ∈ (0, 1), we
have                                                         
                                                    1 2
                   Pr {|XS − β`| ≥ ρ`} ≤ 2 exp − ρ (1 − λ)` .
                 u1 ,...,u`                         4

6.4      The #SAT algorithm
In this section we prove Theorem 6.1. We start with a derandomised version of a lemma
by Razborov [Raz87] for approximating AC0 [2] circuits by low-degree polynomials. Using
this version, we then state formally the #SAT algorithm and analyse it.

6.4.1     Derandomised construction of probabilistic polynomials
          for AC0 [2]
The following lemma is an algorithmic version of a result by Razborov [Raz87] (see also
Kopparty-Srinivasan [KS18] for the dependence on ε). It can be viewed as a derandomi-
sation of Williams’ [Wil14b] algorithm.

Lemma 6.16. For any ε > 0, an AC0 [2] circuit C over n variables of depth d and
size at most s has an ε-error probabilistic polynomial P from F2 [x1 , . . . , xn ] of degree at
most D = (O(log s)d−1 · log(1/ε)). Further, P = Maj(P1 , . . . , P` ), where P1 , . . . , P` are
probabilistic polynomials of degree D1 = O(log s)d−1 and ` = O(log(1/ε)).
   Moreover, there is a deterministic procedure S, which when given as input the circuit
C, the parameter ε, and a uniformly random Boolean string σ of length r = O(log(s/ε)),
produces a random sample of the polynomials P1 , . . . , P` as sums of monomials. The
                                     n
                                       
procedure S runs in time poly `, s, ≤D1 .

   Before we go into the proof of Lemma 6.16, we prove a weaker version that will
be useful for proving it. This result is a higher-depth analogue of a result of Chan
and Williams [CW16] which itself may be viewed as a derandomisation of Razborov’s
construction [Raz87] for depth-2 circuits.




                                              133
Lemma 6.17. For every AC0 [2] circuit C over n variables of depth d and size s, there
exists a 14 -error probabilistic polynomial P 0 from F2 [x1 , . . . , xn ] of degree at most D1 =
O(log s)d−1 . Further, there is a deterministic algorithm T that produces a random sample
of P 0 as a sum of monomials
                             given as input C, s and O(log s) random bits. The algorithm
                         n
                             
T runs in time poly s, ≤D1 .

Proof. Let C be a circuit over n variables of size s and depth d. Let m = s log(40s), δ =
1/(20s) and G be an δ-biased generator over {0, 1}m with seed length O(log(m/δ)) =
O(log s) (from Lemma 4.4).
    Fix some enumeration g1 , . . . , gs of all the gates in C. Let h ∈ {g1 , . . . , gs } be the
output gate of C and let C1 , . . . , Cr (r ≤ s) be the depth-(d − 1) sub-circuits feeding into
h. Firstly, for each gate g 6= h in the circuit, we construct a probabilistic polynomial
of degree O(log s) over the gate inputs, following which we construct a constant degree
probabilistic polynomial for the gate h. Composing these polynomials together gives the
constant error probabilistic polynomial of degree O(log s)d−1 for C.
  Let x ∈ {0, 1}n be any input to C. Fix any gate g 6= h. If g is a NOT gate or a
MOD2 gate, we can easily get a polynomial Pg of degree 1 which always agrees with the
function computed by g and needs no random bits. Therefore, let g be an OR gate (a
dual construction works for AND gates). Let gi1 , . . . , gik be the gates that are inputs to
g and vg ∈ {0, 1}s such that vg [i] = gi (x) iff i ∈ {i1 , . . . , ik }. Observe that g outputs 1 iff
vg is not the zero vector.
    Let t = log(40s). Construct the vectors u1 , . . . , ut ∈ {0, 1}m , such that for each up ,
1 ≤ p ≤ t, on dividing up into t blocks, the pth block contains vg and all the other bits
of up are set to 0. The dimension of the vector space V ⊆ Fm 2 spanned by {u1 , . . . , ut } is
equal to t if vg is a non-zero vector. Use the generator G to sample a string y ∈ {0, 1}m ,
using a seed of length O(log s). Consider y as being split into t blocks y1 , . . . , yt of size s
each.
   W.l.o.g. consider the vector u1 . The inner product hu1 , yi which is exactly equal to
the inner product hvg , y1 i, can be calculated by hardwiring into a MOD2 gate all the
input gates of g for which the corresponding bit in y equals 1. In other words, the
inner product hu1 , yi is represented by the polynomial q1y = j∈{i1 ,...,ik } (y1 )j · gj (x) over
                                                             P

inputs gi1 (x), . . . , gik (x). Repeating this construction for all t vectors u1 , . . . , ut , we get
polynomials q1y , . . . , qty . Finally, we compute the disjunction of these t terms using the
polynomial Pgy = 1 − tp=1 (1 − qpy ) over inputs gi1 (x), . . . , gik (x), of degree t = O (log s).
                             Q

    We now analyse the behaviour of Pgy on input x. If the gate g outputs 0 on x, then
for any y ∈ S, we get hup , yi = 0 for every 1 ≤ p ≤ t. In particular, Pgy outputs 0
with probability 1. On the other hand, if g(x) = 1, we see that Pgy errs on x iff for each
1 ≤ p ≤ t, qpy = 0. Let V⊥ be the orthogonal complement to V = span({u1 , . . . , ut }).

                                                 134
Note that the co-dimension of the vector space V⊥ is t. We now use Corollary 6.12 to
see that, if g(x) = 1, y belongs to V⊥ , or in other words, hup , yi = 0 for every 1 ≤ p ≤ t,
with probability at most 21t + δ. Thus, on input x, Pgy disagrees with the output of g with
probability at most 21t + δ = 40s
                               1     1
                                  + 20s    3
                                        = 40s .
   We generate a single y from G and then use it (for each OR and AND gate) to get
the probabilistic polynomial Pgy for each gate g 6= h in C. For each of the depth-(d − 1)
sub-circuits C1 , . . . , Cr , we compose the polynomials for their gates inductively, to obtain
probabilistic polynomials Q1 , . . . , Qr of degree at most O(log s)d−1 . Following this, we
use the first t1 = 3 blocks of y in a similar fashion to get a probabilistic polynomial Ph of
degree O(1) for the function computed by the output gate h with error at most 21t1 + δ.
Now, for any input x ∈ {0, 1}n , P 0 = Ph (Q1 , . . . , Qr ) satisfies

     Pr0 {C(x) 6= P 0 (x)} ≤      Pr {∃j ∈ [r] : Cj (x) 6= Qj (x)}
     P                         Q1 ,...,Qr

                                            + Pr{h(C1 (x), . . . , Cr (x)) 6= Ph (C1 (x), . . . , Cr (x))}
                                               P
                               3    1
                          ≤s·     + t1 + δ
                              40s 2
                            3   1   1      1
                          ≤   + +      ≤
                            40 8 20s       4
where the second inequality uses a union bound over the (at most s) gates g in C.
   This gives us a probabilistic polynomial P 0 of degree O(log s)d−1 for the circuit C, with
error at most 41 and the number of random bits needed to get a sample is the seed length
of G, which is O(log s). This polynomial is multilinear and by expanding the monomials
at each step we ensure multilinearity of the intermediate polynomials. Using Fact
                                                                                  6.5 we
                                                                            n
                                                                                
see that the running time of the sampling algorithm is given by poly s, ≤D    1
                                                                                  .

Proof of Lemma 6.16. Let k = O(log s) be the number of random bits needed by the
algorithm T from Lemma 6.17. Consider an explicit (2k , ∆, λ) expander graph G on
V = {0, 1}k given by Theorem 6.14, where ∆ is a large enough constant given by the
construction and λ = 12 . The graph G can be constructed in time poly(2k ) = poly(s).
   Let ` = 200 log 2ε . We define the algorithm S to be the following deterministic
                      

procedure which takes as input the circuit C, the parameter ε and a uniformly random
seed σ of length r = k + (` − 1) · log ∆ and produces a random sample of the probabilis-
tic polynomials P1 , . . . , P` , where each of the Pi is an instantiation of the probabilistic
polynomial constructed in Lemma 6.17.

   1. Perform a length ` random walk in G using the bits of the random seed σ to obtain
      u1 , . . . , u` ∈ V = {0, 1}k , i.e. first choose u1 uniformly at random from V and for
      each i ∈ {2, . . . , `}, let ui be a random neighbour of ui−1 in the graph G.


                                                       135
  2. For each 1 ≤ i ≤ `, use ui as the input string of random bits to algorithm T from
       Lemma 6.17 to obtain a random sample Pi of the 1/4-error probabilistic polynomial
       for C.

   The number of random bits used by S to obtain a random sample of P1 , . . . , P` is
                                1
                                  
r = O(k + `) = O(log   s + log ε
                                   ) = O (log(s/ε)). At each step of the random walk we
                   n
                     
spend poly s, ≤D1       time to get a sample and thus, the overall running time of S is
                
            n
                
poly `, s, ≤D 1
                   .
    Now, define the probabilistic polynomial P = Maj(P1 , . . . , P` ). Since, Majority of `
bits is a polynomial of degree at most `, the degree of P is O(log s)d−1 · log(1/ε).
   To show that P is a probabilistic polynomial with error ε for the circuit C, fix an
input x ∈ {0, 1}n . For any u ∈ V , let P u be the polynomial sampled by the algorithm T
when given u as input. Let B be the set of vertices u ∈ V such that P u (x) 6= C(x). Note
that as T samples a 1/4-error probabilistic polynomial for C, we must have |B| ≤ |V |/4.
Now, we have P(x) 6= C(x) iff a majority of the vertices on the random walk sampled by
S belong to B. Using Theorem 6.15 we show that this event happens with a probability
at most ε.
   Let XB be the random variable which denotes the number of i ∈ [`] such that i ∈ B.
                                         |B|
Using Theorem 6.15 with the settings β = |V |
                                              ≤ 14 , λ = 12 , ρ = 14 and ` = 200 log(2/ε), we
see that
                                                                
                                           1 2                   2                 2
                                                                     < 2 · 2− log( ε ) < ε
               
    Pr             XB − `/4 > `/4 ≤ 2 exp − ρ (1 − λ) · 200 log
  u1 ,...,u`                               4                     ε



6.4.2          The algorithm and its analysis
We begin by describing the #SAT algorithm A.

Algorithm A. The algorithm A has the following desired input-output behaviour.

       Input: An AC0 [2] circuit C over n variables of size at most s and depth at most
                                    1/d
       d. Recall that s ≤ 2(ε0 n)         for some absolute constant ε0 > 0 (to be chosen below).
       We assume s ≥ n.

       Desired Output: The number of satisfying assignments of C.




                                                   136
       Notation. Let m = γn/(log s)d−1 for a suitable absolute constant γ > 0 that will
be fixed below. Let ε = 1/210m . For s and ε as defined above, choose r = O(log(s/ε))
suitably so that the sampling algorithm S from Lemma 6.16 works as stated.
   For each σ ∈ {0, 1}r , let (P1σ , . . . , P`σ ) be the output of the algorithm S on string σ
(note that the probabilistic polynomials (P1 , . . . , P` ) from Lemma 6.16 are exactly the
polynomials (P1σ , . . . , P`σ ) for a uniformly random σ, and hence P = Maj(P1σ , . . . , P`σ )).
       Now, for a fixed σ ∈ {0, 1}r and c ∈ {0, 1}m , let Piσ,c ∈ F2 [x1 , . . . , xn−m ] be defined by
Piσ,c = Piσ (x1 , . . . , xn−m , c1 , . . . , cm ) (i.e. the last m variables of Piσ are fixed to bits of c).
Let P σ,c = Maj(P1σ,c , . . . , P`σ,c ).
    For S ⊆ [`], let PSσ,c =                        σ,c         σ,c
                                        L
                                              i∈S Pi . Let QS be the polynomial with integer coeffi-
cients obtained by treating the F2 -coefficients of PSσ,c as integers. Note that for each
b ∈ {0, 1}n−m , PSσ,c (b) ≡ Qσ,c
                             S (b) (mod 2).


   1. Using the algorithm FC from Fact 6.7, compute4 integers kS ∈ {2−(`+1) , . . . , 2(`+1) }
                                                           1
                                                              P          L
      for each S ⊆ [`] such that Maj(z1 , . . . , z` ) = 2`+1   S⊆[`] kS   i∈S zi .


   2. For each c ∈ {0, 1}m , σ ∈ {0, 1}r and S ⊆ [`], construct (as a sum of monomials)
         the polynomial Qσ,c
                         S (x1 , . . . , xn−m ) using the algorithm S from Lemma 6.16.


   3. Construct as a sum of monomials, the multilinear polynomial R ∈ Z[x1 , . . . , xn−m ]
         (Fact 6.5) defined by
                                               X        X      X
                   R(x1 , . . . , xn−m ) =                             kS · Ft (Qσ,c
                                                                                 S (x1 , . . . , xn−m ))
                                             c∈{0,1}m σ∈{0,1}r S⊆[`]

         where Ft is the modulus amplifying polynomial given by Lemma 6.8 and for a large
         absolute constant A > 0 chosen below, t = A log(s/ε) .

   4. Evaluate R(b) for each b ∈ {0, 1}n−m using the algorithm FPE from Lemma 6.9.

   5. Let Rt (b) = R(b) (mod 2t ) ∈ {0, . . . , 2t − 1}. Output                                            `+1+r
                                                                                   P
                                                                                       b∈{0,1}n−m [Rt (b)/2      ]
         where [x] denotes the integer closest to x (if x is a half-integer, [x] is defined arbi-
         trarily).

       Theorem 6.1 follows directly from Lemmas 6.18 and 6.19 below.

Lemma 6.18 (Running time). For any constant A > 0, there exist constants γ > 0 and
ε0 > 0 such that the algorithm A, on an input circuit C of depth at most d and size at
                   1/d
most s ≤ 2(ε0 n)         , has running time poly(s) · 2n/10 + poly(n) · 2n−m .
   4
    There is actually an explicit description of the integers kS (see, e.g., O’Donnell [O’D14]) using which
each kS can each be computed in time poly(`) as opposed to the 2O(`) time taken by the algorithm C.
However, the algorithm we give here doesn’t need this and works for any Boolean function in place of
Maj.


                                                       137
Proof. We analyse the running time of A by looking at the running times for each of its
individual steps. From Fact 6.7, we see that Step 1 of the algorithm takes 2O(`) running
time. Since ` = O(log(1/ε)) = O(m) = O(n/(log s)d−1 ) = o(n), this step takes at most
2o(n) < 2n/10 time to run.                                     
                                                                          n
                                                                              
    For Step 2, we see that the running time is 2`+m+r · poly `, s, ≤D      1
                                                                                 , as we construct
                                                                                              n
                                                                                                  
2`+m+r many polynomials using the algorithm S, each of which takes poly(`, s, ≤D                1
                                                                                                   )
time to construct, as seen in Lemma 6.16. For the parameters we pick, we see that
                        n
                                              d−1       (d−1)/d log n)
2`+m+r = 2o(n) and ≤D     1
                              ≤ nD1 = nO(log s)    = 2O(n               . Thus, Step 2 takes at
most 2n/10 · poly(n, s) time.      
                                         n
                                             
    Step 3 takes time 2`+m+r · poly `, ≤2tD1
                                                , as the modulus amplifying polynomial Ft
blows the degree of the polynomial up by a factor of (2t−1) and the number   of monomials
                                                                                  n
                                                                                       
in the multilinear expansion of the polynomial R(x1 , . . . , xn−m ) is poly `, ≤2tD 1
                                                                                          . To
upper bound this running time, let c0 > 0 be a constant such that the degree parameter
D1 from Lemma 6.16 is at most c0 · (log s)d−1 . Then the degree of the polynomial R is at
most
                             2tD1 ≤ 2t · c0 (log s)d−1
                                    = 2A log(s/ε) · c0 (log s)d−1
                                    = 2Ac0 (log s)d + 20Amc0 (log s)d−1
                                    = 2Ac0 (log s)d + 20Aγc0 n

where we have used log(1/ε) = 10m and m = γn/(log s)d−1 .
                              1                  1
                                   
   Fix the constants ε0 = 400Ac  0   and γ = 4000Ac 0 . This ensures that the 2tD1 ≤ 0.01n.
                                                  2tD1            0.01n
                         n                     ne               ne
                              
From this we see that, ≤2tD 1
                                is  at most   2tD1
                                                          ≤   0.01n
                                                                           < 20.09n and we see
that step 3 takes at most 2n/10 time.
   Note that each kS computed in Step 1 is an (` + 1)-bit integer and hence, the bit
complexity of the coefficients of R is at most O(` + m + r) ≤ n. From Lemma 6.9, we see
that Step 4 takes 2n−m poly(n) time and Step 5 runs in the same time trivially. Thus, the
algorithm A takes a total of poly(n, s) · 2n/10 + poly(n) · (2n−m ) to run.

Lemma 6.19 (Correctness). Assume that A > 0 is chosen large enough so that t >
m + r + ` + 10. Then the algorithm A above outputs the number of satisfying assignments
of C.

Proof. We need to show that the algorithm A computes correctly the number of satisfying
assignments of C. To this end, define the function C 0 on n − m input bits by
                                                  X
                   C 0 (x1 , . . . , xn−m ) =              C(x1 , . . . , xn−m , c1 , . . . , cm )
                                                c∈{0,1}m



                                                      138
where the sum is over Z. It suffices to show that, for every b ∈ {0, 1}n−m , [Rt (b)/2`+1+r ]
is a correct estimate of C 0 (b) since this implies that the number of satisfying assignments
of C, which is equal to b∈{0,1}n−m C 0 (b), is computed correctly.
                         P

    From the definition of Rt (b), we see that for any b ∈ {0, 1}n−m
                                                                 
                                X      X X
 Rt (b) = R(b) (mod 2t ) =                       kS · Ft (Qσ,c
                                                            S (b))
                                                                   (mod 2t )
                                   c∈{0,1}m σ∈{0,1}r S⊆[`]
                                                                                         
                                     X        X      X
                                                             kS · Ft (Qσ,c      (mod 2t )  (mod 2t )
                                                                                         
                            =                                         S (b))
                                   c∈{0,1}m σ∈{0,1}r S⊆[`]


    For every σ ∈ {0, 1}r , c ∈ {0, 1}m , S ⊆ [`] and b ∈ {0, 1}n−m , we use the property
of the modulus amplifying polynomial Ft from Lemma 6.8, to observe that Ft (Qσ,c
                                                                             S (b))
(mod 2t ) = Qσ,c                σ,c            σ,c
               S (b) (mod 2) = PS (b) = ⊕i∈S Pi (b). This observation, along with Step
1 of the algorithm A implies that the sum S⊆[`] kS · (Ft (Qσ,c          t
                                         P
                                                           S (b)) (mod 2 )) is the same
as the value of 2`+1 · Maj(P1σ,c (b), . . . , P`σ,c (b)) = 2`+1 · P σ,c (b). In other words,

                                                  
                          X         X                                        X        X
      Rt (b) = 2`+1                        P σ,c (b) (mod 2t ) = 2`+1                        P σ,c (b)
                        c∈{0,1}m σ∈{0,1}r                                  c∈{0,1}m σ∈{0,1}r


where the last equality follows from the fact that t > m + ` + r + 10.
    Now, for every b ∈ {0, 1}n−m and c ∈ {0, 1}m , we have
                                         (
                        X                 ≥ 2r (1 − ε) if C(b, c) = 1
                               P σ,c (b)
                      σ∈{0,1}r
                                          ≤ 2r ε       if C(b, c) = 0

where ε = 2−10m . Since C 0 (b) =                                                                          n−m
                                       P
                                            c∈{0,1}m C(b, c), we have that for every b ∈ {0, 1}


              2`+1 · 2r (1 − ε)C 0 (b) ≤ Rt (b), and
                               Rt (b) ≤ 2`+1 · (2r (1 − ε)C 0 (b) + ε(2m − C 0 (b)) · 2r )
                                       ≤ 2`+1 · (2r (1 − ε)C 0 (b) + ε2m · 2r ) .

In particular, since ε = 2−10m , for every b ∈ {0, 1}n−m , we see that the estimate returned
by the algorithm, which is [Rt (b)/2`+1+r ], is equal to C 0 (b).

6.4.3      A Consequence for Lower Bounds
Our #SAT algorithm can be used to obtain improved lower bounds against AC0 [2] circuits
(and more generally, against AC0 [p] circuits for prime p), using Williams’ connection


                                                    139
between algorithms and lower bounds. These lower bounds are, however, not very explicit
- they hold for a language in ENP .
   We first remind the reader of the best “explicit” lower bounds that are known against
AC0 [2] circuits.

Theorem 6.20. [OSS19] For each positive integer d ≥ 3, there is a language computable
                                                                                  1/2d−4 )
in polynomial time that requires depth-d AC0 [2] circuits of size 2Ω(n                       .

   In fact, the lower bounds of Theorem 6.20 holds for Majority, for all d ≥ 3. Note that,
                                                                     1/2d−2 )
the earlier best known lower bound for Majority was 2Ω(n                        by [Raz87, Smo87], for
any d ≥ 2.
   In terms of parameters, the bound in Theorem 6.20 is weaker than the best known
bound for AC0 circuits as a function of d. Parity is known to require depth-d circuits of
         1/(d−1) )
size 2Ω(n             . It has been a longstanding open problem to improve the lower bound in
Theorem 6.20 for some function in ENP , to match the AC0 lower bound for Parity. Note
that [OSS19] show that we can’t hope to prove such a lower bound for any symmetric
function (like Majority). Using the algorithmic method of Williams and its refinements,
we are able to use our #SAT algorithm to make progress on this problem.
   The following lemma can be shown using the proof technique of Theorem 1.5 in
[BSV14].

Lemma 6.21. [Wil13a, BSV14] Let s be a size function and d be a positive integer such
that satisfiability can be solved deterministically in time 2n /nω(1) on AC0 [2]-circuits of size
O(s(n)) and depth at most d on n variables. Then there is a language in ENP which does
not have AC0 [2] circuits of depth d − 1 and size o(s(n)).

   We now apply the lemma to get better lower bounds than Theorem 6.20 in terms of
size against AC0 [2] circuits when the depth is at least 3. A similar lower bound against
AC0 [p] circuits can be shown for prime p using the analogue of Theorem 6.1 for AC0 [p]
circuits. The following result is simply a re-statement of Theorem 6.3.

Theorem 6.22. For any positive integer d, there is a language in ENP which does not
                                                     1/(d+1) )
have AC0 [2] circuits of depth d and size 2o(n                   .

Proof. Pick ε < ε0 , where ε0 is the constant in Theorem 6.1. By Theorem 6.1, for any size
            1/(d+1)
s ≤ 2(εn)             , there is a deterministic algorithm solving satisfiability of AC0 [2] circuits
of size at most s and depth at most d + 1 in time 2n /nω(1) . Now using Lemma 6.21, we
have that there is a language in ENP which does not have AC0 [2] circuits of depth d and
size o(s(n)), which establishes our claim.



                                                    140
6.5                Future Directions
In this chapter, we showed a deterministic algorithm to count the number of satisfying
                                                                              1/d )
assignments for AC0 [2]-circuits of depth d and size s ≤ 2O(n                         , which beats brute-force
search with savings O(lognd−1 s) . A minor caveat is that we require the circuit size to be
       1/d )
2O(n           in Theorem 6.1, for technical reasons. One would expect that the analysis can be
                                               1/(d−1)
extended to circuit size up to 2n                        .
    We also use the algorithm in Theorem 6.1 to show a lower bound for ENP against AC0 [2]
                                 1/d+1 )
circuits of depth d and size 2Ω(n        . This lower bound has recently been improved to
               2    1/d−1 )                                                                         1/d−1 )
2Ω((n/ log n)                 by [Vio20]. It would be interesting to see if we can get the 2Ω(n               lower
                     NP                                                               0
bound for E , which is its best known lower bound against AC .
   For explicit functions like Majority, [OSS19] showed an improved AC0 [2]-circuit size
upper bound of 2O(n
                 e 1/(1.5d−6) )                                      1/(2d−4) )
                                (for d ≥ 5) and a lower bound of 2Ω(n           , improving on a
longstanding gap between the two. An interesting question would be to find the optimal
size bound for Majority at large depths ([OSS19] show tight bounds when the depth is 3
or 4). Another question is to use the more refined structural information about AC0 [2]
circuits exploited in the proof of Theorem 6.1 to prove lower bounds for other explicit
problems.
       Additionally, we can improve our understanding of the structure of AC0 [2] circuits by
studying other related meta-computational questions. [CIKK16] show quasi-polynomial
time learning algorithms for AC0 [2] using membership queries over the uniform distribu-
tion. As a next step, designing learning algorithms for AC0 [2] using random examples,
even over the uniform distribution is of great interest.
       Constructing PRGs which fool AC0 [2] circuits is another interesting research direction.
We refer to [CR20, CLW20] for recent advances on strong average-case lower bounds for
AC0 [2], which are tightly connected to the construction of such PRGs. In particular,
[CLW20] show that there exists an ε = ε(d) > 0 and a function in ENP that cannot be
                     ε                                                    ε
(1/2 + 1/2n )-approximated by any ACC0d circuit of size 2n (which contains AC0 [2]).5 An
important feature of this result is that the lower bound holds for almost all input lengths,
whereas previously, the algorithmic method only provided infinitely often lower bounds,
including Theorem 6.22. Using this average-case lower bound, they show the construction
of an ENP computable PRG of seed length poly(log n) which fools sub-exponential size
ACC0 circuits, on almost every input length. The questions of proving strong average-case
lower bounds for functions in E, or constructing EXP-computable PRGs of seed length
no(1) (for stretch n) still remains a challenge.


   5
       Using the techniques of [CP19], ε = 1/O(d).


                                                             141
Chapter 7

Concluding Remarks

The results presented in this thesis explore the complexity of meta-computational prob-
lems, and encompass the study of lower bounds for the minimum circuit size problem
(and minimum time bounded Kolmogorov complexity problem), hardness of learning
circuit classes, #SAT algorithmic upper bounds for restricted circuit classes, and their
connections with lower bounds in complexity theory. The proofs combine and extend
techniques from different areas in theoretical computer science, building on approaches
to circuit lower bounds developed over the last few years. Main conceptual contributions
include the introduction of the locality barrier for hardness magnification, and the initia-
tion of a top-down approach for proving hardness of learning powerful circuit classes. We
also discuss future research directions at the end of each chapter. Particularly interesting
directions include:

   • Does the study of MCSP lead us to strong circuit lower bounds? Can we use our
     understanding of the locality barrier to design new lower bound techniques for MCSP
     or hardness magnification theorems, and prove strong separations like NP 6⊆ NC1 ?

   • Is it possible to prove the NP-Hardness of PAC-learning NP/poly efficiently using
     random examples, via non-black-box and/or relativisable reductions? It would be
     interesting to even study the existence of a relativisation barrier for proving such
     hardness results, or for that matter, NP-Hardness of learning P/poly.

   • Can we design deterministically computable PRGs of small seed length (such as
     no(1) ), or learning algorithms using random examples over the uniform distribution
     for AC0 [2]? Even answering these questions for slightly weaker classes like AC0 -XOR
     would be interesting, considering its benefits to hardness magnification.

    Going forward, the main challenge for researchers is still to understand the class
of general circuits better. This includes proving unconditional results on circuit lower
bounds, as well as computational questions associated with related meta-computational

                                            142
problems, like the hardness of learning P/poly, uniform or non-uniform hardness of MCSP,
or designing Circuit-SAT algorithms, to name a few. At this stage, we seem to need to
make significant progress to tackle any of these questions, and it is unclear what sort of
mathematical ideas we require for this task.
  On the positive side, we have seen many recent advances in the theory of lower bounds
based on its connections with meta-computational problems, and vice versa. We believe
that further exploration along these lines will lead us to a more rigorous understanding of
the power and limitations of various computational devices, and complexity lower bounds.




                                           143
Bibliography

   [AB09] Sanjeev Arora and Boaz Barak. Computational complexity: a modern ap-
          proach. Cambridge University Press, 2009.

[ABK+ 06] Eric Allender, Harry Buhrman, Michal Kouckỳ, Dieter Van Melkebeek, and
          Detlef Ronneburger. Power from random strings. SIAM Journal on Com-
          puting, 35(6):1467–1493, 2006.

  [ABX08] Benny Applebaum, Boaz Barak, and David Xiao. On basing lower-bounds
          for learning on worst-case assumptions. In Symposium on Foundations of
          Computer Science (FOCS), pages 211–220, 2008.

 [ACW16] Josh Alman, Timothy M. Chan, and R. Ryan Williams. Polynomial repre-
          sentations of threshold functions and algorithmic applications. In Irit Dinur,
          editor, IEEE 57th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
          FOCS 2016, 9-11 October 2016, Hyatt Regency, New Brunswick, New Jer-
          sey, USA, pages 467–476. IEEE Computer Society, 2016.

[AGGM06] Adi Akavia, Oded Goldreich, Shafi Goldwasser, and Dana Moshkovitz. On
          basing one-way functions on NP-hardness. In Jon M. Kleinberg, editor,
          Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
          Seattle, WA, USA, May 21-23, 2006, pages 701–710. ACM, 2006.

[AGHP92] Noga Alon, Oded Goldreich, Johan Håstad, and René Peralta. Simple con-
          structions of almost k-wise independent random variables. Random Struc-
          tures & Algorithms, 3(3):289–304, 1992.

 [AHK17] Eric Allender, Dhiraj Holden, and Valentine Kabanets. The minimum oracle
          circuit size problem. computational complexity, 26(2):469–496, 2017.

[AHM+ 08] Eric Allender, Lisa Hellerstein, Paul McCabe, Toniann Pitassi, and
          Michael E. Saks. Minimizing Disjunctive Normal Form Formulas and AC0
          Circuits Given a Truth Table. SIAM J. Comput., 38(1):63–84, 2008.



                                        144
   [AJ08] Alexander E. Andreev and Stasys Jukna. Very large cliques are easy to
          detect. Discrete Mathematics, 308(16):3717–3721, 2008.
                           P1
  [Ajt83] Miklós Ajtai.    1 -formulae on finite structures. Annals of Pure and Applied
          Logic, 24(1):1–48, 1983.

  [AK10] Eric Allender and Michal Koucký. Amplifying lower bounds by means of
          self-reducibility. J. ACM, 57(3):14:1–14:36, 2010.

   [All01] Eric Allender.       When worlds collide: Derandomization, lower bounds,
          and Kolmogorov complexity. In International Conference on Foundations
          of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science, pages 1–15.
          Springer, 2001.

   [All17] Eric Allender. The complexity of complexity. In Computability and Com-
          plexity, pages 79–94. Springer, 2017.

   [All20] Eric Allender. The new complexity landscape around circuit minimization.
           In International Conference on Language and Automata Theory and Appli-
          cations, pages 3–16. Springer, 2020.

[ALM+ 98] Sanjeev Arora, Carsten Lund, Rajeev Motwani, Madhu Sudan, and Mario
          Szegedy. Proof verification and the hardness of approximation problems.
          Journal of the ACM (JACM), 45(3):501–555, 1998.

  [Ang88] Dana Angluin. Queries and concept learning. Machine learning, 2(4):319–
          342, 1988.

   [AS98] Sanjeev Arora and Shmuel Safra. Probabilistic checking of proofs: A new
          characterization of NP. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 45(1):70–122, 1998.

  [Baz09] Louay M. J. Bazzi. Polylogarithmic independence can fool DNF formulas.
          SIAM J. Comput., 38(6):2220–2272, 2009.

   [BB15] Andrej Bogdanov and Christina Brzuska. On basing size-verifiable one-way
          functions on NP-hardness. In Yevgeniy Dodis and Jesper Buus Nielsen, ed-
          itors, Theory of Cryptography - 12th Theory of Cryptography Conference,
          TCC 2015, Warsaw, Poland, March 23-25, 2015, Proceedings, Part I, vol-
          ume 9014 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 1–6. Springer, 2015.

[BFKL93] Avrim Blum, Merrick Furst, Michael Kearns, and Richard J Lipton. Crypto-
         graphic primitives based on hard learning problems. In Annual International
          Cryptology Conference, pages 278–291. Springer, 1993.

                                          145
  [BFL91] László Babai, Lance Fortnow, and Carsten Lund. Non-deterministic expo-
          nential time has two-prover interactive protocols. Computational complexity,
          1(1):3–40, 1991.

[BFNW93] László Babai, Lance Fortnow, Noam Nisan, and Avi Wigderson. BPP has
          subexponential time simulations unless EXPTIME has publishable proofs.
          Computational Complexity, 3:307–318, 1993.

  [BFT98] Harry Buhrman, Lance Fortnow, and Thomas Thierauf. Nonrelativizing
          separations. In Proceedings. Thirteenth Annual IEEE Conference on Com-
          putational Complexity (Formerly: Structure in Complexity Theory Confer-
          ence)(Cat. No. 98CB36247), pages 8–12. IEEE, 1998.

   [BIS12] Paul Beame, Russell Impagliazzo, and Srikanth Srinivasan. Approximating
          AC0 by small height decision trees and a deterministic algorithm for #AC0 -
          SAT. In 2012 IEEE 27th Conference on Computational Complexity, pages
          117–125. IEEE, 2012.

  [BSV14] Eli Ben-Sasson and Emanuele Viola. Short PCPs with projection queries.
          In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming,
          pages 163–173. Springer, 2014.

   [BT94] Richard Beigel and Jun Tarui. On ACC. Computational Complexity, 4:350–
          366, 1994.

   [BT06] Andrej Bogdanov and Luca Trevisan. On worst-case to average-case re-
          ductions for NP problems. SIAM Journal on Computing, 36(4):1119–1159,
          2006.

 [CGJ+ 18] Mahdi Cheraghchi, Elena Grigorescu, Brendan Juba, Karl Wimmer, and
          Ning Xie. AC0 ◦ MOD2 lower bounds for the Boolean Inner Product. J.
          Comput. Syst. Sci., 97:45–59, 2018.

  [Che15] Ruiwen Chen. Satisfiability algorithms and lower bounds for Boolean for-
          mulas over finite bases. In International Symposium on Mathematical Foun-
          dations of Computer Science, pages 223–234. Springer, 2015.

  [Che19] Lijie Chen. Non-deterministic quasi-polynomial time is average-case hard
          for ACC circuits. In 2019 IEEE 60th Annual Symposium on Foundations of
          Computer Science (FOCS), pages 1281–1304. IEEE, 2019.



                                       146
[CHMY20] Mahdi Cheraghchi, Shuichi Hirahara, Dimitrios Myrisiotis, and Yuichi
          Yoshida. One-tape turing machine and branching program lower bounds for
          MCSP. In Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC),
          volume 103, 2020.

[CHO+ 20] Lijie Chen, Shuichi Hirahara, Igor Carboni Oliveira, Ján Pich, Ninad Raj-
          gopal, and Rahul Santhanam. Beyond natural proofs: Hardness magnifica-
          tion and locality. In Thomas Vidick, editor, 11th Innovations in Theoretical
          Computer Science Conference, ITCS 2020, January 12-14, 2020, Seattle,
          Washington, USA, volume 151 of LIPIcs, pages 70:1–70:48. Schloss Dagstuhl
          - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020.

 [CIKK16] Marco L. Carmosino, Russell Impagliazzo, Valentine Kabanets, and Anton-
          ina Kolokolova. Learning algorithms from natural proofs. In Conference on
          Computational Complexity (CCC), pages 10:1–10:24, 2016.

 [CILM18] Marco L Carmosino, Russell Impagliazzo, Shachar Lovett, and Ivan Miha-
          jlin. Hardness amplification for non-commutative arithmetic circuits. In
          33rd Computational Complexity Conference (CCC 2018). Schloss Dagstuhl-
          Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2018.

 [CJW19] Lijie Chen, Ce Jin, and Ryan Williams. Hardness magnification for all sparse
         NP languages. In Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
          2019.

 [CJW20] Lijie Chen, Ce Jin, and R. Ryan Williams. Sharp threshold results for
         computational complexity. In Konstantin Makarychev, Yury Makarychev,
          Madhur Tulsiani, Gautam Kamath, and Julia Chuzhoy, editors, Proccedings
          of the 52nd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing,
          STOC 2020, Chicago, IL, USA, June 22-26, 2020, pages 1335–1348. ACM,
          2020.

   [CK15] Ruiwen Chen and Valentine Kabanets. Correlation bounds and #SAT algo-
          rithms for small linear-size circuits. In International Computing and Com-
          binatorics Conference, pages 211–222. Springer, 2015.

[CKK+ 15] Ruiwen Chen, Valentine Kabanets, Antonina Kolokolova, Ronen Shaltiel,
          and David Zuckerman. Mining circuit lower bound proofs for meta-
          algorithms. Computational Complexity, 24(2):333–392, 2015.




                                       147
 [CKLM19] Mahdi Cheraghchi, Valentine Kabanets, Zhenjian Lu, and Dimitrios Myri-
           siotis. Circuit lower bounds for MCSP from local pseudorandom generators.
           In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming
           (ICALP), pages 39:1–39:14, 2019.

   [CKS16] Ruiwen Chen, Valentine Kabanets, and Nitin Saurabh. An improved de-
           terministic #SAT algorithm for small De Morgan formulas. Algorithmica,
           76(1):68–87, 2016.

  [CLW20] Lijie Chen, Xin Lyu, and Ryan Williams. Almost-everywhere circuit lower
           bounds from non-trivial derandomization. In Symposium on Foundations of
           Computer Science (FOCS), 2020.

[CMMW19] Lijie Chen, Dylan M. McKay, Cody D. Murray, and R. Ryan Williams.
           Relations and equivalences between circuit lower bounds and Karp-Lipton
           theorems. In Computational Complexity Conference (CCC), 2019.

   [COS17] Xi Chen, Igor Carboni Oliveira, and Rocco A. Servedio. Addition is expo-
           nentially harder than counting for shallow monotone circuits. In Symposium
           on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 1232–1245, 2017.

   [COS18] Ruiwen Chen, Igor C Oliveira, and Rahul Santhanam. An average-case
           lower bound against ACC0 . In Latin American Symposium on Theoretical
           Informatics, pages 317–330. Springer, 2018.

    [CP19] Shiteng Chen and Periklis A Papakonstantinou. Depth reduction for com-
           posites. SIAM Journal on Computing, 48(2):668–686, 2019.

    [CR20] Lijie Chen and Hanlin Ren. Strong average-case lower bounds from non-
           trivial derandomization. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual ACM SIGACT
           Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 1327–1334, 2020.

    [CS12] Arkadev Chattopadhyay and Rahul Santhanam. Lower bounds on interac-
           tive compressibility by constant-depth circuits. In Symposium on Founda-
           tions of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 619–628, 2012.

    [CS15] Ruiwen Chen and Rahul Santhanam. Improved algorithms for sparse MAX-
           SAT and MAX-k-CSP. In International Conference on Theory and Applica-
           tions of Satisfiability Testing, pages 33–45. Springer, 2015.




                                         148
   [CT19] Lijie Chen and Roei Tell. Bootstrapping results for threshold circuits “just
          beyond” known lower bounds. In Symposium on Theory of Computing
          (STOC), 2019.

  [CW16] Timothy M. Chan and Ryan Williams.           Deterministic APSP, orthogo-
          nal vectors, and more: Quickly derandomizing Razborov-Smolensky. In
          Robert Krauthgamer, editor, Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual
          ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2016, Arlington,
          VA, USA, January 10-12, 2016, pages 1246–1255. SIAM, 2016.

  [CW19] Lijie Chen and R. Ryan Williams. Stronger connections between circuit
         analysis and circuit lower bounds, via PCPs of proximity. In Amir Shpilka,
          editor, 34th Computational Complexity Conference, CCC 2019, July 18-20,
          2019, New Brunswick, NJ, USA, volume 137 of LIPIcs, pages 19:1–19:43.
          Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019.

[DETT10] Anindya De, Omid Etesami, Luca Trevisan, and Madhur Tulsiani. Improved
          pseudorandom generators for depth 2 circuits. In Approximation, random-
          ization, and combinatorial optimization. Algorithms and techniques, pages
          504–517. Springer, 2010.

   [DF13] Rodney G. Downey and Michael R. Fellows. Fundamentals of Parameterized
          Complexity. Texts in Computer Science. Springer, 2013.

   [FF93] Joan Feigenbaum and Lance Fortnow. Random-self-reducibility of complete
          sets. SIAM Journal on Computing, 22(5):994–1005, 1993.

   [FK09] Lance Fortnow and Adam R Klivans. Efficient learning algorithms yield
          circuit lower bounds. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 75(1):27–
          36, 2009.

  [For02] Jürgen Forster. A linear lower bound on the unbounded error probabilistic
          communication complexity. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 65(4):612–625, 2002.

 [FRS94] Lance Fortnow, John Rompel, and Michael Sipser. On the power of multi-
          prover interactive protocols. Theoretical Computer Science, 134(2):545–557,
          1994.

   [FS97] Yoav Freund and Robert E Schapire. A decision-theoretic generalization of
          on-line learning and an application to boosting. Journal of computer and
          system sciences, 55(1):119–139, 1997.


                                        149
  [FSS84] Merrick L. Furst, James B. Saxe, and Michael Sipser. Parity, circuits, and
          the polynomial-time hierarchy. Mathematical Systems Theory, 17(1):13–27,
          1984.

[GGM86] O Goldreich, S Goldwasser, and S Micali. How to construct random func-
          tions. Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery, 33(4):792–807,
          1986.

 [GII+ 19] Alexander Golovnev, Rahul Ilango, Russell Impagliazzo, Valentine Ka-
          banets, Antonina Kolokolova, and Avishay Tal. AC0 [p] lower bounds against
          MCSP via the coin problem. In 46th International Colloquium on Au-
          tomata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2019). Schloss Dagstuhl-
          Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2019.

   [Gil98] David Gillman. A Chernoff bound for random walks on expander graphs.
           SIAM Journal on Computing, 27(4):1203–1220, 1998.

[GKRS19] Mika Göös, Pritish Kamath, Robert Robere, and Dmitry Sokolov. Adven-
         tures in monotone complexity and TFNP. In Innovations in Theoretical
          Computer Science Conference (ITCS), pages 38:1–38:19, 2019.

[GKST16] Alexander Golovnev, Alexander S Kulikov, Alexander V Smal, and Suguru
         Tamaki. Circuit size lower bounds and #SAT upper bounds through a gen-
          eral framework. In 41st International Symposium on Mathematical Founda-
          tions of Computer Science (MFCS 2016). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum
          fuer Informatik, 2016.

   [GL94] Craig Gotsman and Nathan Linial. Spectral properties of threshold func-
          tions. Combinatorica, 14(1):35–50, 1994.

   [GS10] Parikshit Gopalan and Rocco A. Servedio. Learning and lower bounds for
          AC0 with threshold gates. In International Conference on Randomization
          and Computation (RANDOM), pages 588–601, 2010.

 [GST07] Dan Gutfreund, Ronen Shaltiel, and Amnon Ta-Shma. If NP languages are
          hard on the worst-case, then it is easy to find their hard instances. Comput.
          Complex., 16(4):412–441, 2007.

  [GV08] Dan Gutfreund and Salil P. Vadhan. Limitations of hardness vs. random-
          ness under uniform reductions. In Ashish Goel, Klaus Jansen, José D. P.
          Rolim, and Ronitt Rubinfeld, editors, Approximation, Randomization and


                                        150
         Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques, 11th International
         Workshop, APPROX 2008, and 12th International Workshop, RANDOM
         2008, Boston, MA, USA, August 25-27, 2008. Proceedings, volume 5171 of
         Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 469–482. Springer, 2008.

 [Hås86] John Håstad. Almost optimal lower bounds for small depth circuits. In Pro-
         ceedings of the eighteenth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing,
         pages 6–20, 1986.

 [Hås98] Johan Håstad. The shrinkage exponent of De Morgan formulas is 2. SIAM
         J. Comput., 27(1):48–64, 1998.

 [Hea08] Alexander D Healy. Randomness-efficient sampling within NC. Computa-
         tional Complexity, 17(1):3–37, 2008.

 [HH13] Ryan C Harkins and John M Hitchcock. Exact learning algorithms, betting
         games, and circuit lower bounds. ACM Transactions on Computation Theory
         (TOCT), 5(4):1–11, 2013.

 [Hir18] Shuichi Hirahara.    Non-black-box worst-case to average-case reductions
         within NP. In Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
         pages 247–258, 2018.

[Hir20a] Shuichi Hirahara. Characterizing average-case complexity of ph by worst-
         case meta-complexity. In Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
         (FOCS), 2020.

[Hir20b] Shuichi Hirahara. Non-disjoint promise problems from meta-computational
         view of pseudorandom generator constructions. In Shubhangi Saraf, editor,
         35th Computational Complexity Conference, CCC 2020, July 28-31, 2020,
         Saarbrücken, Germany (Virtual Conference), volume 169 of LIPIcs, pages
         20:1–20:47. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020.

[HLW06] Shlomo Hoory, Nathan Linial, and Avi Wigderson. Expander graphs and
         their applications. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.), 43(4):439–561, 2006.

[HOS18] Shuichi Hirahara, Igor C Oliveira, and Rahul Santhanam. NP-hardness of
         minimum circuit size problem for OR-AND-MOD circuits. In Proceedings
         of the 33rd Computational Complexity Conference, pages 1–31, 2018.




                                       151
 [HP15] John M Hitchcock and Aduri Pavan. On the NP-completeness of the min-
         imum circuit size problem. In 35th IARCS Annual Conference on Founda-
         tions of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science (FSTTCS
         2015). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2015.

 [HS17] Shuichi Hirahara and Rahul Santhanam. On the average-case complexity of
         MCSP and its variants. In Computational Complexity Conference (CCC),
         pages 7:1–7:20, 2017.

[HW19] Shuichi Hirahara and Osamu Watanabe. On nonadaptive reductions to the
         set of random strings and its dense subsets. Electronic Colloquium on Com-
         putational Complexity (ECCC), 26:25, 2019.

[IKV18] Russell Impagliazzo, Valentine Kabanets, and Ilya Volkovich. The power of
         natural properties as oracles. In 33rd Computational Complexity Conference
         (CCC 2018). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2018.

[IKW02] Russell Impagliazzo, Valentine Kabanets, and Avi Wigderson. In search of
         an easy witness: Exponential time vs. probabilistic polynomial time. Journal
         of Computer and System Sciences, 65(4):672–694, 2002.

  [IL90] Russell Impagliazzo and Levin LA. No better ways to generate hard NP
         instances than picking uniformly at random. In Proceedings [1990] 31st
         Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 812–821.
         IEEE, 1990.

 [Ila20a] Rahul Ilango. Approaching MCSP from above and below: Hardness for a
         conditional variant and AC0 [p]. In 11th Innovations in Theoretical Com-
         puter Science Conference (ITCS 2020). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum
         für Informatik, 2020.

 [Ila20b] Rahul Ilango. The constant depth formula and partial function versions
         of MCSP are hard. In Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
         (FOCS), 2020.

[ILO20] Rahul Ilango, Bruno Loff, and Igor Carboni Oliveira. NP-hardness of circuit
         minimization for multi-output functions. In 35th Computational Complexity
         Conference (CCC 2020). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik,
         2020.




                                      152
[Imp11] Russell Impagliazzo. Relativized separations of worst-case and average-case
        complexities for NP. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual IEEE Conference
        on Computational Complexity, CCC 2011, San Jose, California, USA, June
        8-10, 2011, pages 104–114. IEEE Computer Society, 2011.

[IMP12] Russell Impagliazzo, William Matthews, and Ramamohan Paturi. A satis-
        fiability algorithm for AC0 . In Proceedings of the twenty-third annual ACM-
        SIAM symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 961–972. SIAM, 2012.

[IMZ19] Russell Impagliazzo, Raghu Meka, and David Zuckerman. Pseudorandom-
        ness from shrinkage. J. ACM, 66(2):11:1–11:16, 2019.

[IPS97] Russell Impagliazzo, Ramamohan Paturi, and Michael E. Saks. Size-depth
        tradeoffs for threshold circuits. SIAM J. Comput., 26(3):693–707, 1997.

[IPZ01] Russell Impagliazzo, Ramamohan Paturi, and Francis Zane. Which problems
        have strongly exponential complexity? J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 63(4):512–530,
        2001.

 [IW97] Russell Impagliazzo and Avi Wigderson. P = BPP if E requires exponential
        circuits: Derandomizing the XOR lemma. In Proceedings of the twenty-ninth
        annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 220–229, 1997.

 [IW01] Russell Impagliazzo and Avi Wigderson. Randomness vs time: Derandom-
        ization under a uniform assumption. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 63(4):672–688,
        2001.

 [Jac97] Jeffrey C Jackson. An efficient membership-query algorithm for learning
        DNF with respect to the uniform distribution. Journal of Computer and
        System Sciences, 55(3):414–440, 1997.

 [Jer09] Emil Jerábek. Approximate counting by hashing in bounded arithmetic. J.
        Symb. Log., 74(3):829–860, 2009.

[Juk12] Stasys Jukna.     Boolean Function Complexity - Advances and Frontiers.
        Springer, 2012.

 [Jus72] Jørn Justesen. Class of constructive asymptotically good algebraic codes.
        IEEE Trans. Information Theory, 18(5):652–656, 1972.

 [KC00] Valentine Kabanets and Jin-Yi Cai. Circuit minimization problem. In Pro-
        ceedings of the thirty-second annual ACM symposium on Theory of comput-
        ing, pages 73–79, 2000.

                                     153
[KKL+ 20] Valentine Kabanets, Sajin Koroth, Zhenjian Lu, Dimitrios Myrisiotis, and
          Igor Oliveira. Algorithms and lower bounds for De Morgan formulas of low-
          communication leaf gates. In 35th Computational Complexity Conference
          (CCC 2020). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020.

 [KKO13] Adam Klivans, Pravesh Kothari, and Igor Carboni Oliveira. Constructing
          hard functions using learning algorithms. In Conference on Computational
          Complexity (CCC), pages 86–97. IEEE, 2013.

   [KL80] Richard M Karp and Richard J Lipton. Some connections between nonuni-
          form and uniform complexity classes. In Proceedings of the twelfth annual
          ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 302–309, 1980.

  [KM93] Eyal Kushilevitz and Yishay Mansour. Learning decision trees using the
          fourier spectrum. SIAM Journal on Computing, 22(6):1331–1348, 1993.

  [KR13] Ilan Komargodski and Raz Ran. Average-case lower bounds for formula size.
          In Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), 2013.

 [KRT17] Ilan Komargodski, Ran Raz, and Avishay Tal. Improved average-case lower
          bounds for De Morgan formula size: Matching worst-case lower bound.
          SIAM Journal on Computing, 46(1):37–57, 2017.

   [KS18] Swastik Kopparty and Srikanth Srinivasan.      Certifying polynomials for
             0
          AC [⊕] circuits, with applications to lower bounds and circuit compression.
          Theory of Computing, 14(1):1–24, 2018.

 [KV94a] Michael Kearns and Leslie Valiant. Cryptographic limitations on learn-
          ing Boolean formulae and finite automata. Journal of the ACM (JACM),
          41(1):67–95, 1994.

 [KV94b] Michael J Kearns and Umesh Vazirani. An introduction to computational
          learning theory. 1994.

  [KW90] Mauricio Karchmer and Avi Wigderson. Monotone circuits for connectivity
          require super-logarithmic depth. SIAM J. Discrete Math., 3(2):255–265,
          1990.

  [Lev84] Leonid A Levin. Randomness conservation inequalities; information and
          independence in mathematical theories. Information and Control, 61(1):15–
          37, 1984.



                                       154
 [LMN93] Nathan Linial, Yishay Mansour, and Noam Nisan. Constant depth circuits,
          fourier transform, and learnability. J. ACM, 40(3):607–620, 1993.

   [LP20] Yanyi Liu and Rafael Pass. On one-way functions and Kolmogorov com-
          plexity. In Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC),
          volume 27, page 52, 2020.

[LPT+ 17] Daniel Lokshtanov, Ramamohan Paturi, Suguru Tamaki, Ryan Williams,
          and Huacheng Yu. Beating brute force for systems of polynomial equations
          over finite fields. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual ACM-SIAM
          Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 2190–2202. SIAM, 2017.

  [LW13] Richard J. Lipton and Ryan Williams. Amplifying circuit lower bounds
          against polynomial time, with applications.     Computational Complexity,
          22(2):311–343, 2013.

   [LY94] Richard J Lipton and Neal E Young. Simple strategies for large zero-sum
          games with applications to complexity theory. In Proceedings of the twenty-
          sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 734–740, 1994.

[MMW19] Dylan M. McKay, Cody D. Murray, and R. Ryan Williams. Weak lower
          bounds on resource-bounded compression imply strong separations of com-
          plexity classes. In Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), 2019.

  [MP20] Moritz Müller and Ján Pich. Feasibly constructive proofs of succinct weak
          circuit lower bounds. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 171(2):102735, 2020.

 [MW17] Cody D. Murray and R. Ryan Williams. On the (non) NP-hardness of
          computing circuit complexity. Theory Comput., 13(1):1–22, 2017.

 [MW18] Cody Murray and Ryan Williams. Circuit lower bounds for nondeterministic
          quasi-polytime: an easy witness lemma for NP and NQP. In Proceedings of
          the 50th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages
          890–901, 2018.

  [NN93] Joseph Naor and Moni Naor. Small-bias probability spaces: Efficient con-
         structions and applications. SIAM journal on computing, 22(4):838–856,
          1993.

  [NR04] Moni Naor and Omer Reingold. Number-theoretic constructions of efficient
         pseudo-random functions. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 51(2):231–262,
          2004.

                                       155
[NW94] Noam Nisan and Avi Wigderson. Hardness vs randomness. Journal of
        computer and System Sciences, 49(2):149–167, 1994.

[O’D14] Ryan O’Donnell. Analysis of Boolean functions. Cambridge University Press,
        2014.

 [Oli13] Igor C Oliveira. Algorithms versus circuit lower bounds. arXiv preprint
         arXiv:1309.0249, 2013.

 [Oli19] Igor Carboni Oliveira. Randomness and intractability in Kolmogorov com-
        plexity. In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Pro-
        gramming (ICALP), pages 32:1–32:14, 2019.

[OPS19] Igor Carboni Oliveira, Ján Pich, and Rahul Santhanam. Hardness magni-
        fication near state-of-the-art lower bounds. In Computational Complexity
        Conference (CCC), 2019.

 [OS15] Igor Carboni Oliveira and Rahul Santhanam. Majority is incompressible by
        AC0 [p] circuits. In Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC), pages
        124–157, 2015.

 [OS17] Igor Carboni Oliveira and Rahul Santhanam. Conspiracies between learning
        algorithms, circuit lower bounds, and pseudorandomness. In Computational
        Complexity Conference (CCC), pages 18:1–18:49, 2017.

[OS18a] Igor Carboni Oliveira and Rahul Santhanam. Hardness magnification for
        natural problems.   In Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
        (FOCS), pages 65–76, 2018.

[OS18b] Igor Carboni Oliveira and Rahul Santhanam. Pseudo-derandomizing learn-
        ing and approximation. In International Conference on Randomization and
        Computation (RANDOM), pages 55:1–55:19, 2018.

[OSS19] Igor Carboni Oliveira, Rahul Santhanam, and Srikanth Srinivasan. Parity
        helps to compute majority. In 34th Computational Complexity Conference
        (CCC 2019). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2019.

[PPZ97] Ramamohan Paturi, Pavel Pudlák, and Francis Zane. Satisfiability coding
        lemma. In Proceedings 38th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
        Science, pages 566–574. IEEE, 1997.




                                     156
  [PS19] Jan Pich and Rahul Santhanam. Why are proof complexity lower bounds
         hard? In 2019 IEEE 60th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
         Science (FOCS), pages 1305–1324. IEEE, 2019.

 [Raz85] Alexander A. Razborov. Lower bounds on the monotone complexity of some
         Boolean functions. Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR, 281:798–801, 1985. En-
         glish translation in: Soviet Mathematics Doklady 31:354–357, 1985.

 [Raz87] Alexander A. Razborov. Lower bounds on the size of constant-depth net-
         works over a complete basis with logical addition. Mathematicheskie Za-
         metki, 41(4):598–607, 1987.

 [Rei11] Ben W. Reichardt. Reflections for quantum query algorithms. In Symposium
         on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 560–569, 2011.

 [RR97] Alexander A. Razborov and Steven Rudich. Natural proofs. J. Comput.
         Syst. Sci., 55(1):24–35, 1997.

  [RS21] Ninad Rajgopal and Rahul Santhanam. On the structure of learnability
         beyond P/Poly. In Mary Wootters and Laura Sanità, editors, Approxi-
         mation, Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and
         Techniques, APPROX/RANDOM 2021, August 16-18, 2021, University of
         Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA (Virtual Conference), volume 207
         of LIPIcs, pages 46:1–46:23. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Infor-
         matik, 2021.

 [RSS18] Ninad Rajgopal, Rahul Santhanam, and Srikanth Srinivasan. Deterministi-
         cally counting satisfying assignments for constant-depth circuits with parity
         gates, with implications for lower bounds. In Igor Potapov, Paul G. Spirakis,
         and James Worrell, editors, 43rd International Symposium on Mathemati-
         cal Foundations of Computer Science, MFCS 2018, August 27-31, 2018,
         Liverpool, UK, volume 117 of LIPIcs, pages 78:1–78:15. Schloss Dagstuhl -
         Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018.

[RVW02] Omer Reingold, Salil Vadhan, and Avi Wigderson. Entropy waves, the
         zig-zag graph product, and new constant-degree expanders and extractors.
         Annals of Mathematics, 155(1):157–187, 2002.

 [San10] Rahul Santhanam. Fighting perebor: New and improved algorithms for
         formula and qbf satisfiability. In 2010 IEEE 51st Annual Symposium on
         Foundations of Computer Science, pages 183–192. IEEE, 2010.

                                          157
[San13] Rahul Santhanam. Ironic complicity: Satisfiability algorithms and circuit
        lower bounds. Bulletin of EATCS, 1(106), 2013.

[San20] Rahul Santhanam. Pseudorandomness and the minimum circuit size prob-
        lem. In Thomas Vidick, editor, 11th Innovations in Theoretical Computer
        Science Conference, ITCS 2020, January 12-14, 2020, Seattle, Washington,
        USA, volume 151 of LIPIcs, pages 68:1–68:26. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-
        Zentrum für Informatik, 2020.

[Sha49] Claude E Shannon. The synthesis of two-terminal switching circuits. The
        Bell System Technical Journal, 28(1):59–98, 1949.

[Smo87] Roman Smolensky. Algebraic methods in the theory of lower bounds for
        Boolean circuit complexity. In Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC),
        pages 77–82, 1987.

 [Sri03] Aravind Srinivasan. On the approximability of clique and related maximiza-
        tion problems. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 67(3):633–651, 2003.

 [SS96] Michael Sipser and Daniel A. Spielman. Expander codes. IEEE Trans.
        Information Theory, 42(6):1710–1722, 1996.

 [SS20] Michael Saks and Rahul Santhanam. Circuit lower bounds from NP-hardness
        of MCSP under turing reductions.       In 35th Computational Complexity
        Conference (CCC 2020). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik,
        2020.

 [ST13] Kazuhisa Seto and Suguru Tamaki. A satisfiability algorithm and average-
        case hardness for formulas over the full binary basis. Computational Com-
        plexity, 22(2):245–274, 2013.

 [ST17] Rocco A Servedio and Li-Yang Tan. What circuit classes can be learned
        with non-trivial savings? In 8th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Sci-
        ence Conference (ITCS 2017). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Infor-
        matik, 2017.

[Tal14] Avishay Tal. Shrinkage of De Morgan formulae by spectral techniques. In
        Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 551–560,
        2014.

[Tal15] Avishay Tal. #SAT algorithms from shrinkage. In Electronic Colloquium on
        Computational Complexity (ECCC), volume 22, page 114, 2015.

                                     158
[Tal17a] Avishay Tal. Formula lower bounds via the quantum method. In Symposium
         on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 1256–1268, 2017.

[Tal17b] Avishay Tal. Tight Bounds on the Fourier Spectrum of AC0 . In Computa-
         tional Complexity Conference (CCC), pages 15:1–15:31, 2017.

[Tam16] Suguru Tamaki. A satisfiability algorithm for depth two circuits with a sub-
         quadratic number of symmetric and threshold gates. Electronic Colloquium
         on Computational Complexity (ECCC), 23:100, 2016.

[Tod91] Seinosuke Toda. PP is as hard as the polynomial-time hierarchy. SIAM J.
         Comput., 20(5):865–877, 1991.

 [TV07] Luca Trevisan and Salil Vadhan. Pseudorandomness and average-case com-
        plexity via uniform reductions. Computational Complexity, 16(4):331–364,
         2007.

 [TX13] Luca Trevisan and Tongke Xue. A Derandomized Switching Lemma and
        an Improved Derandomization of AC0 . In Conference on Computational
         Complexity (CCC), pages 242–247, 2013.

[Vad12] Salil P. Vadhan. Pseudorandomness. Foundations and Trends in Theoretical
         Computer Science, 7(1-3):1–336, 2012.

 [Val84] Leslie G Valiant. A theory of the learnable. Communications of the ACM,
         27(11):1134–1142, 1984.

 [Vio20] Emanuele Viola. New lower bounds for probabilistic degree and AC0 with
         parity gates. 2020.

 [Vol14] Ilya Volkovich. On learning, lower bounds and (un) keeping promises. In In-
         ternational Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, pages
         1027–1038. Springer, 2014.

[VW20] Nikhil Vyas and R. Ryan Williams. Lower bounds against sparse symmetric
         functions of ACC circuits: Expanding the reach of #SAT algorithms. In
         Christophe Paul and Markus Bläser, editors, 37th International Symposium
         on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, STACS 2020, March 10-13,
         2020, Montpellier, France, volume 154 of LIPIcs, pages 59:1–59:17. Schloss
         Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020.

[Wil11] Ryan Williams. Guest column: a casual tour around a circuit complexity
         bound. ACM SIGACT News, 42(3):54–76, 2011.

                                      159
[Wil13a] Ryan Williams. Improving exhaustive search implies superpolynomial lower
         bounds. SIAM Journal on Computing, 42(3):1218–1244, 2013.

[Wil13b] Ryan Williams. Towards NEXP versus BPP? In International Computer
         Science Symposium in Russia, pages 174–182. Springer, 2013.

[Wil14a] Ryan Williams. Algorithms for circuits and circuits for algorithms. In 2014
         IEEE 29th Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC), pages 248–261.
         IEEE, 2014.

[Wil14b] Ryan Williams. New algorithms and lower bounds for circuits with linear
         threshold gates. In David B. Shmoys, editor, Symposium on Theory of
         Computing, STOC 2014, New York, NY, USA, May 31 - June 03, 2014,
         pages 194–202. ACM, 2014.

[Wil14c] Ryan Williams. Nonuniform ACC circuit lower bounds. Journal of the ACM
         (JACM), 61(1):1–32, 2014.

 [Wil16] R. Ryan Williams. Natural proofs versus derandomization. SIAM J. Com-
         put., 45(2):497–529, 2016.

 [Wil18] Richard Ryan Williams. Limits on representing Boolean functions by linear
         combinations of simple functions: Thresholds, relus, and low-degree polyno-
         mials. In Rocco A. Servedio, editor, 33rd Computational Complexity Con-
         ference, CCC 2018, June 22-24, 2018, San Diego, CA, USA, volume 102 of
         LIPIcs, pages 6:1–6:24. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik,
         2018.

 [Yao85] Andrew Chi-Chih Yao. Separating the polynomial-time hierarchy by oracles.
         In Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 1–10,
         1985.

 [Yao89] Andrew Chi-Chih Yao. Circuits and local computation. In Symposium on
         Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 186–196, 1989.

[Yap83] Chee K Yap. Some consequences of non-uniform conditions on uniform
        classes. Theoretical computer science, 26(3):287–300, 1983.




                                      160
