Size bounds for algebraic and
semialgebraic proof systems

     Thesis, PhD in Computing


         Tuomas Hakoniemi
 Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya




                   1
2


                                   Abstract

        This thesis concerns the proof complexity of algebraic and semi-
    algebraic proof systems Polynomial Calculus, Sums-of-Squares and
    Sherali-Adams.
        The most studied complexity measure for these systems is the
    degree of the proofs. This thesis concentrates on other possible com-
    plexity measures of interest to proof complexity, monomial-size and
    bit-complexity. We aim to showcase that there is a reasonably well-
    behaved theory for these measures also.
        Firstly we tie the complexity measures of degree and monomial
    size together by proving a size-degree trade-off for Sums-of-Squares
    and Sherali-Adams.      We show that if there is a refutation with
    at most s many monomials, then there is a refutation of degree
       √
    O( n log s + k), where k is the maximum degree of the constraints
    and n is the number of variables. For Polynomial Calculus similar
    trade-off was obtained in [46].
        Secondly we prove a feasible interpolation property for all three
    systems. We show that for each system there is a polynomial time
    algorithm that given two sets Q1 (x, z) and Q2 (y, z) of polynomial
    constraints in disjoint sequences x, y and z of variables, a refutation
    of Q1 (x, z) ∪ Q2 (y, z) and an assignment a to the variables z, finds
    either a refutation of Q1 (x, a) or a refutation of Q2 (y, a).
        Finally we consider the relation between monomial-size and bit-
    complexity in Polynomial Calculus and Sums-of-Squares. We show
    that there is an unsatisfiable set of polynomial constraints that has
    both Polynomial Calculus and Sums-of-Squares refutations of poly-
    nomial monomial-size, but for which any Polynomial Calculus or
    Sums-of-Squares refutation requires exponential bit-complexity.
        Besides the emphasis on complexity measures other than degree,
    another unifying theme in all the three results is the use of seman-
    tic characterizations of resource-bounded proofs and refutations. All
    results make heavy use of the completeness properties of such charac-
    terizations. All in all, the work on these semantic characterizations
    presents itself as the fourth central contribution of this thesis.
Aamulle ja Ailille
4


Acknowledgements
I’m grateful to my advisor Albert Atserias for his guidance during my doc-
toral studies. Albert has introduced me to proof complexity and led me
towards many interesting problems, some of which have by-products in this
thesis.
    I want to also thank other members of the AUTAR research project
I had the opportunity to discuss and share ideas with: Ilario Bonacina,
Michal Garlı́k, Massimo Lauria, Moritz Müller and Joanna Ochremiak.
    Thank you to my fellow PhD students I had the pleasure to get to know
during these years: Lucas Machado, Alberto Moreno, Josep Sànchez and
Alex Vidal.
    Thank you to Juha Kontinen for hosting my visit at the University of
Helsinki during the academic year 2019-2020, and to Jonne Iso-Tuisku for
all the discussions shared over many cups of coffee.
    Last but definitely not least, I want to thank Elina for all the support
and encouragement, and for enduring with me our life between different
corners of Europe.
    The work in this thesis was partially funded by European Research
Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation programme, grant agreement ERC-2014-CoG 648276 (AUTAR)
and MICCIN grant TIN2016-76573-C2-1P (TASSAT3).
Contents

Contents                                                                    5

1 Introduction                                                               7
  1.1   Propositional proof complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     7
  1.2   (Semi-)algebraic proof systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     8
  1.3   Contributions and related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      10
  1.4   Structure of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19

2 Preliminaries                                                             21
  2.1   On notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
  2.2   The Boolean ideal and multilinear polynomials . . . . . . . .       22
  2.3   Proof systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
  2.4   Convex cones and order units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      28

3 Semantics for resource-bounded proofs and refutations                     33
  3.1   Reduction operators for Polynomial Calculus . . . . . . . . .       34
  3.2   Pseudoexpectations for Sums-of-Squares . . . . . . . . . . .        41
  3.3   Pseudoexpectations for Sherali-Adams . . . . . . . . . . . .        51
  3.4   Sums-of-Squares p-simulates Polynomial Calculus Resolution
        over reals – a semantic proof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57

4 Size-degree trade-offs for Sherali-Adams and Sums-of-Squares
  proofs                                                                    61
  4.1   Duality modulo cut-off functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    64
  4.2   Unrestricting lemmas for Sums-of-Squares . . . . . . . . . .        65

                                     5
  4.3   Unrestricting lemmas for Sherali-Adams . . . . . . . . . . .         69
  4.4   Size-degree trade-off for Sums-of-Squares . . . . . . . . . . .      73
  4.5   Size-degree trade-off for Sherali-Adams . . . . . . . . . . . .      77
  4.6   Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   80

5 Feasible interpolation for Polynomial Calculus, Sums-of-
  Squares and Sherali-Adams                                                  87
  5.1   Feasible interpolation for Polynomial Calculus . . . . . . . .       89
  5.2   Feasible interpolation for Sums-of-Squares . . . . . . . . . .       94
  5.3   Feasible interpolation for Sherali-Adams . . . . . . . . . . . 102
  5.4   No monotone feasible interpolation for Sums-of-Squares . . . 106

6 Bit-complexity vs. Monomial-size in Polynomial Calculus
  and Sums-of-Squares                                                        111
  6.1   The constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
  6.2   The upper bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
  6.3   Lower bound for Sums-of-Squares . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
  6.4   Lower bound for Polynomial Calculus . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119

7 Conclusion and future work                                                 121

Bibliography                                                                 125
Chapter 1

Introduction

Proof theory is a branch of mathematical logic whose objects of study are
formal theories and proofs in formal proof calculi. Though the notion of
logical calculus can be seen already in Leibniz’s Calculus ratiocinator, proof
theory grew to fruition out of Hilbert’s formalist agenda to give finitary
foundations for the whole of mathematics. Even if Hilbert’s program failed
in its most general form, it definitely left a mark on mathematical logic in
general, and proof theory in particular.
   With the clear understanding of proofs as finite combinatorial objects –
strings of symbols from some vocabulary – comes naturally a question about
the sizes of such objects. This leads us to propositional proof complexity,
which studies the sizes of proofs in different proof calculi for propositional
logic(s). The question is certainly interesting by itself, but a stronger mo-
tivation for propositional proof complexity comes from the seminal work
of Cook and Reckhow [23] that connects propositional proof complexity to
major open questions in computational complexity theory.



1.1      Propositional proof complexity
In [23] Cook and Reckhow presented a general definition of a propositional
proof system as a poly-time computable function onto the set of tautologies.
With this definition they made the simple but foundational observation that

                                      7
there is no propositional proof system for classical propositional logic that
has short, i.e. polynomial-sized, proofs for all tautologies unless NP is closed
under complementation. The converse implication holds also.
   Cook and Reckhow introduced also machinery to compare the rela-
tive strengths of different proof systems via so-called p-simulations. A
p-simulation is a polynomial-time function that transforms proofs in one
system to proofs in another. The existence of such function shows that
the proofs in the former system cannot be considerably shorter than in the
latter. The main line of research in propositional proof complexity has ever
since concerned itself in proving lower bounds for stronger and stronger
proof systems in the above definite sense.
   Some proof systems for propositional logic familiar for many include
Resolution, Hilbert- and Gentzen-style calculi and Natural Deduction. For
Resolution we know of many strong lower bounds going back all the way
to Tseitin’s lower bound for a subsystem of Resolution called Regular Res-
olution in 1968 [90] and Haken’s lower bound for general Resolution in
1985 [43]. The other mentioned systems turn out to be equivalent in their
strength [23]. They are jointly called Frege systems as a homage to Frege’s
Begriffsschrift. Proving superpolynomial lower bounds for Frege systems is
a major open question in propositional proof complexity.



1.2      (Semi-)algebraic proof systems
Besides logic, different proof calculi can be found also in other parts of
mathematics. In this thesis we study calculi arising from algebra and com-
binatorial optimization that are used to prove the unsatisfiability of a set
of polynomial equality and/or inequality constraints. We still retain the
point of view of propositional proof complexity, and study these systems
as refutation systems for polynomial constraints over Boolean values 0 and
1. We study the algebraic proof system Polynomial Calculus (PC) and the
semi-algebraic proof systems Sums-of-Squares (SOS) and Sherali-Adams
(SA).
   Polynomial Calculus is a proof system based on local inference rules
whose correctness is ultimately based on Hilbert’s Nullstellensatz. It was
introduced by Clegg, Edmonds and Impagliazzo in [22] under the name
Gröbner basis proofs. In defining the proof system they drew inspiration
from Gröbner basis calculations in computational algebraic geometry, and
gave a proof search method for Polynomial Calculus proofs reminiscent of
the Buchberger’s algorithm for finding a Gröbner basis for a given polyno-
mial ideal. In the Boolean realm Polynomial Calculus was further strength-
ened to a system called Polynomial Calculus Resolution (PCR) in [1].
   Sums-of-Squares on the other hand has its roots in semialgebraic geom-
etry. Central results in semialgebraic geometry are the different forms of
Positiv- and Nichtnegativstellensätze, which give necessary and sufficient
conditions for the positivity or non-negativity of polynomials on semial-
gebraic sets, i.e. subsets of the Euclidean space defined by polynomial
inequalities and equalities. See [83] for a survey on the different forms of
Positiv- and Nichnegativstellensätze.
   Based on the most general form of Positivstellensatz by Krivine [57] and
Stengle [88], Grigoriev and Vorobjov [40] defined the Positivstellensatz proof
system and initiated the study of its proof complexity. Sums-of-Squares
proof system on the other hand is based on Putinar’s Positivstellensatz
[77], which gives a very clean representation of a polynomial positive on a
semialgebraic set under an additional technical assumption that holds for
semialgebraic sets defined by polynomials over Boolean variables.
   Beginning with [9], Sums-of-Squares has amassed considerable amount
of attention due to its connections with approximation algorithms and com-
putational complexity through hierarchies of SDP relaxations of combina-
torial problems [59, 68, 67, 21, 31, 63, 62]. We refer the reader to [67] and
[60] for discussion on these connections.
   If Sums-of-Squares has close connection with hierarchies of SDP relax-
ations, Sherali-Adams proofs arise from the hierarchy of LP relaxations of
Sherali and Adams [85], and so Sherali-Adams forms a subsystem of Sums-
of-Squares. As a proof system for propositional logic Sherali-Adams was
first studied in [26].
1.3     Contributions and related work
This thesis has two unifying themes running along the length of the thesis.
Firstly, the thesis concentrates on size bounds for the three systems dis-
cussed above instead of the most studied complexity measure for the three
systems – the degree of the refutations. The second unifying theme is in
the techniques we employ to prove our results. We use different seman-
tic characterizations of resource-bounded proofs and refutations to prove
the majority of the results below. We rely especially on the completeness
properties of such characterizations, when most work in proof complexity
employs only the soundness properties of such characterizations. We also
introduce novel semantic characterizations tailored directly for size bounds,
instead of degree, for the three systems considered.



1.3.1    Complexity measures
The most studied complexity measure for all three systems is the degree of
a proof. This is of course a very natural complexity measure for proof sys-
tems based on polynomials. But for Sums-of-Squares and Sherali-Adams,
more importantly, the systems bounded by degree are in one-to-one corre-
spondence with the levels of the Lasserre and Sherali-Adams hierarchies,
respectively. Hence the degree upper and lower bounds give immediate
algorithmic information about feasibility and infeasibility of combinatorial
problems.
   In part, the emphasis on degree bounds is also due to the existence of
simple proof search algorithms for bounded degree proofs. For Polynomial
Calculus proof search can be carried out by an algorithm reminiscent of
the Buchberger’s algorithm used in Gröbner basis computations, and for
Sherali-Adams and Sums-of-Squares proof search for a degree d proof is a
linear or semidefinite programming problem of size nO(d) . The proof search
methods produce always proofs with nO(d) monomials, and unless the coef-
ficients grow too large the algorithms actually find the proofs (up to small
additive error in case of SOS) in time nO(d) . For Polynomial Calculus over
finite fields and for Sherali-Adams large coefficients do not cause any prob-
lems – the systems are degree-automatable – but for Polynomial Calculus
over infinite fields and for Sums-of-Squares large coefficients can cause seri-
ous problems for the proof search procedures, as is exemplified also in the
Chapter 6 of this thesis.
   First linear degree lower bounds for Polynomial Calculus were proved
by Razborov in [81] for (a version of) the Pigeonhole Principle. The paper
also introduced the use of reduction operators to prove degree lower bounds
in Polynomial Calculus. This approach has been applied and further devel-
oped in many subsequent papers (see e.g. [2, 34, 30, 65]). Another approach
based on binomial ideals for degree lower bounds for Polynomial Calculus
was used in [20] to prove lower bounds for Tseitin formulas and mod p
counting formulas. The work builds on earlier bounds for Nullstellensatz
using similar machinary [35]. This approach was used also in [13] to prove
degree lower bounds for random CNF’s.
   Grigoriev proved the first degree lower bounds for Sums-of-Squares in
[37] and [36]. The former extended the machinary introduced in [35, 20]
to Sums-of-Squares to give lower bounds on Tseitin and parity formulas,
while the latter introduced the use of the so-called pseudoexpectations to
argue against low degree proofs in Sums-of-Squares. Pseudoexpectations
were used, though implicitly, by Schoenebeck in [84] to give linear degree
lower bounds for random k-CNFs in Sums-of-Squares. The term ‘pseu-
doexpectation’ appears only later in [9], where many useful properties of
pseudoexpectations were also obtained. We refer the reader to the survey
[10] for further discussion on the role and use of pseudoexpectations.
   As Sherali-Adams is a subsystem of Sums-of-Squares all the lower bounds
mentioned above hold for it also. An important example separating Sherali-
Adams from Sums-of-Squares in terms of degree is the Pigeonhole Princi-
ple: while there is a constant degree Sums-of-Squares refutation of the
Pigeonhole Principle [38], Sherali-Adams requires degree Ω(n) to refute the
Pigeonhole Principle with n + 1 pigeons and n holes [25].
   As stated above, this thesis concentrates on other possible complexity
measures that are of interest especially to proof complexity. We consider
the monomial-size of the systems, i.e. the number of monomials in a proof
or refutation, and the bit-complexity of the proofs, i.e. the number of bits
it actually takes to write down the proofs.
    Lower bounds on these size measures are already known for all three
systems: one can transform degree lower bounds into lower bounds on the
number of monomials by using random restrictions (see [38] for an example
of such argument for Sums-of-Squares). Note, however, that such arguments
work only when the Boolean values are represented as 0 and 1 as the method
of random restrictions relies on a step, where one discards a large number of
monomials by mapping them to 0 by some partial assignment. Such attack
does not work, when the Boolean values are represented in the Fourier
basis with values ±1. This is in contrast to degree bounds, where one
can translate between the two representations with no loss in the degree.
Recently Sokolov proved the first strong size lower bounds for Polynomial
Calculus and Sums-of-Squares in the ±1 basis [87]. Note that, by definition,
Sherali-Adams system does not make sense in the Fourier basis.
    On the other side of things, [8, 61] studied the question whether the
 O(d)
n       upper bound on the number of monomials for degree d refutations is
the best one can hope for. It was shown that this upper bound is essentially
optimal. They constructed for each system examples of CNFs that have
degree d refutations, but require nΩ(d) many monomials to refute.


1.3.2      Semantics for resource-bounded proofs and
           refutations
A second unifying theme in this thesis is the use of semantic arguments
to prove the existence or non-existence of resource-bounded proofs or refu-
tations. We aim to showcase that there is a nicely behaved mathematical
theory to reason about size bounds directly using tools reappropriated and
redefined from the tools traditionally used to prove degree bounds.
    A typical way to prove lower bounds in proof complexity is to exhibit
a mathematical object whose existence rules out the existence of resource-
bounded proofs or refutations. From the point of view of mathematical
logic such objects can be seen as sound semantics for the associated classes
of proofs or refutations. More often than not such objects do in fact char-
acterize the associated classes of proofs or refutations, and thus provide us
with semantics that is both sound and complete. These include the pre-
viously mentioned reduction operators for Polynomial Calculus and pseu-
doexpectations for Sums-of-Squares, but also d-designs for Nullstellensatz
[11, 22, 19], the local and partial Boolean valuations for Extended Frege
systems [74, 53, 52], and the game theoretic characterization for Resolution
width from [5].
   In this thesis we further develop the theory around reduction operators
for Polynomial Calculus and pseudoexpectations for Sums-of-Squares and
Sherali-Adams. We define variations on the degree bounded versions of
these operators that can be used to reason about size bounds directly, and
prove the associated soundness and completeness lemmas. Most of our later
contributions in this thesis rely especially on the completeness lemmas: we
argue for the existence of resource-bounded proofs and refutations from
the non-existence of suitable semantic objects, and for the existence of
the semantic objects from the non-existence of resource-bounded proofs or
refutations.


1.3.3     Size-degree trade-offs
We have already noted that one can obtain size lower bounds for the systems
using random restrictions. For Polynomial Calculus there is also a more
uniform way to translate degree lower bounds into monomial-size lower
bounds via the size-degree trade-off of [46].
   Our first contribution is proving analoguous results for both Sums-of-
Squares and Sherali-Adams. These results show how to transform any refu-
tation with small number of (distinct) monomials into a proof with relatively
small degree. Similar results have been also proved between size and width
in Resolution [14] and between size and rank in tree-like LS and LS+ [70].
   In more detail we prove that if there is an SOS/SA refutation of a set
Q of polynomial constraints of monomial-size s, then there is an SOS/SA
                                     √
refutation of Q of degree of order        n log s + k, where n is the number of
variables, and k is the degree of the given constraints Q. This gives us a
criterion for monomial-size lower bounds from degree lower bounds.
   The size-degree trade-offs rely on a zero-gap duality theorem between
pseudoexpectation values and provable lower bounds. This was already
established in [48], but we present here another proof. Our proof allows us
to also prove a small variation on the duality theorem that we actually use
in the proofs of the trade-off results.
   These results are based on the following paper.


 [A] Albert Atserias and Tuomas Hakoniemi. Size-Degree Trade-Offs for
      Sums-of-Squares and Positivstellensatz Proofs. In Amir Shpilka, ed-
      itor, 34th Computational Complexity Conference (CCC 2019), vol-
      ume 137 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs),
      pages 24:1–24:20, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2019. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-
      Zentrum fuer Informatik.


1.3.4     Feasible interpolation
Our second contribution is proving a form of feasible interpolation for the
three systems considered here. Feasible interpolation is a framework in-
troduced by Krajı́ček in [55] and [56] for reducing lower bounds in proof
complexity to lower bounds in other computational models. The general
idea behind feasible interpolation is to somehow feasibly extract from a
refutation an algorithm computing some associated problem, and to use
known lower bounds on the computation model to derive lower bounds for
the proof system.
   The basic form of feasible interpolation takes a refutation of a formula of
the form ϕ(x, z)∧ψ(y, z) with disjoint sequences x, y and z of variables, and
feasibly extracts from it an algorithm computing an interpolant of the for-
mula, i.e. a function that given an assignment a to the z-variables outputs
0 only if ϕ(x, a) is unsatisfiable and 1 only if ψ(y, a) is unsatisfiable. Dif-
ferent variations of this basic form depend on the exact notion of feasibility
at hand. The general framework allows also reductions to computational
problems different than computing the interpolant – as is done in [33, 45].
   The framework was originally used in [56] to prove lower bounds for
Resolution from lower bounds on monotone Boolean circuits from [80, 3].
The paper did this by showing that when the given CNF satisfies certain
monotonicity conditions, there is a monotone interpolant that can be com-
puted by a monotone Boolean circuit whose size is polynomial in the size
of a given refutation.
   Another proof system for which the framework has been very succesfully
applied is Cutting Planes. Pudlák proved in [76] lower bounds on Cutting
Planes refutations showing that given a suitable CNF satifying some mono-
tonicity conditions there is a monotone interpolant that can be computed
by a monotone real circuit of size polynomial in the length of the given
Cutting Planes refutation. Later [33] and [45] showed independently and
concurrently that one can use the general framework to prove lower bounds
for random O(log n)-CNFs.
   A form of monotone feasible interpolation can also be used to derive
degree lower bounds for Nullstellensatz refutation via a reduction to mono-
tone span programs [75]. It has also been shown that Lovász-Schrijver
proof system enjoys the feasible interpolation property [72, 27] with respect
to polynomial-time computability, and the monotone feasible interpolation
property with respect to monotone linear programming circuits [28] – a
strong model of monotone computation introduced in [28] strictly stronger
than monotone Boolean circuits or monotone span programs.
   On the negative side Krajı́ček and Pudlák showed in [54] that Extended
Frege cannot admit feasible interpolation with respect to polynomial-sized
Boolean circuits unless RSA is not secure against P/poly. This results was
later extended to Frege [18] and to bounded depth Frege [16] under other
cryptographic assumptions.
   We prove feasible interpolation for all three systems in the following
form. We show that for each system there is a polynomial-time algorithm
that given two sets Q1 (x, z) and Q2 (y, z) of polynomial constraints in dis-
joint sequences x, y and z of variables, a refutation of Q1 (x, z)∪Q2 (y, z) and
an assignment a to the z-variables, outputs either a refutation of Q1 (x, a)
or a refutation of Q2 (y, a). For Polynomial Calculus we prove this claim
only for fixed finite fields – there is a different algorithm for distinct fields.
   We prove the claim by first proving that either Q1 (x, a) or Q2 (y, a)
has a refutation of size roughly equal to the size of the given refutation of
Q1 (x, z) ∪ Q2 (y, z). This is called the feasible disjunction property of the
proof systems following [73]. The proof is highly non-constructive and uses
the semantic characterizations of resource-bounded refutations in an essen-
tial way. Only after this existence proof we argue that the small refutation
can be actually found in time polynomial in the size of the given refutation
of Q1 (x, z) ∪ Q2 (y, z). The existence proof narrows down the search space
for the refutation in a way that allows us to give a polynomial-time search
algorithm within that smaller search space.
   A weaker form of feasible interpolation for degree-bounded proofs in
the three proof systems can be obtained using the proof search algorithms
mentioned above by simply searching for a refutation of P (x, a) for an ap-
propriate amount of time, and then outputting 0 if a refutation is found
and 1 otherwise. This argument was noted for Polynomial Calculus in [81]
and [75], but a similar argument can be made for Sherali-Adams and Sums-
of-Squares. Similarly a weak form of feasible interpolation with respect to
size bounds can also be proven using the proof search algorithms presented
in Chapter 5. Previously also a form of monotone feasible interpolation for
degree-bounded Polynomial Calculus with respect to monotone polynomial
programs was given in [75]. This model of computation is unfortunately
very strong – over finite fields it is as strong as general Boolean circuits
[75]. Very recently [32] showed a form of monotone feasible interpolation
for Sherali-Adams with respect to a weaker form of monotone linear pro-
gramming circuits than what was needed for Lovász-Shrijver in [28].
   The work on feasible interpolation for Polynomial Calculus and Sums-
of-Squares appeared originally in the following work.

 [B] Tuomas Hakoniemi. Feasible Interpolation for Polynomial Calculus
      and Sums-Of-Squares. In Artur Czumaj, Anuj Dawar, and Emanuela
     Merelli, editors, 47th International Colloquium on Automata, Lan-
     guages, and Programming (ICALP 2020), volume 168 of Leibniz In-
     ternational Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 63:1–63:14,
     Dagstuhl, Germany, 2020. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für In-
     formatik.


1.3.5    Bit-complexity vs. Monomial-size
We consider also the relationship between the two measures, monomial-size
and bit-complexity, and prove separations between the measures in Polyno-
mial Calculus over reals or rationals and Sums-of-Squares. In short, we show
that there is a system of polynomial equations that has refutations both in
Polynomial Calculus and Sums-of-Squares with only small number of mono-
mials, but for which any proof must have exponential bit-complexity. For
Sums-of-Squares we show this by proving a trade-off between the number
of monomials and the magnitude of coefficients in Sums-of-Squares refuta-
tions. For Polynomial Calculus we prove a three-way trade-off between the
number of monomials, the size of coefficients and the height of Polynomial
Calculus refutations. It is rather easy to see that for Sherali-Adams these
two measures do in fact coincide as a search for Sherali-Adams proofs is a
linear programming problem (see Section 5.3.1.1).
   The question on bit-complexity of Sums-of-Squares was raised origi-
nally by O’Donnell [66] in relation to the degree automatability of Sums-
of-Squares. O’Donnell noted that the received wisdom, that a degree d
Sums-of-Squares proof can be found using the ellipsoid algorithm in time
nO(d) if one exists, is not entirely true. Difficulties may arise if the only
proofs of degree d contain exceedingly large coefficients as then the initial
ellipsoid cannot be chosen small enough to guarantee polynomial runtime.
   Building on [66], Raghavendra and Weitz exhibited in [78] (see also
Weitz’s PhD thesis [91]) an example of a set Q of polynomial constraints
over O(n2 ) Boolean variables and a polynomial p that has SOS proofs of
non-negativity from Q of degree 2, and thus with polynomially many mono-
mials, but for which any SOS proof of non-negativity from Q of degree O(n)
must contain a coefficient of doubly exponential magnitude in n.
   The example of Raghavendra and Weitz leaves open, however, the pos-
sibility that there are SOS proofs of non-negativity of p from Q that can
be written with only polynomially many monomials, and with coefficients
of polynomial bit-complexity. In other words the example leaves open the
possibility that there are SOS proofs of non-negativity of p from Q that
can be written down with only polynomially many bits. It follows from our
result that this is not the case.
   Similarly, Polynomial Calculus is often claimed to be degree automat-
able. This is certainly true when the underlying field is a fixed finite field
as then the problem with large coefficients does not occur. When the un-
derlying field is infinite there is however possibility for significant coefficient
blow-up. This phenomenon is recognised also in the Gröbner basis litera-
ture, but there the emphasis seems to be more on circumventing the problem
rather than in proving lower bounds on the magnitude of the coefficients.
See [29, 92, 82, 4] for discussion on ways to circumvent the problem in
Gröbner basis computations.
   Raghavendra and Weitz proved the lower bound on the magnitude of
coefficients in Sums-of-Squares proofs of degree O(n) using the linear de-
gree lower bounds for refutations of Knapsack proved in [36], and the linear
degree pseudoexpectations for Knapsack it provides. We on the other hand
will use lower bounds on the number of monomials in refutations of Knap-
sack, and a suitable form of pseudoexpectations tailored for bounds on
monomial-size.
   To prove our claim for Polynomial Calculus we use the fact – proved orig-
inally by Berkholz in [15] – that Sums-of-Squares p-simulates Polynomial
Calculus over real numbers. We provide a new semantic proof of this re-
sult that gives bounds on the coefficients in the Sums-of-Squares simulation
in terms of the size of coefficients and the height of the given Polynomial
Calculus refutation.
   This work is based on the following paper.

 [C] Tuomas Hakoniemi.          Monomial size vs. Bit-complexity in Sums-
      of-Squares and Polynomial Calculus.     In 36th Annual ACM/IEEE
      Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2021, Rome, Italy,
      June 29 - July 2, 2021, pages 1–7. IEEE, 2021.

Note on Sherali-Adams The papers listed above mention the Sherali-
Adams proof system only in passing. In this thesis – even with a danger of
repeating ourselves – we include also the details for Sherali-Adams.


1.4     Structure of the thesis
Beginning with Chapter 2 we introduce formally the proof systems we con-
sider in this thesis. We also cover some basic facts on convex cones that
admit order units.
   In Chapter 3 we formulate semantic objects for resource-bounded proofs
and refutations in the three proof systems, and prove the corresponding
soundness and completeness results for such objects. This chapter contains
some known results, some parts from all three papers mentioned above,
and some new observations. The soundness and completeness of reduction
operators against degree is implicit in [81], but we give the full details.
Reduction operators against sets of monomials appeared originally in [B].
The proof of the Duality theorem for SOS comes from [A], and the work on
SOS pseudoexpectations against a set of monomials appears in both [B] and
[C]. The arguments for SA are modifications of the ones for SOS. Finally,
the semantic proof that SOS p-simulates PCR over reals appears in [C].
   In Chapter 4, which is based on [A], we prove a size-degree trade-offs
for Sums-of-Squares and Sherali-Adams proof systems.
   In Chapter 5 we prove a form of feasible interpolation for all three sys-
tems we consider here. This chapter is based on [B].
   Chapter 6 considers the the relationship between two complexity mea-
sures, bit-complexity and the number of monomials, in Sums-of-Squares
and Polynomial Calculus refutations. This chapter is based on [C].
   Finally in Chapter 7 we consider future directions for research and pose
some open problems related to the work presented in this thesis.
Chapter 2

Preliminaries

In this chapter we go through some preliminaries for the thesis. First we fix
some notation. Then in Section 2.2 we define the so called Boolean ideal – an
ideal of the polynomial ring, whose affine variety corresponds to bit-strings.
After that, in Section 2.3 we introduce the proof systems we consider in
this thesis and provide for each system a proof search algorithm. Finally in
Section 2.4 we recall some basic facts about convex cones admitting order
units that are used in this thesis.



2.1      On notation
We consider polynomials in a finite sequence x = hx1 , . . . , xn i of commuting
variables. We denote by F[x] the space of all polynomials over the field F in
variables x, in particular R[x] stands for the set of all real polynomials.
For a sequence α = hα1 , . . . , αn i of natural numbers, we denote by xα the
monomial i∈[n] xαi i . Depending on situation we write polynomials either
           Q

in the form α aα xα or m am m, where first sum ranges over sequences of
            P           P

natural numbers and the second sum ranges over monomials.
   For p ∈ R[x], we denote by kpk∞ the maximum coefficient in absolute
value appearing in p.
   For any d ∈ N, we denote by F[x]d the set of all polynomials in F[x] of
degree at most d. Note that F[x]d is a linear subspace of F[x]. However, it

                                      21
is not closed under polynomial multiplication.
   Given any set S of monomials, we write F[S] for the set of all linear com-
binations of elements of S, i.e. the set of polynomials where only elements
of S appear with non-zero coefficient.
   Throughout the thesis we employ the notational convention that upper
case P stands for a set of inequality constraints p ≥ 0, and upper case Q
stands for a set of equality constraints q = 0. We abuse notation and write
p ∈ P and q ∈ Q for the polynomials p and q such that the constraints
p ≥ 0 and q = 0 are in P and Q, respectively.
   For polynomial p with rational coefficients, we denote by hpi the number
of bits needed to represent p, when all its coefficients are represented with
their reduced fractions written in binary. We also extend the notation for
sets of polynomials and write hP i for the number of bits needed to represent
all polynomials in P .


2.2      The Boolean ideal and multilinear
         polynomials
Our primary goal is to study the proof systems from the point of view
of proof complexity and combinatorial optimization. Naturally, in these
contexts the variables take Boolean values, i.e. they assume values 0 or
1. Accordingly, we will mostly work modulo the Boolean ideal – an ideal
whose algebraic variety corresponds to bit-strings – which we define next.
   We consider polynomials over n pairs of twin variables xi , x̄i , i ∈ [n]. The
intended meaning is that the variables in a pair take the opposite values,
i.e. one assumes value 0 and the other value 1. Define the Boolean ideal
In in n pairs of twin variables to be the ideal generated by the following set
of polynomials:

               Bn := {x2i − xi , x̄2i − x̄i , xi + x̄i − 1 : i ∈ [n]}.     (2.1)

It is not hard to see that over any field, the affine variety of In consists
exactly of the {0, 1}-strings of length 2n where any of the pairs have opposite
values. As is usual, we write p ≡ q mod In , if p − q ∈ In
   The Boolean axioms form a Gröbner basis for the ideal In with respect
to any monomial ordering. This can be easily verified using Buchberger’s
criterion (see e.g. [24]). This implies that the multivariate division of a
polynomial p by Bn leaves an unique remainder, and in particular leaves
remainder 0, when p ∈ In . For our purposes this has an important conse-
quence that we discuss next. For details on Gröbner bases and multivariate
division we refer the reader to [24].
   For a polynomial p of degree d in In , there is always a certificate of
degree d of the inclusion. That is, if p ∈ In is of degree d, there are ui , vi
and wi for i ∈ [n] such that deg(ui ), deg(vi ) ≤ d − 2, deg(wi ) ≤ d − 1 and
                X
                     ui (x2i − xi ) + vi (x̄2i − x̄i ) + wi (xi + x̄i − 1) .
                                                                          
           p=
                i∈[n]

This is so because the multivariate division of p by Bn never introduces
monomials of higher degrees. It is because of this fact, that when we con-
sider degree bounded proofs, we work exclusively modulo the Boolean ideal
and disregard the actual lifts of the Boolean axioms.
   Besides considering polynomials modulo the Boolean ideal, at times
we consider polynomials modulo multilinearization, i.e. modulo the ideal
generated by the axioms x2i − xi and x̄2i − x̄i . We write
                               p≡q         mod Jn ,
when p and q are equivalent modulo multilinearization, i.e. there are ui and
vi such that
                           X
                                   ui (x2i − xi ) + vi (x̄2i − x̄i ) .
                                                                    
                   p−q =
                           i∈[n]




2.3      Proof systems
In this section we define the proof systems we consider in this thesis. We
do also provide for each system a proof search algorithm. The first section
2.3.1 deals with Polynomial Calculus, the second section 2.3.2 with Sums-
of-Squares proofs and the final section 2.3.3 with Sherali-Adams proofs.
2.3.1     Polynomial Calculus
Let F be a field and let Q be a set of equality constraints (over F). A
Polynomial Calculus (PC) proof over a field F (or a PC/F proof) of
p = 0 from Q is a sequence
                                   p1 , . . . , p `                        (2.2)

of polynomials such that p` = p and for each i ∈ [`] one of the following
holds:

   • pi ∈ Q;                                                               (2.3)

   • there is j < i and a variable x such that pi = xpj ;                  (2.4)

   • there are j, k < i and scalar a, b ∈ F such that pi = apj + bpk .     (2.5)

A PC/F refutation of Q is a PC/F proof of 1 = 0 from Q.
   In (2.4) the polynomial pj is the direct antecedent of pi and in (2.5)
both pj and pk are the direct antecedents of pi . The proof (2.2) is of degree
at most d if the degree of pi is at most d for all i ∈ [`]. The height of the
proof is the length of the longest subsequence pi1 , . . . , pik such that pij is
a direct antecedent of pij+1 for each j < k. The monomial size of the
proof (2.2) is the number of monomials appearing in the proof counted
with multiplicity.
   When F = Q define the bit-complexity of the proof (2.2) to be the
minimum length of a bit-string representing all the polynomials in the proof
and all the scalars used in the linear combination rule, when all the coef-
ficients and scalars are represented with their reduced fractions written in
binary.
   Let S be a set of monomials, and let Sb = S ∪ xS, where xS = {xm :
m ∈ S and x is a variable}. A PC/F proof of p from Q over S is a PC/F
proof of p from Q, where only monomials from the set Sb appear, and the
inference step (2.4) is only applied when pi is in F[S].
   We write Q `Fd p = 0, if there is a PC/F proof of p = 0 from Q of degree
at most d, and Q `FS p = 0 if there is a PC/F proof of p = 0 from Q over
S. If the field F is clear from the context, we drop the superscript.
     The notion of a PC/F proof over a set of monomials generalizes the
notion of a degree bounded PC/F proof. A PC/F proof of degree at most d
is just a PC/F proof over the set of all monomials of degree at most d − 1.
     The above definitions did not require the presence of the Boolean ax-
ioms. When the Boolean axioms are included in Q, i.e. when Bn ⊆ Q,
the associated proof system is called Polynomial Calculus Resolution
(PCR), and we talk about PCR/F proofs and refutations.


2.3.2          Sums-of-Squares Proofs
Let P and Q be two sets of inequality and equality constraints, respectively,
over R in n pairs of twin variables. Let r be a polynomial. A (Boolean)
Sums-of-Squares (SOS) proof of non-negativity of r from P and Q is a
polynomial equality of the form
       X               XX                       X
  r=           ri2 +                   2
                                      ri,p p+         tq q
       i∈[k]           p∈P i∈[kp ]              q∈Q
                              X
                                       ui x2i − xi + vi x̄2i − x̄i + wi (xi + x̄i − 1) (2.6)
                                                                                    
                          +
                              i∈[n]

where ri ri,p , tq , ui , vi and wi are arbitrary polynomials. An SOS refutation
of P and Q is a proof of non-negativity of −1 from P and Q.
                              2
     We call the polynomials ri,p and tq the lifts of the non-logical axioms
and the polynomials ui , vi and wi the lifts of the Boolean axioms.
     When the situation permits we write the proof (2.6) either as an equality
modulo the Boolean ideal In , or modulo multilinearization, i.e.
                 X         XX              X
             r=      ri2 +          2
                                   ri,p p+    tq q mod In
                              i∈[k]        p∈P i∈[kp ]             q∈Q

or
          X               XX                      X              X
     r=           ri2 +                  2
                                        ri,p p+         tq q +           wi (xi + x̄i − 1)   mod Jn .
          i∈[k]           p∈P i∈[kp ]             q∈Q            i∈[n]

     The degree of the proof (2.6) is at most d, when deg(ri2 ) ≤ d for any
              2
i ∈ [k]; deg(ri,p p) ≤ d for any p ∈ P and i ∈ [kp ]; deg(tq q) ≤ d for any
q ∈ Q; and deg(ui x2i ) ≤ d, deg(vi x̄2i ) and deg(wi xi ) ≤ d for any i ∈ [n].
   The explicit monomials of the proof (2.6) are all the monomials ap-
pearing in the polynomials r, ri for any i ∈ [k], ri,p and p for any p ∈ P and
i ∈ [kp ], tq and q for any q ∈ Q and ui , vi , x2i − xi and xi + x̄i − 1 for any
i ∈ [n]. In other words, the explicit monomials of a proof are all the mono-
mials visible in an explicit representation of the proof. The monomial-size
of the proof is the number of explicit monomials in the proof counted with
multiplicity.
   Finally we identify an important subset of the explicit monomials. In
Chapter 4 we prove a lower bound on the size of this set. We call the mono-
mials appearing in the polynomials ri for all i ∈ [k], in the polynomials ri,p
for all p ∈ P and i ∈ [kp ] and tq for all q ∈ Q the significant monomials
of the proof (2.6).
   In the case that the polynomials in the proof (2.6) have only rational
coefficients, we define the bit-complexity of (2.6) as the minimum length
of a bit-string representing the proof when the rational coefficients are rep-
resented with their reduced fractions written in binary.
   Finally we define a notion of an SOS proof that tries to capture proofs
that use only monomials from a fixed set of monomials. Given a set S of
monomials, we say that the proof (2.6) is over S if all the monomials in
the polynomials ri , ri,p , tq and wi are among S. Note that we do not restrict
the lifts of the Boolean axioms x2i − xi and x̄2i − x̄i . This choice allows us to
still work modulo multilinearization, which makes many things easier later
in the thesis.
                      SOS
   We write P, Q `d         r ≥ 0 if there is an SOS proof of non-negativity of
                                              SOS
r from P and Q of degree d, and P, Q `S             r ≥ 0 if there is a proof of
non-negativity of r from P and Q over S.




2.3.3     Sherali-Adams Proofs

Let again P and Q be sets of polynomial inequality and equality constraints,
respectively, and let r be any polynomial. A Sherali-Adams (SA) proof
of non-negativity of r from P and Q is a polynomial equality of the form

            X              X
  r =s+           sp p +         tq q
            p∈P            q∈Q
                           X
                                   ui (x2i − xi ) + vi (x̄2i + x̄i ) + wi (xi + x̄i − 1) (2.7)
                                                                                        
                      +
                           i∈[n]


where s and sp for any p ∈ P are polynomials with non-negative coefficients
and tq , ui , vi and wi are arbitrary polynomials for any q ∈ Q and i ∈ [n].
An SA refutation of P and Q is a proof of non-negativity of −1 from P and
Q.
     We call the polynomials sp and tq the lifts of the non-logical axioms
and the polynomials ui and vi the lifts of the Boolean axioms.
     Similarly as with Sums-of-Squares, when the situation permits we write
the proof as an equality modulo the Boolean ideal or an equality modulo
multilinearization.
     The degree of the proof (2.7) is at most d, when when deg(s) ≤ d;
deg(sp p) ≤ d for any p ∈ P ; deg(tq q) ≤ d for any q ∈ Q; and deg(ui x2i ) ≤ d,
deg(vi x̄2i ) ≤ d and deg(wi xi ) ≤ d for any i ∈ [n].
     The explicit monomials in the proof (2.7) are all the monomials ap-
pearing in the polynomials r, s, sp and p for any p ∈ P ; tq and q for any
q ∈ Q; and ui , vi , wi , x2i − xi , x̄2i − x̄i and xi + x̄i − 1 for any i ∈ [n]. In other
words, the explicit monomials are all the monomials visible in an explicit
representation of the proof (2.7). The monomial size of a proof is the
number of explicit monomials in the proof counted with multiplicity.
     The significant monomials of the proof (2.7) are the monomials ap-
pearing in the polynomials and s, sp for any p ∈ P and tq for any q ∈ Q.
     In the case that the polynomials in the proof (2.7) have only rational
coefficients, we define the bit-complexity of (2.7) as the minimum length
of a bit-string representing the proof when the rational coefficients are rep-
resented with their reduced fractions written in binary.
     Given a set S of monomials, we say that the proof (2.7) is over S if
all the monomials in polynomials s, sp , tq and wi are among S.
                     SA
   We write P, Q `d p ≥ 0 if there is a proof of non-negativity of p from
                                                 SA
P and Q of degree at most d, and P, Q `S p ≥ 0 if there is a proof of
non-negativity of p from P and Q over S.


2.4      Convex cones and order units
Finally in this section we recall some basic facts about convex cones and
order units. We prove a general duality theorem for convex cones admitting
an order unit. Lastly we use the general duality theorem to prove a sepa-
rating hyperplane theorem for convex cones admitting an order unit that
is also valid in infinite-dimensional vector spaces. For more on order units
and ordered vector spaces we refer the reader to [69].
   A subset C of a real vector space V is convex if for any v, w ∈ C and
any λ ∈ [0, 1], λv + (1 − λ)w ∈ C. A convex cone is a convex set satisfying
the additional property that av ∈ C for any v ∈ C and any a > 0. The
convex cone C is pointed if 0 ∈ C.
   Any convex cone C gives rise to a transitive relation <C by v <C w if w−
v ∈ C. The relation moreover respects vector addition and multiplication
by a positive scalar, i.e. the following hold:

   • if v1 <C w1 and v2 <C w2 , then v1 + v2 <C w1 + w2 ;              (2.8)

   • if v <C w, then av <C aw for any a > 0.                           (2.9)

It follows also that v <C w implies aw <C av for any a < 0. Note that, by
definition, v ∈ C if and only if v >C 0.
   An order unit for a convex cone C is an element e ∈ V such that for
any v ∈ V there is some a ∈ R+ such that ae − v ∈ C, i.e. there is some
a ∈ R+ such that ae >C v. The following lemma collects some of the basic
properties of order units.

Lemma 2.4.1. Let V be a vector space and C ⊆ V a convex cone admitting
an order unit e. Then the following hold:

   • e ∈ C;                                                           (2.10)
   • For every v ∈ V and a1 , a2 ∈ R with a1 < a2 , if a1 e >C v, then
      a2 e >C v.                                                      (2.11)
   • For every v ∈ V there is a ∈ R such that ae >C v >C −ae;         (2.12)
   • If −e ∈ C, then C = V .                                          (2.13)

Proof. (2.10): There is some a ∈ R+ such that ae + e ∈ C, i.e. (r + 1)e ∈ C,
and so e ∈ C.
   (2.11): Now a2 − a1 > 0 and so, by (i), (a2 − a1 )e ∈ C. Thus (a2 −
a1 )e + a1 e − v ∈ C, i.e. a2 e − v ∈ C.
   (2.12): Let a1 be such that a1 e >C v and let a2 be such that a2 e >C −v,
and let a = max{a1 , a2 }. Now, by (ii), ae >C v and ae >C −v, i.e.
v >C −ae.
   (2.13): Suppose −e ∈ C, let v ∈ V and let a > 0 be such that ae >C v.
Now also −ae ∈ C and so a ∈ C, i.e. C = V .

   Fix a vector space V and a convex cone C admitting an order unit e.
Let U be a subspace of V . A linear functional L : U → R is positive if
L(u) ≥ 0 for all u ∈ U ∩ C. Equivalently L is positive if it respects the
relation <C in a sense that v <C w implies L(v) ≤ L(w). A positive linear
functional L on V is a state for C if L(e) = 1. We denote the set of all
states for C by S (C).
   Suppose U contains the order unit and let v ∈ V . By (2.12) the following
two sets are non-empty:

                         ↓U {v} = {u ∈ U : v >C u},
                         ↑U {v} = {u0 ∈ U : v <C u0 }.

Now if u ∈ ↓U {v} and u0 ∈ ↑U {v}, then u <C u0 and thus L(u) ≤ L(u0 ) for
any positive linear functional L : U → R. Hence for any positive L : U → R
both dLv = sup{L(u) : u ∈ ↓U {v}} and uLv = inf{L(u) : u ∈ ↑U {v}} are
real numbers and dLv ≤ uLv .

Lemma 2.4.2. Let U be a subspace of V containing the order unit e, and
let L be a positive linear functional on U . Then for any v ∈ V \ U and for
any γ ∈ R satisfying dLv ≤ γ ≤ uLv there is a positive linear functional L0
that is defined on span({v} ∪ U ) extending L such that L0 (v) = γ.

Proof. Every element of span({v} ∪ U ) can be written uniquely in form
av + u, where a ∈ R and u ∈ U . Define L0 by

                           L0 (av + u) = aγ + L(u).

It is easy to check that L0 is linear map. We show that L0 is positive by
considering a few cases.
   Case a = 0. If av+u ∈ C and a = 0, then u ∈ C and, by the positiveness
of L, L0 (av + u) = L(u) ≥ 0.
   Case a > 0. Suppose that av + u ∈ C and a > 0. Then v + u/a ∈ C,
i.e. v >C −u/a, and so L(−u/a)) ≤ γ, i.e. 0 ≤ aγ + L(u).
   Case a < 0. Suppose that av + u ∈ C and a < 0. Then −a > 0,
and so −v − u/a ∈ C, i.e. −u/a >C v. Hence γ ≤ L(−u/a), and so
0 ≤ aγ + L(u).


2.4.1      Duality theorem
Now we can prove a general duality theorem for convex cones admitting an
order unit. For a more general version of this result, see [69].

Theorem 2.4.3. Let V be a real vector space and let C be a convex cone
admitting an order unit e. For any v ∈ V it holds that

              sup{a ∈ R : v >C ae} = inf{E(v) : E ∈ S (C)}.

Moreover, if the set S (C) is non-empty, then there is a state achieving the
infimum.

Proof. The inequality from left to right is clear. For the inequality from
right to left we distinguish two cases: whether −e ∈ C or not. If −e ∈ C,
then S (C) = ∅, since −1  0, so inf{E(a) : E ∈ S (C)} = +∞. On the
other hand sup{a ∈ R : v > ae ∈ C} = +∞ by (2.13), and so the claim
follows.
   If −e ∈
         / C, then the map defined by L0 (ae) = a for all a ∈ R is a positive
linear functional on U0 = span({e}). Note that dLv 0 = sup{a ∈ R : v >C
ae}, and so, to prove the theorem, it suffices to show that there is some
state E extending L0 such that E(v) = dLv 0 .
   If v ∈ U0 , then L0 (v) = dvL0 . On the other hand if v ∈
                                                           / U0 , then
by Lemma 2.4.2, there is a positive linear functional L0 extending L0 on
span({e, v}) such that L0 (v) = dLv 0 . Now consider the set A of all positive
linear functionals L that are defined on a subspace U ⊆ V containing both
e and v, and satisfy L(e) = 1 and L(v) = dLv 0 . By the argument above
A 6= ∅. On the other hand A is closed under unions of chains and so, by
Zorn’s lemma, there is some maximal E ∈ A .
   Now the domain of E is the whole of V , since otherwise we could extend
E by using Lemma 2.4.2, contradicting the maximality of E. Hence E is
the state we are looking for.

   As an application of the above general theorem we prove a hyperplane
separation theorem between convex cones admitting an order unit and con-
vex sets. Note that the theorem below holds also for infinite dimensional
vector spaces. For infinite dimensional vector spaces the assumption on the
existence of an order unit is necessary as otherwise there are examples of
disjoint convex cones and sets with no non-trivial separating hyperplanes.

Lemma 2.4.4. Let V be a real vector space, let C1 be a convex cone that
admits an order unit e and let C2 be a convex set disjoint from C1 . Then
there is a linear functional L : V → R such that L(e) = 1, L(v) ≥ 0 for all
v ∈ C1 and L(u) ≤ 0 for all u ∈ C2 .

Proof. Let D be the convex cone of all elements of the form v − au, where
v ∈ C1 , u ∈ C2 and a ∈ R+ . Now 0 ∈
                                   / D, since C1 and C2 are disjoint.
Note also that e is also an order unit for D, and so −e ∈
                                                        / D. It follows
that S (D) 6= ∅. Hence there is some E : V → R such that E(e) = 1 and
E(v) ≥ E(au) for any v ∈ C1 , u ∈ C2 and a ∈ R+ . In particular E(v) ≥ 0
for any v ∈ C1 . On the other hand, since εe ∈ C1 for any ε > 0, we have
that E(u) ≤ 0 for any u ∈ C2 .
Chapter 3

Semantics for
resource-bounded
proofs and refutations

This chapter is dedicated to semantics for resource-bounded proofs and
refutations. Here semantics is understood in the lax sense familiar from
mathematical logic as any mathematical object, not inherently syntactic
in nature, characterizing a class of purely syntactic objects. The intended
application of these objects is of course to simplify proofs of syntactic state-
ments by removing us from combinatorial considerations.
   A typical way to prove lower bounds in proof complexity is to exhibit
a mathematical object that in a sense fools proofs or refutations with only
limited resources to think that the given unsatisfiable set of formulas is
actually satisfiable. From the point of view of mathematical logic, such
objects give sound semantics for resource-bounded proofs or refutations.
More often than not, such objects can actually be used to characterize the
resource-bounded classes of proofs and refutations, and thus they give sound
and complete semantics for the associated classes.
   We feel a need to point out immediately that the semantic objects con-
sidered below, and in the rest of this thesis, have appeared previously in the
literature, and are not usually conceptualized as we do here, as semantics

                                      33
for resource-bounded proofs and refutations. However for the applications
we have in mind, that are of somewhat metalogical in nature themselves, it
is natural to conceptualize these objects from a logical point of view.

   We present in this chapter semantic counterparts of resource-bounded
PC, SOS and SA proofs, and prove that they do in fact characterize suit-
able classes of proofs or refutations, by proving the associated soundness
and completeness properties of these semantic characterizations. First in
Section 3.1 we consider reduction operators for Polynomial Calculus. In
Sections 3.2 and 3.3 we consider pseudoexpectations for Sums-of-Squares
and Sherali-Adams, respectively. Lastly in Section 3.4 we exemplify the use
of semantic arguments for resource-bounded refutations by giving a seman-
tic proof of the fact that SOS p-simulates Polynomial Calculus Resolution
over reals, a result originally proved by Berkholz in [15].




3.1      Reduction operators for Polynomial
         Calculus

For Polynomial Calculus the appropriate semantic counterpart is provided
by the so called reduction operators. These objects were originally intro-
duced by Razborov in [81] to prove degree lower bounds for PC refutations
of the pigeonhole principle. Methods involving reduction operators to prove
degree lower bounds were refined by Alekhnovic and Razborov in [2], and
further developed in [34, 65, 30].

   It turns out that reduction operators can actually be used to charac-
terize the existence of degree bounded refutations. This is implicit in [81],
but we give the full details below. Secondly we will repurpose the degree
bounded reduction operators to define the reduction operators over a set
of monomials, so that we can use those to argue for size upper bounds in
Polynomial Calculus later in Chapter 5.
3.1.1     Reduction operators against degree
For this section fix a field F and a set Q of equality constraints of degree at
most k over the field F. For d ≥ k, a degree d reduction operator for Q
is a linear map R : F[x]d → F[x]d satisfying the following

   • R(1) = 1;                                                            (3.1)

   • R(q) = 0 for any q ∈ Q;                                              (3.2)

   • R(p) = R(R(p)) for any p ∈ F[x]d ;                                   (3.3)

   • R(xm) = R(xR(m)) for any variable x and monomial m of degree at
      most d.                                                             (3.4)

It is not hard to see that if there is a degree d reduction operator for Q,
then there cannot be a degree d PC refutation of Q. This is the soundness
property of reduction operators. The rest of this section is dedicated to
proving that the converse, the completeness property, holds. Note that
(3.3) is not strictly necessary to prove soundness. However the argument
below gives a mapping satisfying also (3.3), and this property actually turns
out to be rather useful. For example the lower bound proof in [81] uses the
fact that the constructed operator is idempotent in the sense of (3.3).
   Let < be a total order on the set of all monomials of degree at most d
that respects the degree, i.e. m < m0 whenever deg(m) < deg(m0 ). The
order lifts naturally to the set of all terms by considering the underlying
monomials of terms. Given a polynomial p ∈ F[x]d , we call the largest term
appearing in p with respect to <, the leading term of p, and denote it
by LT(p). The leading monomial p, denoted LM(p), is the underlying
monomial of the leading term of p.
   Given a set of polynomials Q, and the order <, a term t ∈ F[x]d is
reducible modulo Q, if there is a polynomial p such that Q `d p = 0 and
LT(p) = t. Otherwise t is irreducible modulo Q. The following lemma
shows the important fact that any polynomial can be uniquely decomposed
into a PC provable and irreducible component.
Lemma 3.1.1. For any p ∈ F[x]d there are unique q ∈ F[x]d and r ∈ F[x]d
such that

   • p = q + r;
   • Q `d q = 0;
   • r is a sum of irreducible terms modulo Q.

Moreover LT(p) ≥ t for each term t in r.

Proof. To prove the existence of such q and r, we construct sequences of
elements pi , qi , ri such that

   • p = pi + qi + ri ;
   • Q `d qi = 0;
   • ri is a sum of irreducible terms modulo Q;
   • pm = 0 for some m.

Let p1 = p and q1 = r1 = 0. For step i, let LT(pi ) = ti . If ti is reducible as
witnessed by q, let pi+1 = pi − q, qi+1 = qi + q and ri+1 = ri . On the other
hand, if ti is irreducible, let pi+1 = pi − ti , qi+1 = qi and ri+1 = ri + ti .
   Now pm = 0 for some m, since the rank, i.e. the position in the order <,
of the leading term of pi decreases at each step. By construction, qm and
rm satisfy the conditions of the lemma.
   To prove the uniqueness of q and r, suppose p = q + r and p = q 0 + r0 ,
i.e. q − q 0 = r0 − r. Now Q `d q − q 0 = 0 and so Q `d r0 − r = 0. Hence
LT(r0 − r) is not irreducible. However, since both r and r0 are sums of
irreducible terms, it follows that LT(r0 − r) = 0 and so r = r0 . Hence also
q = q0.

   Consider now the mapping RdQ : F[x]d → F[x]d that maps each p to the
unique sum r of irreducible terms modulo Q such that Q `d p − r = 0. The
following lemma gathers five basic properties of the mapping.
Lemma 3.1.2. The following hold.

   • If there is no PC refutation of Q of degree at most d, then RdQ (1) = 1;
                                                                          (3.5)

   • RdQ (q) = 0 for any q ∈ Q;                                           (3.6)

   • RdQ is a linear function;                                            (3.7)

   • RdQ (RdQ (p)) = RdQ (p) for any polynomial p ∈ F[x]d ;               (3.8)

   • RdQ (xm) = RdQ (xRdQ (m)) for any monomial m of degree at most d − 1
      and any variable x.                                                 (3.9)

Proof. To see that (3.5) holds, note first that if there is no refutation of
Q of degree d then, the constant polynomial 1 is irreducible modulo Q, as
1 is the least monomial with respect to the order <. On the other hand
Q `d 0 = 0 and so, by the uniqueness of the decomposition, RdQ (1) = 1.
   For (3.6), of course Q `d q = 0 for any q ∈ Q, and 0 is a (empty) sum
of irreducible terms modulo Q. Hence, by the uniqueness of the decompo-
sition, RdQ (q) = 0 for any q ∈ Q.
   For (3.7), first note that Q `d p − RdQ (p) = 0 and Q `d q − RdQ (q) = 0,
and so Q `d p + q − (RdQ (p) + RdQ (q)) = 0. Now RdQ (p) + RdQ (q) is a sum of
irreducible terms modulo Q and so, by the uniqueness of the decomposition,
RdQ (p + q) = RdQ (p) + RdQ (q). Similarly Q `d ap − aRdQ (p) = 0 and so
RdQ (ap) = aRdQ (p).
   For (3.8) we have that Q `d p − RdQ (p) = 0 and Q `d RdQ (p) −
RdQ (RdQ (p)) = 0 and so also Q `d p − RdQ (RdQ (p)) = 0, where RdQ (RdQ (p)) is
a sum of irreducible terms modulo Q. Hence, again by the uniqueness of
the decomposition, RdQ (p) = RdQ (RdQ (p)).
   Finally for (3.9) we have again that Q `d m − RdQ (m) = 0. Now, by
Lemma 3.1.4, each term t in RdQ (m) satisfies t ≤ m. Hence, by the degree-
monotonicity condition of <, each t in RSQ (m) is of degree at most d − 1.
Hence also Q `d xm − xRdQ (m) = 0. It follows by the uniqueness of the
decomposition that RdQ (xm) = RdQ (xRdQ (m)).
   In other words, the previous lemma shows that the linear map RdQ con-
structed is a degree d reduction operator if there is no degree d PC refuta-
tion of Q. In conclusion, we have the following soundness and completeness
theorem for degree d reduction operators.

Theorem 3.1.3 (Soundness and Completeness). There is a PC refutation
of Q of degree at most d if and only if there is no degree d reduction operator
for Q.


3.1.2     Reduction operators against sets of monomials
In this section we restate the definitions and results of the previous section
for proofs over a set of monomials. These constructions will be used later to
prove the feasible interpolation property for Polynomial Calculus in Section
5.1.
   For this section fix again a field F and a set Q of equality constraints. Fix
also a set S of monomials containing all the monomials in Q and the empty
monomial 1. Recall the definition of a PC proof over a set of monomials S
from section 2.3.1, and the definition of the set S,
                                                  b

                 Sb := S ∪ {xm : x is a variable and m ∈ S}.

                                b → F[S]
We call a linear function R : F[S]    b a reduction operator for
Q over S if it satisfies the following conditions:

   • R(1) = 1;                                                           (3.10)
   • R(q) = 0 for any q ∈ Q;                                             (3.11)
   • R(p) = R(R(p)) for any p ∈ F[S];
                                  b                                      (3.12)
   • R(xm) = R(xR(m)) for any variable x and m ∈ S.                      (3.13)

Again it is easy to see that if there is a refutation of Q over S, then there
cannot be a reduction operator for Q over S. This is the soundness property
reduction operators over a set of monomials. We prove below that the
converse, the completeness, also holds. Note again that (3.12) is not strictly
necessary for soundness. The proof below however produces a mapping
having this property, and moreover this property is actually needed later in
the proof of Theorem 5.1.1.
   We proceed with the proof. Let < be a total order on Sb satisfying the
following two conditions:

   • 1 ≤ m for any m ∈ Ŝ;                                            (3.14)

   • if m ∈ S and m0 ∈ Sb \ S, then m < m0 .                          (3.15)

   Again the order lifts to the set of all terms built from the monomials in
Ŝ. The leading term of a polynomial p ∈ F[Ŝ], denoted LT(p), is the largest
term in p with respect to <, and the leading monomials, denoted LM(p), is
its underlying monomial.
   We say that a term t ∈ F[Ŝ] is S-reducible modulo Q if there is p ∈ F[S]
                                                                          b
such that Q `S p = 0 and t = LT(p). Otherwise the term is S-irreducible
modulo Q. The following lemma shows that any polynomial in F[Ŝ] can be
uniquely decomposed into a provable and an S-irreducible component. We
omit the proof, since it is exactly the same as the proof of Lemma 3.1.1

Lemma 3.1.4. For any polynomial p ∈ F[Ŝ] there are unique q ∈ F[Ŝ] and
r ∈ F[Ŝ] such that

   • p = q + r;                                                       (3.16)

   • Q `S q = 0;                                                      (3.17)

   • r is a sum of S-irreducible terms modulo Q.                      (3.18)

Moreover LT(p) ≥ t for each term t in r.

   Consider now the mapping RSQ : F[S]
                                    b → F[S]
                                          b that maps each p to the
unique sum r of S-irreducible terms modulo Q such that Q `S p − r = 0.
The following lemma gathers the basic properties of such mapping.

Lemma 3.1.5. The following hold.

   • If there is no refutation of Q over S, then RSQ (1) = 1;         (3.19)
   • RSQ (q) = 0 for any q ∈ Q;                                          (3.20)

   • RSQ is a linear function;                                           (3.21)

   • RSQ (RSQ (p)) = RSQ (p) for any polynomial p ∈ F[S];
                                                      b                  (3.22)

   • RSQ (xm) = RSQ (xRSQ (m)) for any m ∈ S and any variable x.         (3.23)

Proof. For (3.19) note first that there is no refutation of Q over S, then,
by (3.14), the constant polynomial 1 is S-irreducible modulo Q. On the
other hand Q `S 0 = 0 and so, by the uniqueness of the decomposition,
RSQ (1) = 1.
   For (3.20), of course Q `S q = 0 for any q ∈ Q. On the other hand the
constant polynomial 0 is vacuously a sum of S-irreducible terms, and so,
by the uniqueness of the decomposition, RSQ (q) = 0 for any q ∈ Q.
   For (3.21) first note that Q `S p − RSQ (p) = 0 and Q `S q − RSQ (q) = 0,
and so Q `S p+q −(RSQ (p)+RSQ (q)) = 0. Now RSQ (p)+RSQ (q) is a sum of S-
irreducible terms modulo Q and so, by the uniqueness of the decomposition,
RSQ (p + q) = RSQ (p) + RSQ (q). Similarly Q `S ap − aRSQ (p) = 0 and so
RSQ (ap) = aRSQ (p).
   For (3.22) we have that Q `S p − RSQ (p) = 0 and Q `S RSQ (p) −
RSQ (RSQ (p)) = 0 and so also Q `S p − RSQ (RSQ (p)) = 0, where RSQ (RSQ (p)) is
a sum of S-irreducible terms modulo Q. Hence, again by the uniqueness of
the decomposition, RSQ (p) = RSQ (RSQ (p)).
   Finally for (3.23) we have that Q `S m − RSQ (m) = 0. Now, by Lemma
3.1.4, each term t in RSQ (m) satisfies t ≤ m. Hence, by (3.15), each t in
RSQ (m) is in S, and so RSQ (m) ∈ F[S]. Hence also Q `S xm − xRSQ (m) = 0.
It follows that RSQ (xm) = RSQ (xRSQ (m)).

   In other words, the lemma above shows that if there is no refutation
of Q over S, then the operator RSQ constructed is a reduction operator for
Q over S. In conclusion, we have the following soundness and completeness
theorem for reduction operators over a set of monomials.

Theorem 3.1.6 (Soundness and Completeness). There is a PC refutation
of Q over S if and only if there is no reduction operator for Q over S.
3.2       Pseudoexpectations for
          Sums-of-Squares
Secondly we consider pseudoexpectations for Sums-of-Squares. Pseudoex-
pectations are linear functionals that fool resource-bounded SOS to think
that the set of constraints is satisfiable by mapping anything provably non-
negative with limited resources to a non-negative value. Probably the first
instance of this idea to prove degree lower bounds for SOS appears in
[36, 37], however the term ‘pseudoexpectation’ appears for the first time
in [9].
    As with reduction operators we will think of pseudoexpectations mainly
as semantics for resource-bounded SOS refutations and proofs. Another
point of view, much more common in combinatorial optimization, is to view
the pseudoexpectations as the dual objects to levels of the Sums-of-Squares
hierarchy of SDP relaxations. Indeed, these are the primary objects in the
Lasserre hierarchy of SDP relaxations [59].
    We conceptualize pseudoexpectations differently since our emphasis and
goals differ slightly from those of optimization. First of all we are much
more interested in refutations than proofs of non-negativity. But more
importantly the applications we have in mind are of rather metalogical
character, i.e. we aim to prove structural statements about the SOS proof
system itself.
    We will first define pseudoexpectations against bounded degree SOS
proofs. We prove a strong duality theorem between pseudoexpectation val-
ues and provable lower bounds using the general duality theorem 2.4.3.
This was originally proved in [48] using duality of semidefinite program-
ming. Soundness and completeness theorem for pseudoexpectations will
be an immediate consequence of the duality theorem. We will also give a
characterization for pseudoexpectations for sets of equality constraints and
as consequence give a normal form for SOS proofs from sets of equality
constraints.
    Secondly we will again introduce a suitable generalization of pseudoex-
pectations that can be used to argue against monomial size of SOS proofs
rather than only degree. Finally we consider a form of pseudoexpectations
that also takes into account the size of the coefficients that appear in pur-
ported SOS refutations.


3.2.1       Pseudoexpectations against degree
For this section fix a sets P and Q of inequality and equality constrains,
respectively. A degree d SOS pseudoexpectation for P and Q is a linear
functional E : R[x]d → R such that

     • E(1) = 1;                                                      (3.24)

     • E(p) ≥ 0 if P, Q `d
                             SOS
                                   p ≥ 0.                             (3.25)

We denote the set of all degree d SOS pseudoexpectations for P and Q by
Ed
 SOS
       (P, Q).
     The following lemma is key in obtaining the duality theorem for SOS
pseudoexpectations. It shows that the constant polynomial 1 is an order
unit for the cone of polynomials provable in SOS in degree 2d.

Lemma 3.2.1. For any p ∈ R[x]2d ,
                                       SOS
                                    ∅ `2d kpk1 ≥ p,

                                             aα x α .
                 P                       P
where kpk1 =         α |aα |, when p =

                            SOS
Proof. We prove that `2d |a| ≥ am for any monomial m of degree at most
2d, and any a ∈ R. The claim follows then immediately.
                            SOS
    We show first that `2d |a| ≥ am for any monomial m of degree at most
                                              √    √
d, and any a ∈ R. If a ≥ 0, then a − am ≡ ( a − am)2 mod In , and
    SOS                                                        √
so `2d |a| ≥ am. If on the other hand a < 0, then −am ≡ ( −am)2
                     SOS
mod In , and so `2d 0 ≥ am.
                                                        SOS
     Finally we show using the above paragraph that `2d |a| ≥ am for any
monomial m of degree at most 2d and a ∈ R. Let m1 and m2 be two
monomials of degree at most d such that m = m1 m2 . Now if a ≥ 0, then
                       √     √
am1 − 2am1 m2 + am2 ≡ ( am1 − am2 )2 mod In . Now, by previous
                SOS                SOS                    SOS
paragraph, `2d |a| ≥ am1 and `2d |a| ≥ am2 . Now `2d 2|a| ≥ 2am1 m2
          SOS
and so `2d |a| ≥ am1 m2 . If a < 0, then −am1 − 2am1 m2 − am2 ≡
 √        √                          SOS                SOS
( −am1 + −am2 )2 mod In . Again, `2d |a| ≥ −am1 and `2d |a| ≥
                      SOS
−am2 , and so `2d |a| ≥ am1 m2 .

   By the above lemma, degree 2d SOS pseudoexpectations for P and Q are
exactly the states for the convex cone of all polynomials in R[x]2d provably
non-negative in degree 2d from P and Q. Hence, by Theorem 2.4.3, we
obtain the following Duality Theorem for SOS.

Theorem 3.2.2 (Duality theorem). For any p ∈ R[x]2d ,
                            SOS                           SOS
        sup{r ∈ R : P, Q `2d p ≥ r} = inf{E(p) : E ∈ E2d (P, Q)}.

Moreover, if E2d (P, Q) 6= ∅, the infimum is attained by some E ∈ E2d (P, Q).
                  SOS                                                SOS




   An immediate corollary to the above theorem is the following soundness
and completeness theorem.

Theorem 3.2.3 (Soundness and Completeness). There is a degree 2d SOS
refutation of P and Q if and only if there is no degree 2d SOS pseudoexpec-
tation for P and Q.


3.2.2     Characterization of pseudoexpectations
and a normal form for SOS refutations
In this section we prove a characterization of the pseudoexpectations for
sets of equality constraints, and obtain a normal form for SOS refutation
as a corollary.

Lemma 3.2.4. Let Q be a set of equality constraints of degree at most k,
and let d ≥ k. Then a linear functional E : R[x]2d → R is a degree 2d
pseudoexpectation for Q if and only if it satisfies the following conditions:

   • E(1) = 1;                                                         (3.26)
   • E(p) = E(q) if p ≡ q mod In ;                                       (3.27)

   • E(p2 ) ≥ 0 for any p ∈ R[x]d ;                                      (3.28)

   • E(q 2 ) = 0 for any q ∈ Q.                                          (3.29)

Proof. For the non-trivial direction let E be a linear functional satisfying
the conditions (3.26)-(3.29). We need to prove that E(mq) = 0 for any
q ∈ Q and any monomial m such that the degree of mq is at most 2d.
   Let q ∈ Q be of degree k0 , and let m be a monomial of degree at most
2d − k0 . Let m1 and m2 be monomials of degree at most d − k0 and d,
respectively, such that m = m1 m2 .
   We prove first that E((m1 q)2 ) = 0. We have that

                    q 2 − (m1 q)2 ≡ (q − m1 q)2      mod In ,

and so E((m1 q)2 ) ≤ E(q 2 ) by (3.27) and (3.28).           On the other hand
E((m1 q) ) ≥ 0 by (3.26) and E(q ) = 0 by (3.29), and thus E((m1 q)2 ) = 0.
        2                          2

   Secondly

            (m1 q)2 ± 2am1 m2 q + a2 m2 ≡ (m1 q ± am2 )2        mod In

for any a > 0, and so, by (3.27), (3.28) and the above paragraph,

       |E(2m1 m2 q)| ≤ E(m1 q 2 )/a + E(am2 ) ≤ E(am2 ) = aE(m2 )

for any a > 0. Hence E(m1 m2 q) = 0.

   As a corollary for the characterization above we get the following normal
form for Sums-of-Squares refutations of a set of equality constraints.

Lemma 3.2.5. Let Q be a set of equality constraints of degree at most k,
and let d ≥ k. If there is a degree 2d SOS refutation of Q, then there is a
sum of squares s of degree at most 2d and aq ∈ R for every q ∈ Q such that
                                   X
                        −1 ≡ s +         aq q 2   mod In .
                                   q∈Q
Proof. Let C be the convex cone of all the polynomials p of degree at most
2d such that
                                  X
                        p≡s+            aq q 2   mod In ,
                                  q∈Q

for some sum of squares s of degree at most 2d and aq ∈ R for q ∈ Q,
and suppose towards a contradiction that −1 ∈
                                            / C. By Lemma 3.2.1, C is a
convex cone that admits an order unit, namely the constant polynomial 1,
and so, by Lemma 2.4.4, there is some linear functional L : R[x]2d → R such
that L(1) = 1 and L(p) ≥ 0 for every p ∈ C. In particular L(q 2 ) = 0 for
every q ∈ Q, and so, by Lemma 3.2.4, L is a degree 2d pseudoexpectation
for Q.


3.2.3      Pseudoexpectations against a set of monomials
In this section we define the appropriate counterpart of SOS proofs over
some set S of monomials, and obtain analogues of the results above for
bounded degree SOS proofs and pseudoexpectations.
   Fix again for this section sets P and Q of equality and inequality con-
straints, respectively, and a set S of monomials containing the empty mono-
mial 1. An SOS pseudoexpectation for P and Q over S is a linear functional
E : R[S 2 ] → R such that

   • E(1) = 1;                                                       (3.30)

   • E(p) ≥ 0, when P, Q `S
                            SOS
                                  p ≥ 0.                             (3.31)

We denote by ES (P, Q) the set of all SOS pseudoexpectations for P and
                 SOS



Q over S.
   Again, using Theorem 2.4.3, we obtain a strong duality theorem for SOS
pseudoexpectations over a set of monomials via the following lemma, and
the soundness and completeness theorem as a consequence of the duality
theorem.

Lemma 3.2.6. For any p ∈ R[S 2 ],
                                  SOS
                              `S        kpk1 ≥ p,
                                             aα x α .
               P                        P
where kpk1 =       |aα |, when p =

Proof. We prove that for any m ∈ S 2 and a ∈ R,
                                       SOS
                                      `S     |a| ≥ am.
                                                                     √
   First suppose that m ∈ S, and let a ∈ R. If a ≥ 0, then a − am ≡ ( a −
√                      SOS
 am)2 mod Jn , and so `S a ≥ am. If on the other hand a < 0, then
       √                       SOS                   SOS
−am ≡ ( −am)2 mod Jn , and so `S 0 ≥ am. Hence also `S |a| ≥ am.
  Let then m1 , m2 ∈ S, and let a ∈ R. If a ≥ 0, then am1 − 2am1 m2 +
       √        √                                             SOS
am2 ≡ ( am1 − am2 )2 mod Jn . Now, by previous paragraph, `S |a| ≥
           SOS                               SOS                              SOS
am1 and `S       |a| ≥ am2 . Now `S 2|a| ≥ 2am1 m2 and so `S |a| ≥
                                                 √         √
am1 m2 . If a < 0, then −am1 − 2am1 m2 − am2 ≡ ( −am1 + −am2 )2
                       SOS                          SOS                        SOS
mod Jn . Again, `S           |a| ≥ −am1 and `S            |a| ≥ −am2 , and so `S     |a| ≥
am1 m2 .

Theorem 3.2.7 (Duality theorem). For any p ∈ R[S 2 ],
                                SOS                                    SOS
       sup{r ∈ R : P, Q `S            p ≥ r} = inf{E(p) : E ∈ ES (P, Q)}.

Moreover, if ES (P, Q) 6= ∅, then there is E ∈ ES (P, Q) that achieves
                 SOS                                             SOS



the infimum.

Theorem 3.2.8 (Soundness and Completeness). There is an SOS refuta-
tion of P and Q over S if and only if there is no SOS pseudoexpectation
for P and Q over S.

   Finally, for a set Q of equality constraints we obtain a characterization of
SOS pseudoexpectations for Q over S and a normal form for SOS refutations
over S as corollary.

Lemma 3.2.9. Let Q be a set of equality constraints and let S be a set of
monomials containing all the monomials in Q, all variables and the empty
monomial 1. A linear functional E : R[S 2 ] → R is an SOS pseudoexpecta-
tion for Q over S if and only if the following conditions hold:

   • E(1) = 1;                                                                       (3.32)
     • E(p) = E(q) if p ≡ q mod Jn ;                                              (3.33)

     • E(p2 ) ≥ 0 for any p ∈ R[S];                                               (3.34)

     • E(q 2 ) = 0 for any q ∈ Q;                                                 (3.35)

     • E((xi + x̄i − 1)2 ) = 0 for any i ∈ [n].                                   (3.36)

Proof. For the non-trivial direction assume that E : R[S 2 ] → R is a linear
functional satisfying the conditions (3.32)-(3.36). We show that E(mq) = 0
for every m ∈ S and q ∈ Q. By (3.34), E((am ± q/a)2 ) ≥ 0 for every
a > 0, and so,|E(2mq)| ≤ E(a2 m2 ) + E(q 2 /a2 ). By (3.35), E(q 2 /a2 ) = 0,
and so |E(2mq)| ≤ E(a2 m2 ) for any a > 0. It follows that E(mq) = 0.
With a similar argument one obtains that E(m(xi + x̄i − 1)) = 0 for any
m ∈ S and i ∈ [n].

Lemma 3.2.10. Let Q be a set of equality constraints and let S be a set
of monomials that contains all the monomials in Q, all variables and the
empty monomial 1. If there is an SOS refutation of Q over S, then there is
a sum of squares s of polynomials in R[S] and aq ∈ R for q ∈ Q and bi ∈ R
for i ∈ [n] such that
                         X                X
              −1 ≡ s +         aq q 2 +           bi (xi + x̄i − 1)2   mod Jn .
                         q∈Q              i∈[n]


Proof. Let C be the convex cone of all the polynomials p ∈ R[S 2 ] such that
                     X           X
             p≡s+       aq q 2 +   bi (xi + x̄i − 1)2 mod Jn ,
                        q∈Q           i∈[n]

for some sum of squares s of polynomials in R[S, some aq ∈ R for q ∈ Q
and some bi ∈ R for i ∈ [n], and suppose towards a contradiction that
−1 ∈
   / C. By Lemma 3.2.6, C is a convex cone that admits an order unit,
namely the constant polynomial 1, and so, by Lemma 2.4.4, there is some
linear functional L : R[S 2 ] → R such that L(1) = 1 and L(p) ≥ 0 for every
p ∈ C. In particular L(q 2 ) = 0 and L((xi + x̄i − 1)2 ) = 0 for every q ∈ Q
and i ∈ [n], and so, by Lemma 3.2.9, L is a pseudoexpectation for Q over
S.
3.2.4     Pseudoexpectations against bounded
          refutations
Finally we formulate pseudoexpectations in a form that takes also into ac-
count the size of the coefficients appearing in purported refutations. Later
in Section 5.2.2 when we consider the proof search problem for SOS, we
need to consider SOS refutations with a given bound on the size of the co-
efficients in order to give a polynomial time proof search algorithm. Hence
we also need a semantic characterization for SOS refutations that carries in-
formation about the size of the coefficients. We formulate such objects only
for sets of equality constraints. It is not immediately clear how to extend
the definitions meaningfully to the situation with inequality constraints.
   Fix for this section a set Q of equality constraints and a set S of mono-
mials containing all the monomials in Q, all the variables and the empty
monomial 1. We say that an SOS proof
                  X               X              X
             p≡           ri2 +         tq q +           ui (xi + x̄i − 1)   mod Jn   (3.37)
                  i∈[k]           q∈Q            i∈[n]


is R-bounded if ktq k∞ ≤ R for any q ∈ Q and kui k∞ ≤ R for any i ∈ [n].
Note that we do not bound the size of the coefficients in the polynomials ri
or in the lifts of the axioms of the form x2 − x in an R-bounded SOS proof.
This is for the simplicity of the semantic characterization below. Moreover
we will see later in Section 5.2.2 that a bound on the polynomials tq and
ui suffice for an efficient proof search.
   For  > 0, an ε-pseudoexpectation for Q over S is a linear functional
E : R[S 2 ] → R satisfying the following:

   • E(1) = 1;                                                                        (3.38)

   • E(p) = E(q) if p ≡ q mod Jn ;                                                    (3.39)

   • E(p2 ) ≥ 0 for any p ∈ R[S];                                                     (3.40)

   • |E(mq)| ≤ ε for any m ∈ S and q ∈ Q.                                             (3.41)

   • |E(m(xi + x̄i − 1))| ≤ ε for any m ∈ S and i ∈ [n].                              (3.42)
   The following two lemmas give the correspondence between R-bounded
refutations of Q over S and ε-pseudoexpectations for Q over S.

Lemma 3.2.11 (Soundness). If there is an ε-pseudoexpectation for Q over
S, then there is no R-bounded refutation of Q over S for R less than
1/ε|S|(|Q| + n).

Proof. Let E be an ε-pseudoexpectation for Q over S, and suppose that
                      X          X
             −1 ≡ s +     tq q +   ui (xi + x̄i − 1) mod Jn
                              q∈Q           i∈[n]

is a refutation over S with ktq k∞ , kui k∞ < 1/ε|S|(|Q| + n) for any q ∈ Q
and i ∈ [n]. Now |E(amq)| ≤ |a|ε for each m ∈ S, q ∈ Q and a ∈ R. Hence
|E(tq q)| < 1/(|Q| + n) for each q ∈ Q. Similarly |E(ui (xi + x̄i − 1))| <
1/(|Q| + n) for each i ∈ [n]. Hence
                                                    
                      X          X
                  E      tq q +    ui (xi + x̄i − 1) < 1.
                         q∈Q              i∈[n]

Now applying E to both sides of the refutation we obtain that
                 X             X
            −1 ≥     E(tq q) +     E(ui (xi + x̄i − 1)) > −1;
                      q∈Q                  i∈[n]

a contradiction.

Lemma 3.2.12 (Completeness). If there is no R-bounded refutation of Q
over S, then there is a (1/R)-pseudoexpectation for Q over S.

Proof. Suppose there is no R-bounded refutation of Q over S, and consider
the following two sets
                                                        SOS
                         A := {p ∈ R[S 2 ] : ∅ `S             p ≥ 0}

and
               X              X
  B := {−1 +         tq q +           ui (xi + x̄i − 1) :
               q∈Q            i∈[n]

        tq , ui ∈ R[S] and ktq k∞ , kui k∞ ≤ R for every q ∈ Q and i ∈ [n]}.
Now, by assumption, A and B are disjoint, A is a convex cone and B is
a convex set. Moreover, by Lemma 3.2.6, A admits an order unit, the
constant polynomial 1. Now, by Lemma 2.4.4, there is a linear functional
E : R[S 2 ] → R such that E(1) = 1, E(p) ≥ 0 for every p ∈ A, and E(p0 ) ≤ 0
for every p0 ∈ B.
   We claim that E has the desired properties. We prove (3.41), and leave
others to the reader. By definition, −1±Rmq ∈ B, and so E(−1±Rmq) ≤ 0
for any m ∈ S and q ∈ Q. Hence |E(mq)| ≤ 1/R.

   In the proof of the completeness lemma we needed the fact that the size
of the coefficients in the squares or in the lifts of the Boolean axioms of the
form x2 − x were not restricted in the definition of an R-bounded refutation
in order to guarantee that the set A is actually a convex cone of the space
R[S 2 ] that admits an order unit.
   Finally we prove a version of the normal form lemma 3.2.10 that takes
into account the size of coefficients appearing in the refutations. This ver-
sion of the lemma together with the proof search algorithm in Section 5.2.2
show that one can p-simulate arbitrary SOS refutations from sets of equality
constraints almost completely inside the squares.

Lemma 3.2.13. Let Q be a set of equality constraints and let S be a set of
monomials that contains all the monomials in Q, all the variables and the
empty monomial 1. If there is an R-bounded SOS refutation of Q over S,
then there is a sum of squares s of polynomials in R[S] and aq , bi ∈ R for
q ∈ Q and i ∈ [n] such that
                        X                X
             −1 ≡ s +         aq q 2 +           bi (xi + x̄i − 1)   mod Jn ,
                        q∈Q              i∈[n]


and |aq |, |bi | ≤ R02 for every q ∈ Q and i ∈ [n] where R0 = R|S|(|Q|+n)+1.

Proof. Suppose towards a contradiction that the conclusion of the lemma
does not hold, and consider the following two sets
                                                      SOS
                        A := {p ∈ R[S 2 ] : ∅S p ≥ 0}
and
                     X                X
        B := {−1 +         aq q 2 +           bi (xi + x̄i − 1) : |aq |, |bi | ≤ R02 }.
                     q∈Q              i∈[n]

Now, by assumption, A and B are disjoint, and, by construction, A is
a convex cone that admits an order unit 1 and B is a convex set. By
Lemma 2.4.4 there is a linear functional L : R[S 2 ] → R such that L(1) = 1,
L(p) ≥ 0 for every p ∈ P and L(q) ≤ 0 for every q ∈ B.
   Now for every q ∈ Q, we have that −1 ± R02 q 2 ∈ B holds, and thus
|L(q 2 )| ≤ 1/R02 . Now let m ∈ S. We show that |L(mq)| ≤ 1/R0 .
   First assume that L(m) = 0. Then
                           L(m2 ± 2amq + a2 q 2 ) ≥ 0
for any a > 0. Thus |L(mq)| ≤ L(m/(2a)) + L((aq 2 )/2) = L((aq 2 )/2) for
any a > 0. Hence L(mq) = 0. Similarly if L(q 2 ) = 0, then L(mq) = 0.
   Assume then that L(m) > 0 and L(q 2 ) > 0. Now
                                                                               !2
   m       mq          q2                              m                q
       ±p           +         ≡                    p            ±p                    mod Jn
 2L(m)   L(m)L(q 2 ) 2L(q 2 )                          2L(m)      2L(q 2 )
Hence
                                  L(mq)
                             1± p            ≥ 0,
                                 L(m)L(q 2 )
                   p
and so |L(mq)| ≤    L(m)L(q 2 ) ≤ 1/R0 , since L(m) ≤ 1 for every m ∈ S.
   By a similar argument we obtain that |L(m(xi + x̄i − 1))| ≤ 1/R0 for
every m ∈ S and i ∈ [n]. Now it is easy to see that L satisfies the other
conditions of an 1/R0 -pseudoexpectation for Q over S. Now, by the sound-
ness lemma above, there is no R0 -bounded refutation of Q over S for R0 less
than R0 /(|S|(|Q| + n)). But this contradicts the assumption that there is
an R-bounded SOS refutation of Q over S.


3.3     Pseudoexpectations for Sherali-Adams
Lastly we consider pseudoexpectations for Sherali-Adams. The basic ideas
and principles behind these are the same as with Sums-of-Squares. We con-
sider first pseudoexpectations against degree and prove the duality theorem
for SA. Secondly we introduce the notion of pseudoexpectations over a set
of monomials for SA.


3.3.1        Pseudoexpectations against degree
For this section fix again sets P and Q of inequality and equality constraints.
A degree d SA pseudoexpectation for P and Q is a linear functional
E : R[x]d → R such that

      • E(1) = 1;                                                                  (3.43)

      • E(p) ≥ 0 when P, Q `d p ≥ 0.
                                        SA
                                                                                   (3.44)

      We denote the set of all degree d SA pseudoexpectations for P and Q by
Ed (P, Q). The duality theorem for SA pseudoexpectations will be again a
 SA



consequence of the following lemma.

Lemma 3.3.1. For any p ∈ R[x]d ,
                                              SA
                                         ∅ `d kpk1 ≥ p,

                                                   aα x α .
                      P                       P
where kpk1 =              α |aα |, when p =

                                 SA
Proof. We prove that `d |a| ≥ am for any monomial m of degree at most
d and any a ∈ R, by induction on the degree of m.
      If deg(m) = 0, then the claim is clear. If deg(m) = 1, then m = x for
                                                              SA
some basic or twin variable x. If a < 0, then `d                   −a − am ≥ 0, and
       SA                                                               SA
so `d       |a| ≥ am. If on the other hand a ≥ 0, then `d                    ax̄ ≥ 0, i.e.
 SA                                SA
`d a − ax ≥ 0, and so `d a ≥ am.
      Suppose then that deg(m) > 1, let a ∈ R and write m = xm0 for some
                                                                             SA
variable x and monomial m0 . Now, by induction assumption, `d |a| ≥ am0 ,
            SA                                                     SA
and so `d |a|x ≥ am. Now, by previous paragraph, `d |a| ≥ |a|x, and so
                 SA
we obtain `d |a| ≥ am.

      By the above lemma, degree d SA-pseudoexpectations for P and Q are
exactly the states in R[x]d for the convex cone of all polynomials provably in
Sherali-Adams non-negative in degree d from P and Q. Hence, by Theorem
2.4.3, we obtain the following Duality Theorem for degree bounded Sherali-
Adams.

Theorem 3.3.2 (Duality theorem). For any p ∈ R[x]d ,
                              SA                            SA
         sup{r ∈ R : P, Q `d p ≥ r} = inf{E(p) : E ∈ Ed (P, Q)}.

Moreover, if Ed (P, Q) 6= ∅, the infimum is attained by some E ∈ Ed (P, Q).
               SA                                                   SA




   An immediate corollary to the above theorem is again the following
soundness and completeness theorem.

Theorem 3.3.3 (Soundness and Completeness). There is a degree d SA
refutation of P and Q if and only if there is no degree d SA-pseudoexpectation
for P and Q.

   To end this subsection we prove an analogue of Lemma 3.2.5 for Sherali-
Adams. For Sherali-Adams we can only prove the lemma for sets of equality
constraints of a special form. Importantly, however, this includes the mul-
tiplicative encoding of CNFs, where we encode a clause `1 ∨ . . . ∨ `k as the
                          `¯i = 0.
                    Q
equality constraint   i∈[k]


Lemma 3.3.4. Let Q be a set of equality constraints of the form q =
0, where q is a positive linear combination of monomials. If there is a
degree d SA refutation of Q, then there is a positive linear combination s of
monomials of degree at most d, and aq ∈ R for each q ∈ Q such that
                                   X
                        −1 ≡ s +          aq q   mod In .
                                   q∈Q


Proof. Suppose towards a contradiction that the conclusion does not hold,
and let C be the convex cone of all polynomials p of degree at most d such
that
                                   X
                          p≡s+           aq q    mod In ,
                                   q∈Q

where s is a positive linear combination of monomials of degree at most
d and aq ∈ R for every q ∈ Q. By assumption −1 ∈
                                               / C. Then, by Lemma
2.4.4, there is some linear functional L : R[x]d → R such that L(1) = 1 and
L(p) ≥ 0 for every p ∈ C.
   Our aim is to prove that L(mq) = 0 for every monomial m such that
the degree of mq is at most d. This shows that L is a degree d SA-
pseudoexpectation for Q, and thus we reach contradiction by the soundness
theorem.
                                                             aα xα , and let m be a mono-
                                                         P
   So fix an arbitrary q ∈ Q, and write q =
mial so that the degree of mq is at most d. First note that L(xα ) = 0 for any
α. This follows, since q is a positive linear combination of monomials, and
L(q) = 0. On the other we have that xα − mxα ∈ C by a simple telescoping
               Q
sum: write m = i∈[k] `i and note that
                  Y                                               Y
        xα − xα           `i ≡ xα `¯1 + xα `1 `¯2 + · · · + xα             `i `¯k   mod In .
                  i∈[k]                                          i∈[k−1]


Hence L(xα ) ≥ L(mxα ). Moreover, since mxα ∈ C, we have that L(mxα ) ≥
0. Hence L(mxα ) = 0 for any α, and so also L(mq) = 0.


3.3.2      Pseudoexpectations against sets of monomials
Secondly we define SA pseudoexpectations over a set of monomials. Fix
again for this section sets P and Q of inequality and equality constraints.
An SA pseudoexpectation for P and Q over S is a linear functional
E : R[S] → R such that

   • E(1) = 1;                                                                                 (3.45)

   • E(p) ≥ 0, when P, Q `S p ≥ 0.                                                             (3.46)

We denote by ES (P, Q) the set of all SA-pseudoexpectations for P and Q
                   SA



over S.
   We need to impose some restrictions to the set S in order to prove the
duality theorem for SA pseudoexpectations over S. We say that the set S is
closed if it satisfies the following two conditions:

   • if S contains a variable x, it contains also its twin x̄;                                 (3.47)
      • for any m ∈ S, there is some variable x and m0 ∈ S such that xm0 = m
        and x̄m0 ∈ S.                                                               (3.48)

Note that it follows from the definition, that if a closed set S of monomials
is non-empty, then 1 ∈ S. With this definition at hand, we can prove the
analogue of Lemma 3.3.1.

Lemma 3.3.5. If S is a closed set of monomials, then for any p ∈ R[S],
                                        SA
                                       `S kpk1 ≥ p.
                             SA
Proof. We prove that `S |a| ≥ am for any m ∈ S and a ∈ R. If a < 0,
                        SA                            SA
then by definition, `S −a − am ≥ 0, and so `S |a| ≥ am.
      Suppose then that a ≥ 0. We argue by induction on the degree of m.
If deg(m) = 0, the claim is clear. If deg(m) = 1, then m = x for some
                                                                SA
variable x. Now, by condition (3.47), x̄ ∈ S, and so `S ax̄ ≥ 0, and so also
 SA                          SA
`S a − ax ≥ 0. Hence `S a ≥ ax.
      Suppose then that deg(m) > 1. By condition (3.48) there is a variable
                                                                               SA
x and m0 ∈ S such that m = xm0 . By induction assumption `S a ≥ am0 .
On the other hand, again by condition (3.48), x̄m0 ∈ S, and so

                      am0 − axm0 = ax̄m0 − am0 (x + x̄ − 1)
                                                                          SA
is a proof over S of non-negativity of am0 − axm0 . Hence `S am0 ≥ axm0 ,
               SA
and so also `S a ≥ am.

Theorem 3.3.6 (Duality theorem). If S is a closed set of monomials, then
for any p ∈ R[S],
                                  SA                                 SA
          sup{r ∈ R : P, Q `S p ≥ r} = inf{E(p) : E ∈ ES (P, Q)}.

Moreover, if ES (P, Q) 6= ∅, then there is E ∈ ES (P, Q) that achieves the
                 SA                                        SA



infimum.

Theorem 3.3.7 (Soundness and Completeness). Let S be a closed set of
monomials. There is an SA refutation of P and Q over S if and only if
there is no SA-pseudoexpectation for P and Q over S.
   Finally we prove an analogue of Lemma 3.2.10 for Sherali-Adams. The
lemma does not take as nice form as the same lemma for SOS.


Lemma 3.3.8. Let Q be a set of equality constraints of the form q = 0,
where q is a positive linear combination of monomials, and let S be a set of
monomials containing all the monomials appearing in Q, all the variables
and the empty monomial 1. If there is an SA refutation of Q over S, then
there is a positive linear combination s of poly(|S|) many monomials, and
aq ∈ R for any q ∈ Q such that
                                     X
                          −1 ≡ s +         aq q   mod In .
                                     q∈Q


Moreover the monomial size of the proof above is poly(|S|).


Proof. Consider the convex cone C of all polynomials p ∈ R[S 2 ] such that
                                 X
                          p≡s+         aq q       mod In ,
                                 q∈Q


where s is a positive linear combination of monomials from S 2 and bino-
mials of the form m − m0 , where both m and m0 are from S 2 and m is a
submonomial of m0 . Note that each binomial in this term has an SA proof
of size poly(n) from ∅.
   Assume towards a contradiction that −1 ∈
                                          / C. Then, by Lemma 2.4.4,
there is some linear functional L : R[S 2 ] → R such that L(1) = 1 and
L(p) ≥ 0 for every p ∈ C.
   Our aim is to prove that L(mq) = 0 for any m ∈ S. This suffices to
prove our: applying L on both sides of the given SA refutation over S yields
an immediate contradiction of the form −1 ≥ 0.
                                          aα xα , and let m ∈ S. Firstly
                                        P
   So let q ∈ Q be arbitrary, write q =
L(xα ) = 0 for any α, since q is a positive linear combination of monomials
and L(q) = 0. Secondly, as xα − mxα ∈ C and mxα ∈ C for any α, we have
that 0 = L(xα ) ≥ L(mxα ) ≥ 0 for any α. Hence L(mq) = 0.
3.4      Sums-of-Squares p-simulates
         Polynomial Calculus Resolution over
         reals – a semantic proof
Finally, we end this chapter by giving a semantic proof of the fact that Sums-
of-Squares polynomially simulates PCR/R, Polynomial Calculus Resolution
over the reals. This simulation was first proved by Berkholz in [15] via a
syntactic proof. Our proof is conceptually rather different and thus might
be of independent interest.
   We will prove that if there is a PCR/R refutation of Q using only mono-
mials from a set S, then there is an SOS refutation of Q over S. We will first
prove a version that does not take into account the size of the coefficients in
the SOS refutation. This proof highlights the main ideas of the proof, but
does not yield the polynomial time simulation. Afterwards we will prove a
version that takes also into account the size of the coefficients. The second
version will yield the p-simulation of PCR/R by SOS.
   We note that, in a similar manner, one could also prove that SOS, and
actually even SA, simulates Resolution. However these proofs have very
much the taste of being the known syntactic proofs (see [25, 8]) in new
clothes to be of novel interest.

Lemma 3.4.1. Let Q be a set of equality constraints over reals, and suppose
there is a PCR/R refutation of Q using only monomials from a set S. Then
there is an SOS refutation of Q over S.


Proof. Suppose towards a contradiction that there is no SOS refutation of
Q over S. Then, by Theorem 3.2.8, there is an SOS pseudoexpectation
E for Q over S. Let p1 , . . . , p` be a PCR/R refutation of Q using only
monomials from the set S. We prove by induction on the structure of the
PCR/R refutation that E(p2i ) = 0 for every i ∈ [`].
   The claim is clear for any q ∈ Q, and for any Boolean axiom. Suppose
then that pi = xpj for some j < i and some variable x. Now p2j − (xpj )2 ≡
(pj − xpj )2 mod Jn and so E((xpj )2 ) ≤ E(p2j ). However, by induction
assumption E(p2j ) = 0, and so also E((xpj )2 ) = 0.
   Suppose finally that pi = apj + bpk for some j, k < i, and a, b ∈ R.
Now, by induction assumption, E(p2j ) = E(p2k ) = 0. Moreover, since p2j ±
2pj pk + p2k = (pj ± pk )2 , we have that |E(2pj pk )| ≤ E(p2j ) + E(p2k ), and so
E(pj pk ) = 0. Now E(p2i ) = E(a2 p2j ) + E(2abpj pk ) + E(b2 p2k ) = 0.
   Now E(1) = 0, against the definition of an SOS pseudoexpectation over
S. Hence there is an SOS refutation of Q over S.

   Now we incorporate bounds on the coefficients into the proof. However
we lose some of the elegance of the above proof in doing so. We say that
a PCR/R refutation is R-bounded if all the coefficients appearing in the
proof are bounded by R in absolute value and the scalars a and b in the
inference step from pj and pk to apj + bpk are also bounded by R in absolute
value.
   We give a bound on the magnitude of the coefficients in the SOS refu-
tation in terms of a bound on the size of coefficients in the given PCR/R
refutation and the height of the refutation. Recall that the height of a
PCR/R proof p1 , . . . , p` from Q is the length of the longest subsequence
pi1 , . . . , pik such that pij is a direct antecedent of pij+1 for any j < k. Given
a PCR/R proof p1 , . . . , p` from Q, we define the height of a polynomial
pi in the proof as follows: if pi ∈ Q, then pi is at height 0. If pi is obtained
from some pj for j < i by a lift with a variable x, i.e. pi = xpj for some
variable x, and pj is at height h, then pi is at height h + 1. Finally if pi is
obtained from pj and pk for j, k < i by linear combination, i.e. there are
some a, b ∈ R such that pi = apj + bpk , and pj and pk are at heights h and
h0 , respectively, then pi is at height max{h, h0 } + 1.

Lemma 3.4.2. Let Q be a set of equality constraints, let R ≥ 2 and sup-
pose there is an R-bounded PCR/R refutation of Q of height h using only
monomials from a set S. Then there is an R4h+5 -bounded SOS refutation
of Q over S.

Proof. We prove that there is a sum of squares s of polynomials in R[S] and
aq , bi ∈ R for every q ∈ Q and i ∈ [n] such that |aq |, |bi | ≤ R4(h+1) and
                         X           X
              −1 ≡ s +      aq q 2 +   bi (xi + x̄i − 1)2 mod Jn .         (3.49)
                          q∈Q                i∈[n]


Now (3.49) is an R4h+5 -bounded SOS refutation of Q, since, by assumption,
kqk∞ ≤ R for any q ∈ Q.
   Suppose towards a contradiction that the above claim does not hold.
Then the following sets are disjoint:
                                                         SOS
                          A := {p ∈ R[S 2 ] : ∅ `S             p ≥ 0}

and
                    X                X
      B := {−1 +          aq q 2 +           bi (xi + x̄i − 1)2 : |aq |, |bi | ≤ R4(h+1) }.
                    q∈Q              i∈[n]

Now A is a convex cone admitting an order unit 1 and B is a convex set. By
Theorem 2.4.4 there is a non-trivial linear functional E : R[S 2 ] → R such
that E(1) = 1 and E(p) ≥ 0 for every p ∈ A and E(q) ≤ 0 for every q ∈ B.
   Let p1 , . . . , p` be an R-bounded PCR/R refutation of Q of height h using
only monomials from a set S. We prove by induction on the structure of
                                                                                          0
the refutation that for any pi at height h0 we have E(p2i ) ≤ 1/R4(h−h +1) .
   The claim holds for any q ∈ Q, since any q ∈ Q is at height 0 and
we have that −1 + R4(h+1) q 2 ∈ B, and thus E(−1 + R4(h+1) q 2 ) ≤ 0, i.e.
E(q 2 ) ≤ 1/R4(h+1) . Similarly, the claim holds for any Boolean axiom.
   Suppose that pi at height h0 + 1 is obtained from pj via a lift with
a variable x, i.e. pi = xpj for some x. Now E((xpj )2 ) ≤ E(p2j ), since
p2j −(xpj )2 ≡ (pj −xpj )2 mod Jn . Now pj is at height h0 , and so by induction
                                       0                                            0
assumption, E(p2j ) ≤ 1/R4(h−h +1) . Hence E((xpj )2 ) ≤ 1/R4(h−h ) .
   Suppose then that pi at height h0 +1 is obtained from pj and pk via linear
combination, i.e. that there are some a, b ∈ R such that pi = apj +bpk . Now
both pj and pk are at most at height h0 , and so, by induction assumption,
                             0
E(p2j ), E(p2k ) ≤ 1/R4(h−h +1) . Secondly, by assumption, |a|, |b| ≤ R, and so
                                                                 0
a2 , b2 ≤ R2 . Hence E(a2 p2j ), E(b2 p2k ) ≤ R2 /R4(h−h +1) . Thirdly

                     a2 p2j − 2abpj pk + b2 p2k = (apj − bpk )2 ,
and so E(2abpj pk ) ≤ E(a2 p2j ) + E(b2 p2k ). Now

                     E(p2i ) = E(a2 p2j ) + E(2abpj pk ) + E(b2 p2k )
                             ≤ 2 E(a2 p2j ) + E(b2 p2k )
                                                        
                                                 0
                            ≤ 4R2 /R4(h−h +1)
                                             0
                            ≤ R4 /R4(h−h +1)
                                         0
                            = 1/R4(h−h ) ,

where the fourth line follows, since R2 ≥ 4.
   Now E(1) ≤ 1/R against the assumption that E(1) = 1.

   The above lemma together with the proof search algorithm in Section
5.2.2 show that we can find the SOS refutation whose existence is guar-
anteed by the above lemma in time polynomial in hQi, |S|, log R and h.
Hence we obtain the following corollary.

Corollary 3.4.3. Sums-of-Squares p-simulates Polynomial Calculus Reso-
lution over reals.

   The argument above is clearly not as computationally efficient as the
simulation given by the syntactic proof of [15]. However it is a nice illus-
tration of the use of semantic arguments to prove properties of resource-
bounded refutations.
Chapter 4

Size-degree trade-offs for
Sherali-Adams and
Sums-of-Squares proofs

In this chapter we prove a size-degree trade-off for SOS and SA refuta-
tions. Our results match their analogues for other proof systems that
were considered before. Building on the work of [12] and [22] a size-width
trade-off theorem was established for Resolution: a Resolution refutation
with s many clauses can be converted into one in which all clauses have
        √
width O( n log s + k), where k is the size of the largest initial clause [14].
The same type of trade-off was also concurrently established for monomial
size and degree for the Polynomial Calculus in [46], and later for proof
length and rank for LS and LS+ [70], i.e., the proof systems that come out
of the Lovász-Schrijver LP and SDP hierarchies [64]1 .
    Our proof of the trade-off theorem for SA and SOS follows the standard
pattern of the previous proofs with one new key ingredient. Suppose P and
Q are a sets of inequality and equality constraints that admit a SA/SOS
   1
     Besides the proofs of the trade-off results for LS and LS+ , the conference version of
[70] claims the result for the stronger Sherali-Adams and Lasserre/SOS proof systems,
but the claim is made without proof. The very last section of the journal version [70]
includes a sketch of a proof that, unfortunately, is an oversimplification of the LS/LS+
argument that cannot be turned into a correct proof. The forthcoming discussion clarifies
how our proof is based on, and generalizes, the one for LS/LS+ in [70].


                                            61
refutation of monomial size s. Going back to the main idea from [22],
the argument for getting a degree d refutation goes in four steps: (1) find
a variable x that appears in many large monomials, (2) set it to a value
b ∈ {0, 1} to kill all monomials where it appears, (3) induct on the number
of variables to get a refutation of P [x/b] and Q[x/b], and a refutation of
P [x/1−b] and Q[x/1−b] which, if s is small enough, are of degrees d−1 and
d, respectively, and (4) compose these refutations together to get a degree
d refutation of P and Q. The main difficulty in making this work for SA
and SOS is step (4).
   The main difficulty is that, unlike Resolution and the other proof sys-
tems which are deductive proof systems based on inference rules, the SA
and SOS proofs are formal polynomial identities. Such proof systems
also known as static systems. This means that, for SA and SOS, the rea-
soning it takes to refute P and Q from the degree d − 1 refutation of P [x/b]
and Q[x/b] and the degree d refutation of P [x/1 − b] and Q[x/1 − b] needs
to be witnessed through a single polynomial identity, without exceeding the
bound d on the degree. This is challenging because the general simulation
of a deductive proof by a static one incurs a degree loss.
   In order to overcome this difficulty we turn to pseudoexpectations. One
of the key insights of this chapter is that the duality theorem for SA and
SOS is instrumental in completing the step (4) in the proof of the trade-off
theorem. We reached this conclusion from trying to generalize the proofs
for LS and LS+ from [70] to SA and SOS. In those proofs, the corresponding
zero-gap duality theorems are required only for the very special case where
d = 2 and for deriving linear inequalities from linear constraints. The fact
that these hold goes back to the work of Lovász and Schrijver [64].
   In Section 4.6 we list some of the applications of the size-degree trade-
off for SOS that follow from known degree lower bounds. Among these we
include exponential size SOS lower bounds for Tseitin formulas, Knapsack
formulas, and optimal integrality gaps for sparse random instances of MAX-
3-XOR and MAX-3-SAT. Except for Knapsack formulas, for which size
lower bounds follow from an easy random restriction argument applied to
the degree lower bounds in [36, 38], these size lower bounds for SOS appear
to be new.
   For the proofs below we need to consider the sets of constraints given
as indexed sets of constraints P = {p1 ≥ 0, . . . , p` ≥ 0} and Q = {q1 =
0, . . . , qm = 0}. Hence SA and SOS proofs of non-negativity of r from P
and Q take the form
                              X                 X
                   r ≡ s0 +           si pi +           tj qj   mod In ,   (4.1)
                              i∈[`]             j∈[m]


where si is either a polynomial with non-negative coefficients for SA or
a sum-of-squares for SOS for each i ∈ [`] ∪ {0} and tj is an arbitrary
polynomial for each j ∈ [m]
   Our main results of this chapter are as follows.

Theorem 4.0.1. For every two natural numbers n and k, every indexed
sets P and Q of polynomial inequality and equality constraints of degree
at most k in n pairs of twin variables, and every positive integers s, if
there is an SOS refutation from P and Q with at most s many explicit
monomials, then there is an SOS refutation of P and Q of degree at most
 p
4 2(n + 1) log(s) + k + 4.

Theorem 4.0.2. For every two natural numbers n and k, every indexed sets
P and Q of polynomial inequality and equality constrains of degree at most
k in n pairs of twin variables, and every positive integers s, if there is an SA
refutation from P and Q with at most s many explicit monomials, then there
                                                  p
is an SA refutation of P and Q of degree at most 2 2(n + 1) log(s) + k + 2.

   Immediate consequences of the above theorems are degree criteria for
size lower bounds in Sherali-Adams and Sums-of-Squares:

Corollary 4.0.3. Let P and Q be indexed sets of polynomials of degree at
most k in n pairs of twin variables. If d is the minimum degree of an SOS
refutation of P and Q and s is the minimum number of explicit monomials
in a refutation of P and Q, and d ≥ k + 4, then

                     s ≥ exp((d − k − 4)2 /(32(n + 1))).
Corollary 4.0.4. Let P and Q be indexed sets of polynomials of degree at
most k in n pairs of twin variables. If d is the minimum degree of an SA
refutation of P and Q and s is the minimum number of explicit monomials
in an SA refutation of P and Q, and d ≥ k + 2, then

                     s ≥ exp((d − k − 2)2 /(8(n + 1))).

   The proofs of Theorems 4.0.1 and 4.0.2 will follow the standard structure
of proofs for degree-reduction lemmas for other proof systems, except for
some complications in the unrestricting lemmas. These difficulties come
from the fact that both SA and SOS proofs are static. The main tool around
these difficulties is a tight Duality Theorem for degree-bounded proofs with
respect to so-called cut-off functions as defined next.



4.1      Duality modulo cut-off functions
Let P = {p1 ≥ 0, . . . p` ≥ 0} and Q = {q1 = 0, . . . , qm = 0} be indexed sets
of polynomial constraints. A cut-off function for P and Q is a function
c : [` + m] → N with c(i) ≥ deg(pi ) for each i ≤ `, and c(j) ≥ deg(qj−` )
for each j > `. An SA or SOS proof as in (4.1) has degree mod c at
most d if deg(p) ≤ d, deg(s0 ) ≤ d, deg(si ) ≤ d − c(i) for each i ∈ [`], and
deg(tj ) ≤ d − c(j) for each j ∈ [m].
                     SA                      SOS
   We write P, Q `c,d q ≥ p and P, Q `c,d q ≥ p if there is an SA or
an SOS proof of non-negativity of q − p, respectively, from P and Q of
degree mod c at most d. An SA-pseudoexpectation for P and Q of degree
mod c at most d is a linear functional E from the set of all polynomials
                                                                     SA
of degree at most d such that E(1) = 1 and E(q) ≥ 0 if P, Q `c,d q ≥ 0.
The SOS-pseudoexpectations for P and Q of degree mod c at most d are
defined analogously. We denote by Ec,d (P, Q) and Ec,d (P, Q) the sets of all
                                        SA            SOS



SA and SOS pseudoexpectations of degree mod c at most d, respectively.
   Again, by Lemmas 3.2.1 and 3.3.1 and Theorem 2.4.3, we obtain the
following Duality Theorems for proofs and pseudoexpectations modulo any
cut-off function.
Theorem 4.1.1. Let d be a positive integer, let P and Q be indexed sets
of polynomial inequality and equality constrains, let c be a cut-off function
for P and Q, and let p be a polynomial of degree at most 2d. Then
                              SOS                         SOS
         sup{r ∈ R : P, Q `c,2d p ≥ r} = inf{E(p) : E ∈ Ec,2d (P, Q)}.

Moreover, if the set Ec,2d (P, Q) is non-empty, then there is a pseudoexpec-
                        SOS



tation achieving the infimum.

Theorem 4.1.2. Let d be a positive integer, let P and Q be indexed sets
of polynomial inequality and equality constraints, let c be a cut-off function
for P and Q, and let p be a polynomial of degree at most d. Then
                              SA                          SA
         sup{r ∈ R : P, Q `c,d p ≥ r} = inf{E(p) : E ∈ Ec,d (P, Q)}.

Moreover, if the set Ec,d (P, Q) is non-empty, then there is a pseudoexpecta-
                       SA



tion achieving the infimum.

   The role of the cut-off function c in our application below will be ex-
plained in due time; i.e., after its use in the unrestricting Lemmas 4.3.2 and
4.2.2 below. It is important for the lemmas that follow that the duality
theorem is tight in two ways: that they have zero duality gap and that
they respect the degree; i.e., the degree bound is the same for proofs and
pseudoexpectations.



4.2       Unrestricting lemmas for
          Sums-of-Squares
For this section, fix two positive integers n and d for the numbers of pairs
of twin variables and degree, respectively. We also fix two indexed sets
P = {p1 ≥ 0, . . . , p` ≥ 0} and Q = {q1 = 0, . . . , qm = 0} of polynomial
constraints in the n pairs of twin variables, and a cut-off function c for P
and Q.
Lemma 4.2.1. Let x be one of the 2n variables and let m be a monomial
of degree at most 2d − 1. Then E(x) = 0 implies E(xm) = 0 for any
E ∈ Ec,2d (P, Q).
      SOS




Proof. Let m1 and m2 be two monomials of degree at most d − 1 and d,
respectively, such that m = m1 m2 . Note first that E((xm1 )2 ) = 0, since
x − (xm1 )2 ≡ (x − xm1 )2 mod In and all degrees are at most 2d. Hence,
0 = E(x) ≥ E((xm1 )2 ) ≥ 0. Let then a = E(m22 ) and note that a ≥ 0. For
every positive integer k we have

                  1                                       a
         E(xm) ≤    (E(2kxm1 m2 ) + E((kxm1 − m2 )2 )) =     ,
                 2k                                      2k
                  1                                          a
         E(xm) ≥    (E(2kxm1 m2 ) − E((kxm1 + m2 )2 )) = − ,
                 2k                                         2k

where in both cases the equalities follow from E((xm1 )2 ) = 0 and E(m22 ) =
a. Since a ≥ 0 and the inequalities hold for every k > 0 it must be that
E(xm) = 0 and the lemma is proved.


   For q a polynomial in the n pairs of twin variables, i ∈ [n] an index,
and b ∈ {0, 1} a Boolean value, we denote by q[i/b] the polynomial that
results from assigning xi to b and x̄i to 1−b in q. We extend the notation to
indexed sets of such polynomials through P [i/b] to mean {pj [i/b] : j ∈ [`]}.
Note that pj [i/b] is a polynomial in n − 1 pairs of twin variables, and its
degree is at most the degree of pj .

Lemma 4.2.2. Let i ∈ [n], let Q0 and Q1 be the extensions of Q with
the polynomials qm+1 = xi and qm+1 = x̄i , respectively, and let c0 be the
extension of c that maps ` + m + 1 to 1. The following hold:

  1. The function c0 is a cut-off function for both P and Q0 , and P and
      Q1 ;                                                               (4.2)
                        SOS                        SOS
  2. If P [i/0], Q[i/0] `c,2d −1 ≥ 0, then P, Q0 `c0 ,2d −1 ≥ 0;         (4.3)
                        SOS                        SOS
  3. If P [i/1], Q[i/1] `c,2d −1 ≥ 0, then P, Q1 `c0 ,2d −1 ≥ 0.         (4.4)
Proof. (4.2) is obvious. By symmetry we prove only (4.3). Suppose that
                SOS
P [i/0], Q[i/0] `c,2d −1 ≥ 0, say:
                               X                          X
              −1 = s0 +                sj pj [i/0] +             tk qk [i/0]   mod In              (4.5)
                               j∈[`]                     k∈[m]

                                                     α
                                  P
For j ∈ [`], write pj =                α∈Ij aj,α x       , let Jj = {α ∈ Ij : αi ≥ 1} and
Kj = {α ∈ Ij : αi = 0 and αn+i ≥ 1} and note that
                    X                                           X                 α            α
  pj [i/0] = pj +          aj,α (xα /xαi i )(−xαi i ) +              aj,α (xα /x̄i n+i )(1 − x̄i n+i ).
                    α∈Jj                                    α∈Kj


Therefore pj [i/0] ≡ pj + rj xi mod In where
                            X                  α
                                                            X
                 rj =             aj,α (xα /x̄i n+i ) −             aj,α (xα /xαi i ).
                           α∈Kj                             α∈Jj


Note that deg(rj ) ≤ deg(pj ) − 1 since αi ≥ 1 for α ∈ Jj and αn+i ≥ 1 for
α ∈ Kj . Now
                           sj pj [i/0] ≡ sj pj + sj rj xi           mod In .

Because c is a cut-off function for P and Q and c0 (j) = c(j), we have
deg(sj ) ≤ 2d − c(j) = 2d − c0 (j). Likewise we have:

    deg(sj rj ) ≤ deg(sj ) + deg(rj ) ≤ 2d − c(j) + deg(pj ) − 1 ≤ 2d − 1.

The second inequality follows from the fact that deg(rj ) ≤ deg(pj ) − 1 for
all j ∈ [m], the third inequality follows from the fact that c is a cut-off
                                                          SOS
function for P and Q. Hence, P, Q0 `c0 ,2d sj pj [i/0]. A similar argument
                                                                                 SOS
with tj and qj in place of sj and pj shows that P, Q0 `c0 ,2d tj qj [i/0]. This
gives proofs for all terms in the right-hand side of (4.5), and the proof of
the lemma is complete.

   Some comments are in order about the role of the cut-off function in the
above proof. First note that, at the semantic level, the constraint pj [i/0] ≥ 0
is equivalent to the pair of constraints pj ≥ 0 and xi = 0. At the level of
syntactic proofs, though, these two representations of the same constraint
behave differently: although a lift sj pj [i/0] of the restriction pj [i/0] ≡ pj +
rj xi of pj may have its degree bounded by 2d, the degree of its direct
simulation through sj pj + sj rj xi could exceed 2d. The role of the cut-off
function is to restrict the lifts sj pj [i/0] in such a way that their simulation
through sj pj + sj rj xi remains a valid lift of degree at most 2d; this is
the case if, indeed, the allowed lifts sj pj [i/0] of pj [i/0] are those satisfying
deg(sj ) ≤ 2d − c(j), where c(j) ≥ deg(pj ). This is why c is designed to
depend only on the index j and not on the polynomial indexed by j.

Lemma 4.2.3. Let i ∈ [n], let Q0 and Q1 be the extensions of Q with
the polynomials qm+1 = xi and qm+1 = x̄i , respectively, and let c0 be the
extension of c that maps ` + m + 1 to 1. The following hold:

   • The function c0 is a cut-off function for both P and Q0 , and P and
      Q1 ;                                                                                (4.6)
   • If P, Q0 `c0 ,2d −1 ≥ 0, then E(xi ) > 0 for any E ∈ Ec,2d (P, Q); (4.7)
                   SOS                                                       SOS




   • If P, Q1 `c0 ,2d −1 ≥ 0, then E(x̄i ) > 0 for any E ∈ Ec,2d (P, Q). (4.8)
                   SOS                                                       SOS




Proof. (4.6) is obvious. We prove (4.7); the proof of (4.8) is symmetric.
   Suppose towards a contradiction that there is E ∈ Ec,2d (P, Q) such that
                                                                       SOS



E(xi ) = 0. We want to show that E is also in Ec0 ,2d (P, Q0 ). This contradicts
                                                             SOS


                                    SOS
the assumption that P, Q0 `c0 ,2d −1 ≥ 0. Let
                          X                 X
               r ≡ s0 +           sj pj +           tk qk + tm+1 xi   mod In              (4.9)
                          j∈[`]             k∈[m]


be an SOS proof from P and Q0 of degree mod c0 at most 2d. First note
that deg(tm+1 ) ≤ 2d − c0 (m + 1) ≤ 2d − 1. Therefore, Lemma 4.2.1 applies
to all the monomials of tm+1 , so that E(tm+1 xi ) = 0. The rest of (4.9) will
get a non-negative value through E, since by assumption E is in Ec,2d (P, Q)
                                                                                   SOS



and c is c0 restricted to [` + m]. Thus, E is in Ec0 ,2d (P, Q0 ).
                                                               SOS




Lemma 4.2.4. Let i ∈ [n] and assume that d ≥ 2. The following hold:

   • If P [i/0], Q[i/0] `c,2d−2 −1 ≥ 0 and P [i/1], Q[i/1] `c,2d −1 ≥ 0, then
                           SOS                                           SOS


             SOS
      P, Q `c,2d −1 ≥ 0;                                                                 (4.10)
   • If P [i/0], Q[i/0] `c,2d −1 ≥ 0 and P [i/1], Q[i/1] `c,2d−2 −1 ≥ 0, then
                            SOS                                        SOS


             SOS
       P, Q `c,2d −1 ≥ 0.                                                          (4.11)

Proof. First note that −x̄i xi = (x2i − xi ) − xi (xi + x̄i − 1), and d ≥ 1, so
that
                                        SOS
                                     `c,2d −x̄i xi ≥ 0.                            (4.12)

We prove (4.10); the proof of (4.11) is entirely analogous.
                                  SOS
   Assume P [i/0], Q[i/0] `c,2d−2 −1 ≥ 0. By Lemmas 4.2.2 and 4.2.3 and
d ≥ 2 we have E(xi ) > 0 for any E ∈ Ec,2d−2 (P, Q). Then, by the Duality
                                                    SOS


                                                                 SOS
Theorem 4.1.1, there exist  > 0 such that P, Q `c,2d−2 xi ≥ . To see this,
let γ = sup{r ∈ R : P, Q `c,2d−2 xi ≥ r} = inf{E(xi ) : E ∈ Ec,2d−2 (P, Q)}.
                                  SOS                                        SOS



If Ec,2d−2 (P, Q) is empty, then γ = +∞ and any  > 0 serves the purpose. If
    SOS



Ec,2d−2 (P, Q) is non-empty, then the Duality Theorem says that the infimum
 SOS



is achieved, hence γ = E(xi ) > 0 for some E in Ec,2d−2 (P, Q), and  = γ/2 >
                                                               SOS


                                                               SOS
0 serves the purpose. Using d ≥ 2 again, P, Q `c,2d x̄2i xi ≥ x̄2i , so
                                          SOS
                                  P, Q `c,2d x̄i xi ≥ x̄i .                       (4.13)

                                    SOS
Assume also P [i/1], Q[i/1] `c,2d −1 ≥ 0. By Lemmas 4.2.2 and 4.2.3 we
have E(x̄i ) > 0 for any E ∈ Ec,2d (P, Q), and this time d ≥ 1 suffices. By
                                        SOS



the same argument as before, by the Duality Theorem there exist δ > 0
                   SOS
such that P, Q `c,2d x̄i ≥ δ. Now d ≥ 1 suffices to get
                                              SOS
                                   P, Q `c,2d x̄i  ≥ δ.                          (4.14)

                                                            SOS                      SOS
Adding (4.12), (4.13) and (4.14) gives P, Q `c,2d 0 ≥ δ, i.e., P, Q `c,2d
−1 ≥ 0.



4.3       Unrestricting lemmas for
          Sherali-Adams
For this section, fix again two positive integers n and d, two indexed sets
P = {p1 ≥ 0, . . . , p` ≥ 0} and Q = {q1 = 0, . . . , qm = 0} of polynomial
constraints in the n pairs of twin variables, and a cut-off functionc for P
and Q.
     The proofs for the unrestricting lemmas for SA are mostly the same as
in the case of SOS. We do highlight the important differences in the proofs
between the two systems when they appear. First important difference
comes in the following lemma, which is an analogue of Lemma 4.2.1. For
Sherali-Adams the proof of the lemma is much less involved than for Sums-
of-Squares.

Lemma 4.3.1. Let x be one of the 2n variables and let m be a monomial
of degree at most d − 1. Then E(x) = 0 implies E(xm) = 0 for any
E ∈ Ec,d (P, Q).
        SA


                    Q
Proof. Let m =          i∈[d−1] yi .   The proof follows, since Sherali-Adams has a
direct proof of x − xm by the following telescoping sum:
                Y                                  Y
         x−x         yi ≡ xȳi + xy1 ȳ2 + · · · x   yi ȳd−1 mod In .
                i∈[d−1]                                 i∈[d−2]

Hence 0 = E(x) ≥ E(xm). On the other hand E(xm) ≥ 0, and so E(xm) =
0.

     The following two lemmas are analogues of Lemmas 4.2.2 and 4.2.3 for
Sherali-Adams, and the proofs are practically the same.

Lemma 4.3.2. Let i ∈ [n], let Q0 and Q1 be the extensions of Q with
the polynomials qm+1 = xi and qm+1 = x̄i , respectively, and let c0 be the
extension of c that maps ` + m + 1 to 1. The following hold:

     • The function c0 is a cut-off function for both P and Q0 , and P and
       Q1 ;                                                                     (4.15)
     • If P [i/0], Q[i/0] `c,d −1 ≥ 0, then P, Q0 `c0 d −1 ≥ 0;
                              SA                            SA
                                                                                (4.16)
     • If P [i/1], Q[i/1] `c,d −1 ≥ 0, then P, Q1 `
                              SA                            SA
                                                            c0 ,d   −1 ≥ 0.     (4.17)

Proof. (4.15) is obvious. By symmetry we prove only (4.16). Suppose that
                   SA
P [i/0], Q[i/0] `c,d −1 ≥ 0, say:
                          X                 X
               −1 = s0 +      sj pj [i/0] +   tk qk [i/0]              mod In   (4.18)
                              j∈[`]             k∈[m]
                                                 α
                                 P
For j ∈ [`], write pj =            α∈Ij aj,α x       , let Jj = {α ∈ Ij : αi ≥ 1} and
Kj = {α ∈ Ij : αi = 0 and αn+i ≥ 1} and note that
                 X                               X             α             α
 pj [i/0] = pj +    aj,α (xα /xαi i )(−xαi i ) +   aj,α (xα /x̄i n+i )(1 − x̄i n+i ).
                   α∈Jj                                 α∈Kj


Therefore pj [i/0] ≡ pj + rj xi mod In where
                      X                α
                                                 X
                 rj =      aj,α (xα /x̄i n+i ) −   aj,α (xα /xαi i ).
                          α∈Kj                          α∈Jj


Note that deg(rj ) ≤ deg(pj ) − 1 since αi ≥ 1 for α ∈ Jj and αn+i ≥ 1 for
α ∈ Kj . Now
                          sj pj [i/0] ≡ sj pj + sj rj xi       mod In .

Because c is a cut-off function for P and Q and c0 (j) = c(j), we have
deg(sj ) ≤ d − c(j) = d − c0 (j). Likewise we have:

      deg(sj rj ) ≤ deg(sj ) + deg(rj ) ≤ d − c0 (j) + deg(pj ) − 1 ≤ d − 1.

The second inequality follows from the fact that deg(rj ) ≤ deg(pj ) − 1 for
all j ∈ [m], the third inequality follows from the fact that c is a cut-off
                                                 SA
function for P and Q. Hence, P, Q0 `c0 ,d sj pj [i/0]. A similar argument with
                                                                   SA
tj and qj in place of sj and pj shows that P, Q0 `c0 ,d tj qj [i/0]. This gives
proofs for all terms in the right-hand side of (4.18), and the proof of the
lemma is complete.

Lemma 4.3.3. Let i ∈ [n], let Q0 and Q1 be the extensions of Q with
the polynomials qm+1 = xi and qm+1 = x̄i , respectively, and let c0 be the
extension of c that maps ` + m + 1 to 1. The following hold:

    • The function c0 is a cut-off function for both P and Q0 , and P and
      Q1 ;                                                                          (4.19)
    • If P, Q0 `c0 ,d −1 ≥ 0, then E(xi ) > 0 for any E ∈ Ec,d (P, Q); (4.20)
                  SA                                                           SA



    • If P, Q1 `c0 ,d −1 ≥ 0, then E(x̄i ) > 0 for any E ∈ Ec,d (P, Q). (4.21)
                  SA                                                           SA




Proof. (4.19) is obvious. We prove (4.20); the proof of (4.21) is symmetric.
Suppose towards a contradiction that there is E ∈ Ec,d (P, Q) such that
                                                                          SA
E(xi ) = 0. We want to show that E is also in Ec0 ,d (P, Q0 ). This contradicts
                                                                   SA


                                    SA
the assumption that P, Q0 `c0 ,d −1 ≥ 0. Let
                          X                   X
               r ≡ s0 +           sj pj +             tk qk + tm+1 xi        mod In           (4.22)
                          j∈[`]               k∈[m]


be an SA proof from P and Q0 of degree mod c0 at most d. First note that
deg(tm+1 ) ≤ d − c0 (m + 1) ≤ 2d − 1. Therefore, Lemma 4.3.1 applies to all
the monomials of tm+1 , so that E(tm+1 xi ) = 0. The rest of (4.22) will get a
non-negative value through E, since by assumption E is in Ec,d (P, Q) and
                                                                                         SA



c is c0 restricted to [` + m]. Thus, E is in Ec0 d (P, Q0 ).
                                                              SA




   Finally we obtain the following analogue of Lemma 4.2.4.

Lemma 4.3.4. Let i ∈ [n] and assume that d ≥ 2. The following hold:

   • If P [i/0], Q[i/0] `c,d−1 −1 ≥ 0 and P [i/1], Q[i/1] `c,d −1 ≥ 0, then
                           SA                                                      SA


             SA
       P, Q `c,d −1 ≥ 0;                                                                      (4.23)
   • If P [i/0], Q[i/0] `c,d −1 ≥ 0 and P [i/1], Q[i/1] `c,d−1 −1 ≥ 0, then
                           SA                                                 SA


             SA
       P, Q `c,d −1 ≥ 0.                                                                      (4.24)

Proof. First note that −x̄i xi = (x2i − xi ) − xi (xi + x̄i − 1), and d ≥ 2, so
that
                                         SA
                                        `c,d −x̄i xi ≥ 0.                                     (4.25)

We prove (4.23); the proof of (4.24) is entirely analogous.
                                   SA
   Assume P [i/0], Q[i/0] `c,d−1 −1 ≥ 0. By Lemmas 4.3.2 and 4.3.3 and
d ≥ 2 we have E(xi ) > 0 for any E ∈ Ec,d−1 (P, Q). Then, by the Duality
                                                         SA


                                                                        SA
Theorem 4.1.2, there exist  > 0 such that P, Q `c,d−1 xi ≥ . To see this,
let γ = sup{r ∈ R : P, Q `c,d−1 xi ≥ r} = inf{E(xi ) : E ∈ Ec,d−1 (P, Q)}. If
                                  SA                                                    SA



Ec,d−1 (P, Q) is empty, then γ = +∞ and any  > 0 serves the purpose. If
 SA



Ec,d−1 (P, Q) is non-empty, then the Duality Theorem says that the infimum
 SA



is achieved, hence γ = E(xi ) > 0 for some E in Ec,d−1 (P, Q), and  = γ/2 >
                                                                    SA



0 serves the purpose. Using d ≥ 2 again, we obtain that
                                              SA
                                  P, Q `c,d x̄i xi ≥ x̄i .                                   (4.26)
                                SA
Assume also P [i/1], Q[i/1] `c,d −1 ≥ 0. By Lemmas 4.3.2 and 4.3.3 we
have E(x̄i ) > 0 for any E ∈ Ec,d (P, Q), and this time d ≥ 1 suffices. By the
                                 SA



same argument as before, by the Duality Theorem there exist δ > 0 such
            SA
that P, Q `c,d x̄i ≥ δ. Now d ≥ 1 suffices to get
                                          SA
                               P, Q `c,d x̄i  ≥ δ.                               (4.27)
                                                            SA                SA
Adding (4.25), (4.26) and (4.27) gives P, Q `c,d 0 ≥ δ, i.e., P, Q `c,d −1 ≥
0.


4.4      Size-degree trade-off for
         Sums-of-Squares
We need one more technical concept: an SOS proof as in (4.1) is multi-
linear if s0 and sj are sums of squares of multilinear polynomials for each
j ∈ [`], and tk is a multilinear polynomial for each k ∈ [m].

Lemma 4.4.1. For every positive integer s and any indexed sets P and Q of
polynomial inequality and equality constraints, if there is an SOS refutation
from P and Q with at most s many distinct significant monomials, then
there is a multilinear SOS refutation from P and Q with at most s many
distinct significant monomials.

Proof. Let P = {p1 ≥ 0, . . . , p` ≥ 0} and Q = {q1 = 0, . . . , qm = 0}
and suppose that there is a refutation from P and Q as in (4.1), with
                       Pkj 2
s0 = ki=1
     P0 2
          ri,0 and sj = i=1 ri,j for j ∈ [`], where the number of distinct
monomials among the ri,0 , ri,j and tk is at most s. For each polynomial
r let r̄ be its direct multilinearization; i.e., each power xl with l ≥ 2 that
appears in r is replaced by x. It is obvious that r ≡ r̄ mod In and also
r2 ≡ r̄2 mod In , where n is the number of pairs of twin variables in P and
Q. Moreover, the number of distinct monomials among r̄i,0 , r̄i,j and t̄k does
not exceed s. Thus, setting s00 = ki=1 r̄i,0 , s0j = ki=1 r̄i,J and t0k = t̄k we
                                 P0 2               PJ 2

get
                               X                  X
                  −1 ≡ s00 +           s0j pj +           t0k qk   mod In .        (4.28)
                               j∈[`]              k∈[m]
It follows that P Q has a multilinear refutation with at most s distinct
significant monomials.

   Theorem 4.0.1 will be a consequence of the following lemma for a suitable
choice of d and c:

Lemma 4.4.2. For every natural number n, any indexed sets P and Q of
polynomial inequality and equality constraints in n pairs of twin variables,
every cut-off function c for P and Q, every real s ≥ 1 and every positive
integer d, if there is a multilinear SOS refutation from P and Q with at
most s many distinct significant monomials of degree at least d, then there
is an SOS refutation from P and Q of degree mod c at most 2d0 +2d00 , where
d0 = d + b2(n + 1) log(s)/dc and d00 = max{1, d(max c)/2e}.

Proof. The proof is an induction on n. Let P and Q be indexed sets of
polynomials in n pairs of twin variables, let c be a cut-off function for P
and Q, let s ≥ 1 be a real, let d be a positive integer, and let Π be a
multilinear refutation of P and Q with at most s many distinct significant
monomials of degree at least d.
   For n = 0 the statement is true because 2d00 ≥ 2d(max c)/2e ≥ max c.
Assume now that n ≥ 1. Let t ≤ s be the exact number of distinct sig-
nificant monomials of degree at least d in Π. The total number of variable
occurrences in such monomials is at least dt. Therefore, there exists one
among the 2n variables that appears in at least dt/2n of the significant
monomials of degree at least d. Let i ∈ [n] be the index of such a variable,
basic or twin. If it is basic, let a = 0. If it is twin, let a = 1. Our goal is to
show that

P [i/a], Q[i/a] `c2d0 +2d00 −2 −1 ≥ 0 and P [i/1 − a], Q[i/1 − a] `c2d0 +2d00 −1 ≥ 0,
                                                                              (4.29)
for d0 and d00 as stated in the lemma. If we achieve so, then d0 + d00 ≥ 2
because d0 ≥ d ≥ 1 and d00 ≥ 1, so Lemma 4.2.4 applies on (4.29) to give
P, Q `c2d0 +2d00 −1 ≥ 0, which is what we are after.
   Consider P [i/a] and Q[i/a] first. These are sets of polynomials on n − 1
pairs of twin variables, and Π[i/a] is a multilinear refutation of P [i/a] and
Q[i/a] that has at most s0 := t(1 − d/2n) distinct significant monomials
of degree at least d. Moreover c is a cut-off function for the sets. We
distinguish the cases s0 < 1 and s0 ≥ 1. If s0 < 1, then all significant
monomials in Π[i/a] have degree at most d − 1. Since 2d00 ≥ max c, this
refutation has degree mod c at most 2(d−1)+2d00 ≤ 2d0 +2d00 −2. This gives
the first part of (4.29). If s0 ≥ 1, then first note that d < 2n. Moreover, the
induction hypothesis applied to P [i/a],Q[i/a] and s0 , and the same c and
d, gives that there is a refutation of P [i/a] and Q[i/a] of degree mod c at
most 2da + 2d00 , where

  da = d + b2n log(t(1 − d/2n))/dc ≤ d + b2(n + 1) log(s)/dc − 1.       (4.30)

Here we used the inequality log(1 + x) ≤ x which holds true for every real
x > −1, and the fact that d < 2n. This gives the first part of (4.29) since
da ≤ d0 − 1.
   Consider P [i/1 − a] and Q[i/1 − a] next. In this case, the best we can
say is that c is still a cut-off function for the sets, and that Π[i/1 − a] is
a multilinear refutation of the sets that still has at most s many distinct
significant monomials of degree at least d. But P [i/1 − a] and Q[i/1 − a]
have at most n − 1 pairs of twin variables, so the induction hypothesis
applies. Applied to the same c, s and d, it gives that there is a refutation
of P [i/1 − a] and Q[i/1 − a] of degree mod c at most 2d1−a + 2d00 , where

               d1−a = d + b2n log(s)/dc ≤ d + b2(n + 1) log(s)/dc.      (4.31)

This gives the second part of (4.29) since d1−a ≤ d0 . The proof is complete.


   We are ready now to prove Theorem 4.0.1. We will actually prove the
following slightly stronger statement.

Theorem 4.4.3. For every two natural numbers n and k, every indexed sets
P and Q of polynomials of degree at most k with n pairs of twin variables,
and every positive integers s, if there is an SOS refutation from P and Q
with at most s many distinct significant monomials, then there is an
                                             p
SOS refutation of P and Q of degree at most 4 2(n + 1) log(s) + k + 4.
Proof. Assume that there is a refutation of P and Q with at most s many
distinct significant monomials. Applying Lemma 4.4.1 we get a multilinear
refutation with at most s many distinct significant monomials, and hence
with at most s many distinct significant monomials of degree at least d0 ,
for any d0 of our choice. We choose
                                       p
                                d0 := b 2(n + 1) log(s)c + 1.                                 (4.32)

By assumption s ≥ 1 and we chose d0 in such a way that d0 ≥ 1. Thus,
Lemma 4.4.2 applies to any cut-off function c for Q, in particular for the
cut-off function that is k everywhere. This gives a refutation of degree mod
c at most 2d0 + k + 2 with
                                         p
         d0 ≤ d0 + 2(n + 1) log(s)/d0 ≤ 2 2(n + 1) log(s) + 1.                                (4.33)

Since a proof of degree mod c at most 2d0 + k + 2 is also a proof of standard
degree at most 2d0 + k + 2, the proof is complete.


4.4.1          Size-degree trade-offs for Positivstellensatz
               proofs
Positivstellensatz proof system is an extension of Sums-of-Squares, defined
originally in [40]. A Positivstellensatz proof of non-negativity of r from
P and Q is a polynomial equality of the form
       X               X X                  Y          X
  r=           ri2 +                  2
                                     ri,R         p+         tq q
       i∈[k]           R⊆P i∈[kR ]          p∈R        q∈Q
                                                  X
                                                          ui (x2i − xi ) + vi (xi + x̄i − 1) . (4.34)
                                                                                            
                                              +
                                                  i∈[n]

Note that when |P | ≤ 1, the Positivstellensatz proof 4.34 is an SOS proof.
However, with the power of multiplying inequality constraints together, one
can possibly obtain proofs smaller than in SOS.
   We say that the PS proof 4.34 has product-width at most w if for
any R with |R| > w, ri,R = 0 for any i ∈ [kR ]. Now any PS proof from
P and Q of product-width at most w can be considered as an SOS proof
from the sets P w and Q, where P w = { p∈R p : R ⊆ P, |R| ≤ w}. Now
                                      Q

the set of constraints P w has degree at most kw, and hence an immediate
consequence of the size-degree trade-off for SOS is the following size-degree
trade-off for Positivstellensatz proofs with bounded product-width.

Theorem 4.4.4. For every two natural numbers n and k, every indexed
sets P and Q of polynomial inequality and equality constrains of degree at
most k in n pairs of twin variables, and every two positive integers s and w,
if there is a PS refutation from Q of product-width at most w and monomial
size at most s, then there is a PS refutation from Q of product-width at most
                         p
w and degree at most 4 2(n + 1) log(s) + kw + 4.

   In the paper [6] we painstakingly proved this form of the result from
first premises. The proof above simplifies the proof slightly. It is still open
whether a similar size-degree trade-off holds for Positivstellensatz proofs
with unbounded product-width.



4.5      Size-degree trade-off for Sherali-Adams
We say that an SA proof as in (4.1) is multilinear if s0 and sj are positive
linear combinations of multilinear monomials for each j ∈ [`], and tk is a
multilinear polynomial for each k ∈ [m].

Lemma 4.5.1. For every positive integer s and any indexed sets P and Q of
polynomial inequality and equality constraints, if there is an SA refutation
from P and Q with at most s many distinct significant monomials, then
there is a multilinear SA refutation from P and Q with at most s many
distinct significant monomials.

Proof. Let P = {p1 ≥ 0, . . . , p` ≥ 0} and Q = {q1 = 0, . . . , qm = 0} and
suppose that there is a refutation from P and Q as in (4.1), where the
number of distinct significant monomials is at most s. For each polynomial
r let r̄ be its direct multilinearization; i.e., each power xl with l ≥ 2 that
appears in r is replaced by x. It is obvious that r ≡ r̄ mod In , where n is
the number of pairs of twin variables in P and Q. Moreover, the number of
distinct significant monomials among s̄0 , s̄j and t̄k does not exceed s. Now
                                X                  X
                   −1 ≡ s̄0 +           s̄j pj +           t̄k qk   mod In ,        (4.35)
                                j∈[`]              k∈[m]


and so P and Q has a multilinear refutation with at most s distinct signif-
icant monomials.

   Theorem 4.0.2 will again be a consequence of the following lemma for a
suitable choice of d and c:

Lemma 4.5.2. For every natural number n, any indexed sets P and Q of
polynomial inequality and equality constrains in n pairs of twin variables,
every cut-off function c for P and Q, every real s ≥ 1 and every positive
integers d, if there is a multilinear SA refutation of P and Q with at most
s many distinct signicant monomials of degree at least d, then there is an
SA refutation from P and Q of degree mod c at most d0 + d00 , where d0 =
d + b2(n + 1) log(s)/dc and d00 = max{1, max c}.

Proof. The proof is an induction on n. Let P and Q be indexed sets of
polynomials in n pairs of twin variables, let c be a cut-off function for P
and Q, let s ≥ 1 be a real, let d be a positive integer, and let Π be a
multilinear refutation of P and Q with at most s many distinct significant
monomials of degree at least d.
   For n = 0 the statement is true because d00 ≥ max c. Assume now that
n ≥ 1. Let t ≤ s be the exact number of distinct significant monomials of
degree at least d in Π. The total number of variable occurrences in such
monomials is at least dt. Therefore, there exists one among the 2n variables
that appears in at least dt/2n of the distinct significant monomials of degree
at least d. Let i ∈ [n] be the index of such a variable, basic or twin. If it is
basic, let a = 0. If it is twin, let a = 1. Our goal is to show that

                 SA                                                            SA
P [i/a], Q[i/a] `c,d0 +d00 −1 −1 ≥ 0 and P [i/1 − a], Q[i/1 − a] `c,d0 +d00 −1 ≥ 0,
                                                                                    (4.36)
for d0 and d00 as stated in the lemma. If we achieve so, then d0 + d00 ≥ 2
because d0 ≥ d ≥ 1 and d00 ≥ 1, so Lemma 4.3.4 applies on (4.36) to give
      SA
P, Q `c,d0 +d00 −1 ≥ 0, which is what we are after.
   Consider P [i/a] and Q[i/a] first. These are sets of polynomials on n − 1
pairs of twin variables, and Π[i/a] is a multilinear refutation of P [i/a] and
Q[i/a] that has at most s0 := t(1 − d/2n) distinct significant monomials
of degree at least d. Moreover c is a cut-off function for the sets. We
distinguish the cases s0 < 1 and s0 ≥ 1. If s0 < 1, then all significant
monomials in Π[i/a] have degree at most d − 1. Since d00 ≥ max c, this
refutation has degree mod c at most (d − 1) + d00 ≤ d0 + d00 − 1. This gives
the first part of (4.36). If s0 ≥ 1, then first note that d < 2n. Moreover, the
induction hypothesis applied to P [i/a],Q[i/a] and s0 , and the same c and
d, gives that there is an SA refutation of P [i/a] and Q[i/a] of degree mod
c at most da + d00 , where

  da = d + b2n log(t(1 − d/2n))/dc ≤ d + b2(n + 1) log(s)/dc − 1.       (4.37)

Here we used the inequality log(1 + x) ≤ x which holds true for every real
x > −1, and the fact that d < 2n. This gives the first part of (4.36) since
da ≤ d0 − 1.
   Consider P [i/1 − a] and Q[i/1 − a] next. In this case, the best we can
say is that c is still a cut-off function for the sets, and that Π[i/1 − a] is
a multilinear refutation of the sets that still has at most s many distinct
significant monomials of degree at least d. But P [i/1−a] and Q[i/1−a] have
at most n − 1 pairs of twin variables, so the induction hypothesis applies.
Applied to the same c, s and d, it gives that there is an SA refutation of
P [i/1 − a] and Q[i/1 − a] of degree mod c at most d1−a + d00 , where

               d1−a = d + b2n log(s)/dc ≤ d + b2(n + 1) log(s)/dc.      (4.38)

This gives the second part of (4.36) since d1−a ≤ d0 . The proof is complete.


   Again instead of proving Theorem 4.0.2, we prove the following slightly
stronger statement from which Theorem 4.0.2 follows directly.
Theorem 4.5.3. For any two natural numbers n and k, any indexed sets
P and Q of polynomial in n of degree at most k in n pairs of twin variables,
and every positive integer s, if there is an SA refutation of P and Q with
at most s many distinct significant monomials, then there is an SA
                                         p
refutation of P and Q of degree at most 2 2(n + 1) log(s) + k + 2


Proof. Assume that there is a refutation of P and Q with at most s many
distinct significant monomials. Applying Lemma 4.4.1 we get a multilinear
refutation with at most s many distinct significant monomials, and hence
with at most s many distinct significant monomials of degree at least d0 ,
for any d0 of our choice. We choose

                              p
                       d0 := b 2(n + 1) log(s)c + 1.                  (4.39)

By assumption s ≥ 1 and we chose d0 in such a way that d0 ≥ 1. Thus,
Lemma 4.5.2 applies to any cut-off function c for P and Q, in particular for
the cut-off function that is k everywhere. This gives a refutation of degree
mod c at most d0 + k + 1 with

                                       p
       d0 ≤ d0 + 2(n + 1) log(s)/d0 ≤ 2 2(n + 1) log(s) + 1.          (4.40)

Since a proof of degree mod c at most d0 + k + 1 is also a proof of standard
degree at most d0 + k + 1, the proof is complete.



4.6     Applications
The obvious targets for applications of Theorems 4.0.2 and 4.0.1 are the
examples from the literature that are known to require linear degree to
refute. For some of them, such as the Knapsack, the SOS size lower bound
that follows was already known [38]. For some others, the applications of
the Theorems yields a new result. This section concentrates on SOS as the
stronger of the two systems.
4.6.1    Tseitin, Knapsack, and Random CSPs
The first set of examples that come to mind are the Tseitin formulas: If
Gn = (V, E) is an n-vertex graph from a family {Gn : n ∈ N} of constant
degree regular expander graphs, then the formula TSn has one Boolean
                                                    P
variable xe for each e ∈ E and one parity constraint e:u∈e xe = 1 mod 2
for each u ∈ V . Whenever the degree d of the graphs is even, this is
unsatisfiable when n is odd. In the encoding of the constraints given by the
                                       Q
system of polynomial equations Q = { e:u∈e (1 − 2xe ) = −1 : u ∈ V }, the
Tseitin formulas TSn were shown to require degree Ω(n) to refute in SOS
in Corollary 1 from [37]. Since the number of variables of TSn is dn/2, the
constraints in Q are equations of degree d, and d is a constant, Theorem ??
gives:


Corollary 4.6.1. There exists  ∈ R>0 such that for every sufficiently large
n ∈ N, every SOS refutation of TSn has monomial size at least 2n .


   Among the semialgebraic proof systems in the literature, exponential
size lower bounds for Tseitin formulas were known before for a proof system
called static LS+ in [38, 47]. Up to at most doubling the degree, this can
be seen as the subsystem of SOS in which every square sj is of the very
special form
                         X                  Y         Y         2
                 sj =            ai x i + b         xi    (1 − xj ) .
                         i∈[n]                i∈I        j∈J


   A second set of examples are the Knapsack equations 2x1 +· · ·+2xn = k,
which are unsatisfiable for odd integers k. We denote them KSn,k . These
are known to require degree Ω(min{k, 2n − k}) to refute in SOS [36]. Since
the number of variables is n and the degree is one, Theorem 4.0.1 gives
an exponential size 2Ω(n) lower bound when k = n. For this example,
an exponential size lower bound for SOS was also proved in Theorem 9.1
from [38] when k = Θ(n), so this result is not new. We state the precise
relationship that the degree-reduction theorem gives in terms of n and k,
                                                      √
which yields superpolynomial lower bounds for k = ω( n log n).
Corollary 4.6.2. There exist  ∈ R>0 such that for every sufficiently large
n ∈ N and k ∈ [n], every SOS refutation of KSn,k has monomial size at
         2
least 2k /n .

    The third set of examples come from sparse random instances of con-
straint satisfaction problems. As far as we know, monomial size lower
bounds for these examples do not follow from earlier published work without
using our result, so we give the details.
    When C is a clause with k literals, say xi1 ∨ · · · ∨ xi` ∨ x̄i`+1 ∨ · · · ∨
x̄ik , we write pC for the unique multilinear polynomial on the variables
xi1 , . . . , xik of C that evaluates to the same truth-value as C over Boolean
assignments; concretely pC = 1 − `j=1 (1 − xij ) kj=`+1 xij . More generally,
                                        Q            Q

if C denotes a constraint on k Boolean variables, we write pC for the unique
multilinear polynomial on the variables of C that represents C over Boolean
assignments; i.e., such that pC (x) = 1 if x satisfies C, and pC (x) = 0 if x
falsifies C, for any x ∈ {0, 1}n .

Theorem 4.6.3 (see Theorem 12 in [84]). For every δ ∈ R>0 there exist
c,  ∈ R>0 such that, asymptotically almost surely as n goes to infinity, if
m = dcne and C1 , . . . , Cm are random 3-XOR (resp. 3-SAT) constraints
on x1 , . . . , xn that are chosen uniformly and independently at random, then
there is a degree n SOS pseudoexpectation for the system of polynomial
equations pC1 = 1, . . . pCm = 1, and at the same time every truth assignment
for x1 , . . . , xn satisfies at most a 1/2 + δ fraction (resp. 7/8 + δ) of the
constraints C1 , . . . , Cm .

    It should be noted that it is not immediately obvious, from just reading
the definitions, that the statement of Theorem 12 in [84] gives the pseudo-
expectation as stated in Theorem 4.6.3. However, the proof of Theorem 12
in [84] is by now sufficiently well understood to know that Theorem 4.6.3
holds true as stated. One way of seeing this is by noting that the proof of
Theorem 12 in [84] and the proof of the lower bound for the Tseitin formulas
in Corollary 1 of [37] are essentially the same. In particular Theorem 12 in
[84] holds true also for proving the existence of SOS pseudo-expectations as
stated in Theorem 4.6.3.
   As an immediate consequence we get:


Corollary 4.6.4. There exist c,  ∈ R>0 such that, asymptotically almost
surely as n goes to infinity, if m = dcne and C1 , . . . , Cm are random 3-
XOR (resp. 3-SAT) constraints on x1 , . . . , xn that are chosen uniformly and
independently at random, then every SOS refutation of pC1 = 1, . . . , pCm = 1
has monomial size at least 2n .


   It is often stated that Theorem 4.6.3 gives optimal integrality gaps for
the approximability of MAX-3-XOR and MAX-3-SAT by linear degree SOS.
Corollary 4.6.4 is its analogue for subexponential size SOS. There is however
a subtlety in that the validity of the integrality gap statement could depend
on the encoding of the objective function. The next section is devoted to
clarify this.



4.6.2      MAX-CSPs
An instance I of the Boolean MAX-CSP problem is a sequence C1 , . . . , Cm
of constraints on n Boolean variables. We are asked to maximize the fraction
of satisfied constraints. If pj denotes the unique multilinear polynomial on
the variables of Cj that represents Cj , then the optimal value for an instance
I can be formulated as follows::

                                             1
                                                 Pm
                   opt(I ) := maxx∈{0,1}n    m    j=1 pj (x).           (4.41)


We could ask for the least upper bound on (4.41) that can be certified by an
SOS proof of some given complexity c, i.e., monomial size at most s, degree
at most 2d, etc. There are at least three formulations of this question.
Using the notation `c to denote SOS provability with complexity c, the
three formulations are:

  sos00 c (I ) :=
                           Pm
       inf{γ ∈ R : `c m1      j=1 pj (x) ≤ γ},                               (4.42)
  sos0 c (I ) :=
                                                    Pm
       inf{γ ∈ R : {pj (x) = yj : j ∈ [m]} `c m1      j=1 yj ≤ γ},           (4.43)
  sosc (I ) :=
                                                    Pm
       inf{γ ∈ R : {pj (x) = yj : j ∈ [m]} ∪ { m1     j=1 yj ≥ γ} `c −1 ≥ 0}.
                                                                             (4.44)

   The first formulation asks directly for the least upper bound on the
objective function of (4.41) that can be certified in complexity c. The second
formulation is similar but stronger since it allows m additional Boolean
variables y1 , . . . , ym , and their twins. The third is the strongest of the three
as it asks for the least value that can be proved impossible. In addition,
unlike the other two, the set of hypotheses in (4.44) mixes equations and
inequality constraints. It should be obvious that (for natural complexity
measures) we have sosc (I ) ≤ sos0 c (I ) ≤ sos00 c (I ) so lower bounds on sosc
imply lower bounds for the other two.
   Theorem 4.6.3 gives, by itself, optimal integrality gaps for MAX-3-XOR
and MAX-3-SAT for linear degree SOS in the sos00 c formulation, when c
denotes SOS-degree. However, the degree lower bound that follows from
this formulation does not let us apply our main theorem; the statement is
not about refutations, it is about proving an inequality, so Theorem 4.0.1
does not apply. In the following we argue that Theorem 4.6.3 also gives
optimal integrality gaps in the sos0 c and sosc formulations of the problems.
Since the sosc formulation is about refutations, our main theorem will apply.
   We write αc (I ) for the supremum of the α ∈ [0, 1] for which

                       α · sosc (I ) ≤ opt(I ) ≤ sosc (I )                   (4.45)

holds. If C is a class of instances, then we write αc∗ (C ) := inf{αc (I ) :
I ∈ C }; the sosc -approximation factor for C . It is our goal to show that
Theorem 4.6.3 implies that, for SOS proofs of sublinear degree, the sosc -
approximation factor of MAX-3-XOR is at most 1/2, and that of MAX-
3-SAT is at most 7/8. These are optimal. This will follow from Theo-
rem 4.6.3 and the following general fact about pseudo-expectations that
(pseudo-)satisfy all the constraints:

Lemma 4.6.5. Let I be a MAX-CSP instance with n Boolean variables
and m constraints of arity at most k, represented by multilinear polynomials
p1 , . . . , pm , and let Q = {pj (x) = 1 : j ∈ [m]}, Q0 = {pj (x) = yj : j ∈ [m]}
and P 0 = { m1 m
                   P
                      j=1 yj ≥ 1}. If there is a degree-2dk SOS pseudo-expectation
E for Q, then there is a degree-2d SOS pseudo-expectation E 0 for P 0 and
Q0 .

Proof. Let σ be the substitution that sends yj to pj (x) and ȳj to 1 − pj (x)
for j = 1, . . . , m. For each polynomial p on the x and y variables, define
E 0 (p) := E(p[σ]), where p[σ] denotes the result applying the substitution
to p. The proof that this works relies on the fact that if p and q are poly-
nomial in the x and y variables, then (pq)[σ] = p[σ]q[σ], and deg((pq)[σ]) ≤
deg(p[σ]q[σ]) ≤ 2k(deg(p) + deg(q)). In particular, squares maps to squares
by the substitution. It is obvious that each equation pj (x) = yj lifts:
E 0 (t(pj (x) − yj )) = E(t[σ](pj (x) − pj (x))) = E(0) = 0. It is equaly ob-
vious that the inequality m1 m
                                P                         0    1
                                                                 Pm
                                   j=1 yj − 1 ≥ 0 lifts: E (s( m  j=1 yj − 1)) =
1
   Pm
m      j=1 E(s[σ](pj (x) − 1)) ≥ 0. This completes the proof of the lemma.

       Combining this with Theorem 4.6.3 and Theorem 4.0.1 we get:

Corollary 4.6.6. For every δ ∈ R>0 , there exist r,  ∈ R>0 such that if c
denotes SOS monomial size at most 2n , where n is the number of variables,
then αc∗ (MAX-3-XOR) ≤ 1/2 + δ (resp. αc∗ (MAX-3-SAT) ≤ 7/8 + δ), and
the gap is witnessed by an instance I with m = drne many uniformly
and independently chosen random constraints, for which sosc (I ) = 1 and
opt(I ) ≤ 1/2 + δ (resp. opt(I ) ≤ 7/8 + δ), asymptotically almost surely
as n goes to infinity.
Chapter 5

Feasible interpolation for
Polynomial Calculus,
Sums-of-Squares and
Sherali-Adams

In this chapter we prove a form of feasible interpolation for Polynomial
Calculus, Sums-of-Squares and Sherali-Adams. We prove that for any of
the three systems there is a polynomial-time algorithm that given

   • two set Q1 (x, z) and Q2 (y, z) in disjoint sequences x, y and z of vari-
     ables;

   • a refutation of Q1 (x, z) ∪ Q2 (y, z);

   • and an assignment a to the z-variables

outputs a refutation of Q1 (x, a) or a refutation of Q2 (y, a). Hence not only
is an interpolant of Q1 (x, z) ∪ Q2 (y, z) computable in time polynomial in
the size of the given refutation of Q1 (x, z) ∪ Q2 (y, z), but moreover we can
actually find a refutation to match.
   This is actually a typical situation in proofs of feasible interpolation.
Many known proofs of feasible interpolation explicitly construct a refutation

                                       87
of either Q1 (x, a) or Q2 (y, a) from a given refutation of Q1 (x, z) ∪ Q2 (y, z)
(see e.g. [76, 72]). Our proof is however novel in the methods used. We do
not construct either of the refutations explicitly from the given refutation
of Q1 (x, z) ∪ Q2 (y, z). Rather we first show that a small refutation of either
Q1 (x, a) or Q2 (y, a) exists. This existential property is called the feasible
disjunction property of the proof systems after [73]. Only after proving
the feasible disjunction property we show that we can actually efficiently
find the small refutation, whose existence is guaranteed by the feasible
disjunction property.
   We prove the feasible disjunction property using the semantic tools for
proofs over sets of monomials developed in Chapter 3. For these proofs
it is more natural and cleaner to consider refutations of the union of two
sets Q1 (x) and Q2 (y) of polynomial constraints in disjoint sequences of
variables. The setting with a given refutation of Q1 (x, z) ∪ Q2 (y, z) reduces
to the former after assigning the values of z-variables. In short, we show
that if there is a refutation of Q1 (x) ∪ Q2 (y) that uses only monomials
from some set S, then either Q1 (x) has a refutation over Sx or Q2 (y) has a
refutation over Sy , where Sx is the projection of S to the x-variables. For
Sums-of-Squares and Sherali-Adams the actual result takes slightly more
cumbersome form.
   The basic idea behind the proofs of feasible disjunction property is very
simple. Assuming towards a contradiction that there is no refutation of
Q1 (x) over Sx nor a refutation of Q2 (y) over Sy , we obtain semantic ob-
jects, either reduction operators or pseudoexpectations, witnessing these
assumptions. As these semantic objects are defined on disjoint sequences of
variables, we can combine them to form a semantic object that contradicts
the existence of a refutation of Q1 (x, z) ∪ Q2 (y, z) that uses only monomi-
als from the set S. The proofs are thus resource-bounded versions of the
obvious semantic proof of Halldén Completeness of classical propositional
logic [44], which states that if ϕ ∨ ψ is a theorem and ϕ and ψ don’t share
any propositional variables, then ϕ is a theorem or ψ is a theorem.
   In this chapter we also show that there are efficient proof search algo-
rithms for proofs over sets of monomials. The algorithm for Polynomial
Calculus is a modification of the one for degree-bounded PC proofs from
[22]. The algorithm has a polynomial-time run-time for any fixed finite
fields, but for infinite fields intermediate coefficient bloat can become a
hinderance for the run-time.
   For Sherali-Adams and Sums-of-Squares the proof search for proofs over
a set of monomials is a linear or semidefinite program of size polynomial in
the size of the set of monomials and the encoding of the constraints. This
immediately gives a polynomial-time proof search algorithm for Sherali-
Adams with ellipsoid algorithm, but for Sums-of-Squares we need to bound
the initial ellipsoid by considering proof search problem with a bound on
the size of the coefficients appearing in the SOS proof.
   Together with the feasible disjunction property these proof search algo-
rithms yield the proofs of the feasible interpolation theorems. As we give
an efficient algorithm for Polynomial Calculus only over fixed finite fields,
we can prove the feasible interpolation property only for fixed finite fields.
Similarly we prove the feasible interpolation theorem for Sums-of-Squares
only for sets of equality constraints, since we need to consider explicitly
bounded SOS refutations and we only have the corresponding semantic ob-
jects in this case for sets of equality constraints.
   Finally in Section 5.4 we prove that Sums-of-Squares cannot admit
monotone feasible interpolation with respect to polynomial-sized monotone
Boolean circuits by showing that the Clique-Coloring formulas have small
refutations in Sums-of-Squares. The monotone feasible interpolation theo-
rem for Sums-of-Squares would thus be in contradiction with known lower
bounds for monotone circuits [80, 3].



5.1      Feasible interpolation for Polynomial
         Calculus
First we prove the feasible interpolation property for Polynomial Calculus
over any finite field. The feasible disjunction property does not rely on the
finiteness of the field, but stays true over any field. However we obtain the
feasible interpolation property only over finite fields, since we can guarantee
the polynomial run-time in the proof search algorithm of Section 5.1.2 only
over finite fields. We do not assume the presence of Boolean axioms in this
section.


5.1.1      Feasible disjunction for Polynomial Calculus
For a set of monomials S, and a sequence x of variables, we denote by Sx
the projection of S onto the variables x, i.e. m ∈ Sx , if only variables from
x appear in m, there is some m0 , where no variables from x appear and
mm0 ∈ S.

Theorem 5.1.1. Let F be a field, let Q1 (x) and Q2 (y) be two sets of equality
constraints in disjoint sequences x and y of variables, let Π be a PC/F
refutation of Q1 (x) ∪ Q2 (y), and let S be the set of all monomials appearing
in the refutation Π. Then there is a PC/F refutation of P (x) over Sx or a
PC/F refutation of Q(y) over Sy .

Proof. Suppose towards a contradiction that the conclusion does not hold.
Then, by Theorem 3.1.6, there are reduction operators Rx and Ry for Q1 (x)
and Q2 (y) over Sx and Sy , respectively.
    Let S 0 := {mx my : mx ∈ Sx and my ∈ Sy }, and define a linear function
R : F[S 0 ] → F[S 0 ] with

                             R(mx my ) = Rx (mx )Ry (my )

for any mx my ∈ S 0 and extend linearly.
    We claim now that R has the following properties:

    • R(1) = 1;                                                           (5.1)
    • R(q1 ) = 0 for any q1 ∈ Q1 (x);                                     (5.2)
    • R(q2 ) = 0 for any q2 ∈ Q2 (y);                                     (5.3)
    • R(xi m) = R(xi R(m)) if m ∈ S;                                      (5.4)
    • R(yi m) = R(yi R(m)) if m ∈ S.                                      (5.5)
   (5.1) holds, since Rx (1) = Ry (1) = 1. It is clear that both (5.2) and
(5.3) hold.
   Finally (5.4) holds by (3.12) and (3.13), since

                      R(xi m) = Rx (xi mx )Ry (my )
                              = Rx (xi Rx (mx ))Ry (Ry (my ))
                              = R(xi Rx (mx )Ry (my ))
                              = R(xi R(m))

The case (5.5) is proved similarly.
   Now the existence of such R is in contradiction with the assumption
that in Π there appears only monomials from S. Firstly R is defined for
all the polynomial appearing in Π. Secondly, by (5.2) and (5.3), R maps
each axiom in P (x) ∪ Q(y) to zero, and, by linearity and (5.4) and (5.5),
respects the inference rules in the sense that R maps the consequent of a
rule to zero whenever it maps the premises to zero. Hence, by induction on
the structure of the refutation, R(1) = 0, against (5.1).


5.1.2     Proof search for Polynomial Calculus
In this section we give a proof search algorithm for Polynomial Calculus
proofs over a set S of monomials. We show that for any fixed finite field
F the algorithm can find a PC/F proof of p = 0 from Q over a set S of
monomials in time polynomial in |S|, |Q| and n if one exists. In particular
one can find a degree d PC/F proof of p = 0 from Q in time polynomial in
nd and |Q| if one exists.
   For any field F, we construct a basis B for the vector space PCFS (Q) of all
polynomials p ∈ F[S]b that admit a proof from Q over S. This construction
is carried out by the algorithm 1 which is a modification of an algorithm
from [22]. For the algorithm fix any total ordering < on Sb that satisfies the
following property:

   • m < m0 for any m ∈ S and m0 ∈ Sb \ S.                                (5.6)
Define the leading monomial LM(p) and leading term LT(p) of a polyno-
mial p with respect to the ordering <. The leading monomial of p is the
highest monomial with respect to < with a non-zero coefficient in p, and
the leading term is the non-zero term in p, whose underlying monomial is
the leading monomial of p.

 Algorithm 1: Proof search over S
   Initially A = Q and B = ∅;
   while A 6= ∅ do
       Pick p ∈ A and remove it from A;
       while LM(p) ∈ LM(B) do
            Let q ∈ B be such that LM(q) = LM(p);
            Let p ← p − aq, where a is such that LT(p) = aLT(q);
       end
       If p 6= 0, add p to B;
       If p ∈ F[S], add xp to A for every variable x;
   end
   Output B;



   The output B of the algorithm 1 is a linearly independent set of poly-
nomials, since all elements of B have distinct leading monomials. As all
elements of B have distinct leading monomials there is never more than
n|S| elements added to A and thus the algorithm halts after polynomially
many rounds in |S|, |Q| and n. Hence for any fixed finite field the algorithm
will halt in time polynomial in |S|, |Q| and n. In the following we prove
that B is actually a basis for PCFS (Q).

Lemma 5.1.2. At the end of the algorithm 1, span(B) = PCFS (Q).

Proof. Clearly each q ∈ B has a proof from Q over S, and so span(B) ⊆
PCFS (Q).
   Now suppose p ∈ PCFS (Q) and let p1 , . . . , p` be a PC proof of p = 0
from Q over S. We show by induction on the structure of the proof that
pi ∈ span(B) for any i ∈ [`]. To see that any element of Q is in B, note
that span(A ∪ B) can only increase at each stage of the algorithm. Hence,
as the algorithm halts with A = ∅, at the end each element of Q is in
span(B). If pi = apj + bpk for some j, k < i, and pj , pk ∈ span(B), then
clearly pi ∈ span(B).
   Finally, suppose that pi = xpj for some j < i and some variable x. Now
we have pj ∈ F[S], and by induction assumption, pj ∈ span(B). Write
     P
pj =    ak qk for some ak ∈ F and qk ∈ B. We claim that qk is in F[S]
for each k with non-zero ak . To see this, let m be the maximal monomial
that appears in any qk with a non-zero coefficient. Now m appears in only
one of the qk ’s, since they all have distinct leading monomials, and so the
monomial m has a non-zero coefficient in pj . Hence m is in S, and so, by
(5.6), qk is in F[S] for every k. Now for any k, the polynomial qk was added
to B and xqk was added to A at some stage of the algorithm. At that stage
xqk is in span(A ∪ B). However, since the span only increases during the
execution of the algorithm, xqk is in span(B) at the end of the algorithm.
Hence xpj is in span(B) at the end of the algorithm.


   Now to check whether there is a PC/F proof of p = 0 from Q over S one
simply needs to reduce the polynomial p with respect to the basis B. This
is easy to do, since all the elements of B have distinct leading monomials.
In order to construct the proof, one needs proofs for the basis elements.
The construction of these proofs is easily incorporable into the algorithm
above, but was omitted for readability.

Remark 5.1.3. We claim the polynomial-time proof search only for fixed
finite fields, since although the algorithm 1 always halts in polynomially
many steps in |S|, |Q| and n, there is no way to combat potential coefficient
bloat in infinite fields, and in the worst case the magnitude of the largest
coefficient in A ∪ B might be squared after each round of the algorithm.
   In Chapter 6 we give an example over rationals where such blow-up
is necessary showing that over rationals the worst case time-complexity of
algorithm 1 is necessarily exponential.
5.1.3     Feasible interpolation for Polynomial Calculus
As a consequence of Theorem 5.1.1 and Section 5.1.2 we obtain the feasible
interpolation property for PC over any finite field.

Theorem 5.1.4. For any finite field F, there is a polynomial time algorithm
that given

   • two sets Q1 (x, z) and Q2 (y, z) of equality constraints in disjoint se-
      quences x, y and z of variables;

   • a PC/F refutation of Q1 (x, z) ∪ Q2 (y, z);

   • an assignment a to the variables z

outputs a PC/F-refutation of Q1 (x, a) or a PC/F-refutation of Q2 (y, a).


5.2      Feasible interpolation for
         Sums-of-Squares
Secondly we prove feasible interpolation property for Sums-of-Squares. We
prove the feasible interpolation property for SOS only for sets of equality
constraints. This is due to our need to consider explicitly bounded proofs
in order to give a polynomial time search algorithm for SOS proofs. Hence
we need to prove the feasible disjunction property in a form that also takes
into account the magnitude of the coefficients appearing in the refutations.
This we can do using ε-pseudoexpectations, but with the cost of losing the
inequality constraints along the way.


5.2.1     Feasible disjunction for Sums-of-Squares
Theorem 5.2.1. Let Q1 (x) and Q2 (y) be two sets of equality constraints
in disjoint sequences x and y of variables, let Π be an R-bounded SOS refu-
tation of Q1 (x) ∪ Q2 (y), let S be the set of all explicit monomials appearing
in the refutation Π, and let R0 = 2R(|Q1 (x) ∪ Q2 (y)| + n)|S|. Then there
is a R0 -bounded refutation of Q1 (x) over Sx or a R0 -bounded refutation of
Q2 (y) over Sy .

Proof. Suppose towards a contradiction that the conclusion does not hold.
Then, by Lemma 3.2.12, there are 1/R0 -pseudoexpectations for Q1 (x) and
Q2 (y) over Sx and Sy , respectively. Now define a linear functional E : R[S 2 ] →
R with
                           E(m) = Ex (mx )Ey (my ),

for m ∈ S 2 and extend linearly. Here mx and my are the projections of the
monomial m to variables x and y, respectively. We claim that E has the
following properties.

   • E(1) = 1;                                                             (5.7)
   • E(p2 ) ≥ 0 for any p ∈ R[S];                                          (5.8)
   • E(m(x2i − xi )) = 0 for any m ∈ S and any variable xi ;               (5.9)
   • E(m(yi2 − yi )) = 0 for any m ∈ S and any variable yi ;              (5.10)
   • |E(m(xi + x̄i − 1))| ≤ 1/R0 for any m ∈ S and any variable xi ; (5.11)
   • |E(m(yi + ȳi − 1))| ≤ 1/R0 for any m ∈ S and any variable yi ; (5.12)
   • |E(mq)| ≤ 1/R0 for any m ∈ S and any q ∈ Qi for i = 1, 2;            (5.13)

   Firstly (5.7) holds, since Ex (1) = Ey (1) = 1.
   For (5.8), write p = m∈S am m. Now the matrix (Ey (my m0y ))m,m0 ∈S is
                         P

positive semidefinite and so there are vectors u such that for all m, m0 ∈ S
we have Ey (my m0y ) = u um um0 . Now we have
                       P

                        X
                   E p2 =  am am0 Ex (mx m0x )Ey my m0y
                                                        
                             m,m0
                             XX
                         =              am um am0 um0 Ex (mx m0x )
                             m,m0   u
                                                          !2 
                                        XX
                         = Ex                  am um mx     ≥0
                                        m   u
   To see that (5.9) holds, let m ∈ S. Now

                E(m(x2i − xi )) = Ex (mx (x2i − xi ))Ey (my ) = 0,

since Ex (mx (x2i − xi )) = 0. The case (5.10) follows similarly.
   For (5.11), let m ∈ S. Now

        |E(m(xi + x̄i − 1))| = |Ex (mx (xi + x̄i − 1))||Ey (my )| ≤ 1/R0 ,

where the last inequality holds since Ex is an 1/R0 -pseudoexpectation for
Q1 (x) over Sx and since |Ey (my )| ≤ 1 for all m ∈ S. Cases (5.12) and (5.8)
follow by a similar argument.
   Now the existence of such E is in contradiction with the assumption that
there is a refutation of Q1 (x) ∪ Q2 (y) with all the explicit monomials among
S: applying the E on both sides of the refutation we reach a contradiction
of the form −1 > −1 as in Lemma 3.2.11.


5.2.2      Proof search for SOS proofs
In this section we show how to efficiently find SOS proofs over a set of
monomials by formulating the search for an SOS proof as a semidefinite
program, and using the ellipsoid algorithm to check the feasibility of the
said program.
   Let us first recall the ellipsoid method and its implications to the fea-
sibility problem of semidefinite programming. The ellipsoid method is a
general purpose optimization method for convex optimization problems in-
troduced in [86]. Its rise to fame came when Khachiyan used the method
to give the first polynomial time algorithm for linear programming [50, 51].
We refer the reader to the monograph [42] for a very thorough treatment
of the Ellipsoid algorithm.
   For our purposes, the ellipsoid method can be used to solve the fol-
lowing computational problem. Given a set Q of linear and semidefinite
constraints, and positive rationals r and R, with the promise that if the
feasible region of Q is non-empty, then it contains a ball of radius r, i.e. the
feasible region is full-dimensional, which itself is contained in a larger ball
of radius R centered at the origin, the initial ellipsoid, then the ellipsoid
method either finds a feasible point of Q, or tells that the feasible region is
empty, in time polynomial in hQi, log(1/r) and log(R), where hQi denotes
the number of bits needed to encode all the constraints. This follows from
the central-cut ellipsoid method of [42] and the fact that there is a strong
separation oracle for PSD matrices as observed already in [41]: given a
symmetric rational matrix A, one can in time polynomial in hAi, either
verify that A is a PSD matrix, or find a vector v such that v T Av < 0.
   As noted earlier, to achieve a polynomial time proof search algorithm
for SOS proofs over a set of monomials, we need to impose a restriction on
the magnitude of the coefficients in an SOS proof. This is to bound the
radius of initial ellipsoid so that our starting point for the proof search is
not too far from the origin. For semidefinite programs in general, there
are examples whose feasible region is too far from the origin [79], and thus
the initial ellipsoid cannot be chosen small enough to guarantee polynomial
run-time. For SOS this was first noted by O’Donnell in [66] in non-Boolean
context and then expanded on by [78] for Boolean SOS. Chapter 6 of this
thesis further explores this issue.
   The following lemma and its corollary show that a bound on the coeffi-
cients of the polynomials tq and ui translates into a bound on the coefficients
appearing in the polynomials ri and in the lifts of the x2 − x axioms. The
proof of the lemma is a minor modification of a special case of the main
theorem of [78].

Lemma 5.2.2. Let p ∈ R[S] and suppose that there are ri ∈ R[S] such that
                                  X
                            p≡        ri2   mod Jn .

Then there is a PSD matric C such that

                          p ≡ hC, vS vST i mod Jn ,

and all the entries in C are bounded from above in absolute value by poly-
nomial in 2poly(|S|) and kpk∞ .
Proof. Let vS be a vector of all the monomials in S, and let D be a PSD
matrix such that
                          p ≡ hD, vS vST i mod Jn
Denote the matrix vS vST averaged over all the 0, 1-assignments on the 2n
variables (not necessarily respecting the twin variables, i.e. twins can have
the same value) by MS , i.e. MS = Eα∈{0,1}2n [vS (α)vST (α)]. Now, by Lemma
6 of [78], the smallest non-zero eigenvalue δ of MS is at least 1/2poly(|S|) .
                  P T
    Let now Π =       uu be the projector onto the zero eigenspace of MS .
Since Eα∈{0,1}2n [uT vS (α)vST (α)u] = uT MS u = 0 for each u in the zero
eigenspace of MS , the inner product uT vS (α) is zero for every assignment
α. Thus uT vS ≡ 0 mod Jn , and so

           hD, vS vST i ≡ hD, (Π + Π⊥ )vS vST (Π + Π⊥ )i mod Jn
                       ≡ hD, Π⊥ vS vST Π⊥ i mod Jn
                       ≡ hΠ⊥ DΠ⊥ , vS vST i mod Jn

Let C = Π⊥ DΠ⊥ , so that

                          p ≡ hC, vS vST i mod Jn .

Now, by taking averages on both sides, we obtain that

                         Eα∈{0,1}2n [r(α)] ≥ hC, MS i

The left hand side is at most polynomial in R and |S|. On the other hand
the right hand side is at least δTr(C), since every non-zero eigenvalue of MS
is at least δ and the zero eigenspace of C is included in the zero-eigenspace
of MS . Since the Frobenius norm of C is bounded by Tr(C) we have that
each entry of C is at most polynomial in 2poly(|S|) and R.

Corollary 5.2.3. Let Q be a set of equality constraints, let S be a set of
monomials containing all the monomials in Q, all the variables and the
empty monomial 1, and let p ∈ R[S 2 ]. If there is an R-bounded proof of
non-negativity of p from Q over S, then there is a PSD matrix C and
polynomials tq for every q ∈ Q and ui for every i ∈ [n] such that
                                  X        X
               p ≡ hC, vS vST i +   tq q +   ui (xi + x̄i − 1),        (5.14)
                                 q∈Q      i∈[n]
and all the entries in C are bounded from above in absolute value by poly-
nomial in 2poly(|S|) , R and kpk∞ ; and ktq k∞ , kui k∞ ≤ R for any q ∈ Q and
i ∈ [n].

Proof. If
                 X               X                X
            p≡           ri2 +           tq q +           ui (xi + x̄i − 1)      mod Jn
                 i∈[k]           q∈Q              i∈[n]


, then
                 X               X                                 X
            p−         tq q −            ui (xi + x̄i − 1) ≡               ri2   mod Jn ,
                 q∈Q             i∈[n]                             i∈[k]

and the previous lemma provides us with a suitable matrix C.

   The existence of the proof 5.14 can now be expressed as feasibility of
a set of linear and semidefinite constraints. Moreover the bounds on the
entries of C allow us to narrow down the search space for an R-bounded
proof so that we can efficiently check the feasibility, and thus find an SOS
proof, using ellipsoid algorithm. We discuss the details next.
   For a set Q of equality constraints; a polynomial p; a set S of (multi-
linear) monomials containing all the monomials in Q, p, all the variables
and the empty monomial 1; and a positive real R we define the semidefinite
program SDP(Q, p, S; R) as follows.


Variables: Introduce a variable xm,m0 for any m, m0 ∈ S. These corre-
spond to the entries in the matrix C in (5.14). For any q ∈ Q and any
m ∈ S introduce a variable xm,q . These correspond to the coefficients in
the polynomial tq of (5.14). Finally, for any i ∈ [n] and any m ∈ S intro-
duce the variables xm,i . These correspond to the coefficients in the lifts of
the Boolean axiom xi + x̄i − 1. Let X be the |S| × |S|-matrix of variables,
such that Xm,m0 = xm,m0 .              The number of variables is polynomial in |S|
and |Q|.


Constraints: For any q ∈ Q, let q̄ denote the coefficient vectors of q, i.e.
q̄ T vS = q for any q ∈ Q. Let Ṡ denote the set of all multilinearizations of
elements of S 2 , and write p =
                                            P
                                              m∈Ṡ am m.      For any m ∈ Ṡ we introduce
the linear equality constraint Cm = am , where
               X                      X        X
  Cm :=                  xm1 ,m2 +               xm1 ,q q̄m2
                 m1 ,m2 ∈S                       m1 ,m2 ∈S   q∈Q
              m m ≡m mod Jn                  m1 m2 ≡m mod Jn
              1 2                                                                           
     X              X                           X                           X
 +                              xm1 ,i +                      xm2 ,i −                  xm3 ,i .
                                                                                               
      
     i∈[n]           m1 ∈S                         m2 ∈S                     m3 ∈S
              xi m1 ≡m mod Jn              x̄i m2 ≡m mod Jn              m3 ≡m mod Jn

     In short the constraint states that the entries of the matrix C and the
coefficients for the lifts should be chosen so that each monomial m ends
up with the correct coefficient for p. Secondly we impose the constraints
−R ≤ xm,q ≤ R for any q ∈ Q and m ∈ S and −R ≤ xm,i ≤ R for any
i ∈ [n] and m ∈ S. We furthermore impose the PSD-constraint X  0.
The size of the encoding of all the constraints is polynomial in |S|, hQi and
hpi and log R.


     Now it is straightforward to verify that any feasible solution for the
above constraints gives an R-bounded SOS proof of non-negativity of p from
Q over S, and vice versa.
     Corollary 5.2.3 gives us an upper bound for radius of the initial ellipsoid.
However, with all the linear equality constraints, the feasible region of the
program SDP(Q, p, S; R) is never full-dimensional. However by fuzzying
the constraints slightly we gain full-dimensionality without affecting our
end goal too much. The trick is well-known, we sketch the argument below.
A similar argument can be found in e.g. [66].
     For ε > 0, an ε-relaxation of the above constraints is the same set of
constraints with the constraints Cm = am replaced by |Cm − am | ≤ ε,
and the constraints −R ≤ xm,q ≤ R and −R ≤ xm,i ≤ R replaced by
−R − ε ≤ xm,q ≤ R + ε and −R − ε ≤ xm,i ≤ R + ε. Now if there is
a feasible solution for the original set of constraints, the set of solutions
of the ε-relaxation has volume at least 1/2poly(log(1/ε),|S|) . We choose ε of
order 1/2poly(|S|) . This gives the smaller radius r in the ellipsoid algorithm
of order 1/2poly(|S|) .
   Now one can find a feasible solution to the ε-relaxation of the program
SDP(Q, p, S; R) in time polynomial in |S|, hQi, hpi and log R using the
ellipsoid algorithm.
   Any solution for the ε-relaxation translates into an R + ε-bounded SOS
proof of non-negativity of a polynomial p+q from Q over S, where kqk∞ ≤ ε0
for some small ε0 of size polynomial in 1/2poly(|S|) and |Q|. Now for each term
am m that appears in q, define qm as follows: if am > 0 let qm = am (1 − m)2 ,
and if am < 0 let qm = −am (m)2 . Now adding all qm to p + q gives Sums-
of-Squares proof of p − ε00 for some ε00 of size polynomial in 1/2poly(|S|) and
|Q|.
   In conclusion, given a set of equality constraints Q; a polynomial p; a set
S of monomials containing all the monomials in Q and p, all the variables
and the empty monomial 1; and a non-negative real R, one can find an
R + ε-bounded SOS proof of non-negativity of p + ε from Q over S, for
some ε of size polynomial in 1/2poly(|S|) and |Q|, in time polynomial in |S|,
hQi, hpi and log R.



5.2.3      Feasible interpolation for Sums-of-Squares
Again we obtain the feasible interpolation property for SOS as a corollary
to Theorem 5.2.1 and Section 5.2.2.


Theorem 5.2.4. There is a polynomial time algorithm that given


   • two sets Q1 (x, z) and Q2 (y, z) of equality constraints in disjoint se-
       quences x, y and z of variables;


   • an SOS refutation of Q1 (x, z) ∪ Q2 (y, z);


   • an assignment a to the variables z


outputs an SOS-refutation of Q1 (x, a) or an SOS-refutation of Q2 (y, a).
5.3      Feasible interpolation for
         Sherali-Adams
Finally we prove the feasible interpolation property for Sherali-Adams. Un-
like with SOS, for SA we can prove the feasible interpolation property for
both equality and inequality constraints as there is no need to consider the
analogues of ε-pseudoexpectations. However, as the SA proofs and pseu-
doexpectations over sets of monomials are not as nicely behaved as their
counterparts for SOS, the statement of the feasible disjunction property for
SA takes slightly more cumbersome form.


5.3.1     Feasible disjunction for Sherali-Adams
Recall the definition of a closed set of monomials from (3.47) and (3.48).
We define the closure of a set S of monomials, denoted S̄, in n pairs of twin
variables xi , x̄i , i ∈ [n] as the least set of monomials satisfying the following
conditions:

   • S ⊆ S̄;
   • 1 ∈ S̄;
   • xi , x̄i ∈ S̄ for any i ∈ [n];
   • if xi m ∈ S̄ and all indices appearing in m are at least i, then
      x̄i m ∈ S̄ and m ∈ S̄;
   • if x̄i m ∈ S̄ and all indices appearing in m are at least i, then
      xi m ∈ S̄ and m ∈ S̄.

Now it is clear that S̄ satisfies the conditions (3.47) and (3.48). It is equally
clear that one can compute S̄ from S in time polynomial in n and |S|.
   With the definition of closure of a set of monomials at hand we can state
and prove the feasible disjunction property for Sherali-Adams.

Theorem 5.3.1. Let P1 (x) and P2 (y) be two sets of inequality constraints
and Q1 (x) and Q2 (y) be two set of equality constraints in disjoint sequences
x and y of variables. Let Π be an SA refutation of P1 (x) ∪ P2 (y) and
Q1 (x) ∪ Q2 (y), and let S be the set of explicit monomials appearing in
Π. Then there is an SA refutation of P1 (x) and Q1 (x) over Sx2 or an SA
refutation of P2 (y) and Q2 (y) over Sy2 .

Proof. Suppose towards a contradiction that neither conclusion holds. Then,
by Theorem 3.3.7, there are SA pseudoexpectations Ex for P1 (x) and Q1 (x)
over Sx2 and Ey for P2 (y) and Q2 (y) over Sy2 .
   Now define a linear functional E : R[S 2 ] → R by

                           E(m) = Ex (mx )Ey (my )

for m ∈ S 2 and extend linearly, where mx and my are the projections of
m to the variables x and y, respectively.
   We claim that E has the following properties:

   • E(1) = 1;                                                           (5.15)
   • E(m) ≥ 0 for any m ∈ S;                                             (5.16)
   • E(m(x2i − xi )) = 0 for any m ∈ S;                                  (5.17)
   • E(m(yi2 − yi )) = for any m ∈ S;                                    (5.18)
   • E(m(xi + x̄i − 1)) = 0 for any m ∈ S;                               (5.19)
   • E(m(yi + ȳi − 1)) = 0 for any m ∈ S;                               (5.20)
   • E(mp) ≥ 0 for any p ∈ Pj for j = 1, 2 and m ∈ S                     (5.21)
   • E(mq) = 0 for any q ∈ Qj for j = 1, 2 and m ∈ S.                    (5.22)

(5.15) holds since, by definition, Ex (1) = Ey (1) = 1. (5.16) holds since
E(m) = Ex (mx )Ey (my ) and both Ex (mx ) and Ey (my ) are non-negative.
To see that (5.17) holds, first note that, for any m ∈ S, Ex (mx (x2i − xi )) is
defined and equals 0. Now E(m(x2i − xi )) = Ex (mx (x2i − xi ))Ey (my ) = 0.
The cases (5.18) - (5.20) are proved similarly. For (5.21) suppose without
a loss of generality that p ∈ P1 . First note that for any m ∈ S both
Ex (mx p) and Ey (my ) are defined and are non-negative. Hence E(mp) =
Ex (mx p)Ey (my ) ≥ 0. The case (5.22) is argued similarly.
   Now the existence of such E is in contradiction with the assumption
that there is a refutation of P1 (x) ∪ P2 (y) and Q1 (x) ∪ Q2 (y) with all the
explicit monomials among S: applying the E on both sides of the refutation
yields a contradiction of the form −1 ≥ 0.



5.3.1.1   Proof search for Sherali-Adams proofs

In this section we show how to efficiently find SA proofs of non-negativity
over a set of monomials by formulating the search for SA proofs as a lin-
ear program whose feasible solutions are in one-to-one correspondence with
SA proofs of non-negativity. Then again we can use ellipsoid algorithm to
search for a feasible solution, and thus for an SA proof. Unlike with semidef-
inite programming, ellipsoid algorithm can always solve the feasibility of a
set of linear constraints, in polynomial time in the size of the encoding of
the constraints. This is because a linear program has a feasible solution of
relatively small bit-complexity if it has any at all. Similarly there are ways
to circumvent the requirement for full-dimensionality with linear program-
ming. We refer the reader to [49] for a readable and thorough account on
the ellipsoid algorithm for linear programming. Thus the problem with too
large coefficients we encountered with SOS does not come up with SA.
   For sets P and Q of inequality and equality constraints, respectively, a
polynomial r and set S of multilinear monomials containing all the mono-
mials in P , Q and r, all the variables and the empty monomial 1 we define
a linear program LP(P, Q, r, S) as follows.



Variables: Introduce a variable xm for any m ∈ S. These correspond to
the coefficients of the polynomial s in the proof (2.7). Similarly for any
p ∈ P and for any q ∈ Q, introduce variables xm,p and xm,q for any m ∈ S.
These correspond to the coefficients in the lifts of the non-logical axioms.
Finally, for any i ∈ [n] introduce the variables xi for any m ∈ S. These
correspond to the coefficients in the lifts of the Boolean axioms.
Constraints: For any p ∈ P and any q ∈ Q, let p̄ and q̄ denote the
coefficient vectors of p and q. Let Ṡ denote the set of all multilinearizations
of monomials from S 2 , and write r =
                                           P
                                              m∈Ṡ am m. For any m ∈ S we
introduce the linear constraint

                                                                                    !
                           X           X                       X
  am = x m +                                  xm0 ,p p̄m00 +         xm0 ,q q̄m00
                    m1 ,m2 ∈S          p∈P                     q∈Q
                m1 m2 ≡m mod Jn
                                                                                       
              X               X                             X
          +                                 xm1 ,i +                        xm2 ,i − xm,i  (5.23)
                                                                                          
               
              i∈[n]              m1 ∈S                         m2 ∈S
                          xi m1 ≡m mod Jn              x̄i m2 ≡m mod Jn


   In short the constraint tells that coefficients for the lifts should be chosen
so that each monomial m ends up with the correct coefficient.
   We impose the constraint xm ≥ 0 for any m ∈ S, and the constraint
xm,p ≥ 0 for any m ∈ S and p ∈ P .
   Now it is straightforward to verify that any feasible solution for the
above constraints gives an SA proof of non-negativity of r from P and
Q over S, and vice versa. The size of the linear program is polynomial in
|S|, hP i, hQi and hri. Thus the ellipsoid algorithm or any other polynomial-
time algorithm for linear programming can be used to find a feasible solution
for the constraints in time polynomial in |S|, hP i, hQi and hri.


5.3.2     Feasible interpolation for Sherali-Adams
Finally as a consequence of Theorem 5.3.1 and Section 5.3.1.1, we obtain
feasible interpolation for Sherali-Adams.

Theorem 5.3.2. There is a polynomial time algorithm that given

   • two sets P1 (x, z) and P2 (y, z) of inequality constraints and two set
      Q1 (x, z) and Q2 (y, z) of equality constraints in disjoint sequences x, y
      and z of variables;

   • an SA refutation Π of P1 (x, z) ∪ P2 (y, z) and Q1 (x, z) ∪ Q2 (y, z);
   • an assignment a to the z variables

outputs an SA refutation of P1 (x, a) and Q1 (x, a) or an SA refutation of
P2 (y, a) and Q2 (y, a).


5.4        No monotone feasible interpolation for
           Sums-of-Squares
Finally in this section we show that SOS does not admit monotone feasible
interpolation, i.e. feasible interpolation with respect to poly-sized monotone
Boolean circuits in the case that the interpolating function is monotone. We
prove that SOS has poly-sized proofs of the clique-coloring formulas, and
so monotone feasible interpolation property would be in contradiction with
the monotone circuit lower bounds for the clique function [80, 3].
   Let us first recall the clique-coloring formulas. Let k > `. We define
two CNFs Cliquen,k (x, z) and Colorn,` (y, z) stating that there is a clique of
size k and a coloring with ` colors, respectively, on a graph on [n] encoded
by the variables z.
   Introduce variables xui for any u ∈ [k] and i ∈ [n] stating that node
i is the uth element of the clique encoded by the x variables, variables
yia stating that node i gets the color a, and variables zij for any {i, j} ⊆ [n]
for distinct i and j stating that there is an edge between nodes i and j.
   The formula Cliquen,k (x, z) consists of the following clauses:

   •
       W
        i∈[n] xui for any u ∈ [k];                                       (5.24)

   • x̄ui ∨ x̄uj for any u ∈ [k] and any distinct i, j ∈ [n];            (5.25)

   • x̄ui ∨ x̄vi for any distinct u, v ∈ [k] and any i ∈ [n];            (5.26)

   • x̄ui ∨ x̄vj ∨ zij for any distinct u, v ∈ [k] and any distinct i, j ∈ [n].
                                                                         (5.27)

Clauses (5.24) and (5.25) together say that exactly one of the nodes in [n] is
the uth element of the clique encoded by the variables x. Clause (5.26) says
that no node is both the uth and vth element of the clique for distinct u and
v. Finally (5.27) states that all nodes in the clique are pairwise connected
by an edge.
   The formula Colorn,` (y, z) consists of the following clauses:

   • a∈[`] yia for any i ∈ [n];
    W
                                                                         (5.28)

   • ȳia ∨ ȳib for any i ∈ [n] and distinct a, b ∈ [`];                (5.29)

   • ȳia ∨ ȳja ∨ z̄ij for any distinct i, j ∈ [n] and any a ∈ [`].     (5.30)

Clauses (5.28) and (5.29) together say that every node gets exactly one of
the ` colors, and clause (5.30) states that no two nodes with the same color
are connected by an edge.
   In the following we construct SOS refutations for Cliquen,k ∧ Colorn,` .
Our construction follows closely that of [39], where small refutations of
Cliquen,k ∧ Colorn,` were constructed for degree 4 Lovasz-Schrijver proofs.
   We translate all the clauses into polynomial inequality constraints in a
straightforward manner: for a clause `1 ∨ . . . ∨ `k we define the polynomial
           P
constrain i∈[k] `i ≥ 1. We call this the additive encoding of CNFs into
polynomial constraints.
   We begin by proving a simple but very useful lemma.

Lemma 5.4.1. Let m1 , . . . , mn be monomials of degree at most k. Then
                                                       P
there is a degree 3k SOS proof of non-negativity of 1 − i∈[n] mi from the
constraints mi + mj ≤ 1 for any distinct i, j ∈ [n].

Proof. We have that
                        2
     X              X        X
                               m2i + m2j (1 − mi + mj )
                                        
 1−     mi ≡ 1 −     mi  +                                           mod In
      i∈[n]            i∈[n]         i,j∈[n]
                                       i<j




Lemma 5.4.2. There is a constant degree SOS refutation of the additive
encoding of Cliquen,k ∧ Colorn,` for k > `. Moreover the refutation is of bit-
complexity poly(n), i.e. the refutation does not contain exceedingly large
coefficients.
Proof. We introduce a shorthand to make the proof a little more readable.
Let pua stand for the polynomial
                               X
                                                       xui yia .
                                               i∈[n]

The idea is that the polynomial pua aims to capture the statement that the
uth vertex of the clique is of color a.
   Now our aim is to prove that both
                       X
                           pua ≥ 1 for all u ∈ [k]                                                (5.31)
                                 a∈[`]

and
                                   X
                                           pua ≤ 1 for all a ∈ [`]                                (5.32)
                                   u∈[`]

have constant degree SOS proofs of non-negativity from Cliquen,k ∧Colorn,` .
With these we reach a contradiction as
                                                  
                    X X                 X      X
            `−k =           pua − 1 +   1 −   pua 
                           u∈[`]     a∈[`]                         a∈[k]       u∈[`]

   It is straightforward to derive (5.31). Namely, we have that
                                                       
      X              X         X               X
           pua − 1 ≡    x2ui     yia − 1 +      xui − 1 mod In
       a∈[`]             i∈[n]             a∈[`]                       i∈[n]

   Secondly to derive (5.32), we show that for any two distinct monomials
                          P
m1 and m2 from the sum u∈[`] pua , there is a constant degree SOS proof
of non-negativity of 1 − m1 − m2 from Cliquen,k ∧ Colorn,` . Then the claim
follows by Lemma 5.4.1.
   If m1 = xui yia and m2 = xuj yja for distinct i and j, then

  1 − xui yia − xuj yja ≡ (xui − xui yia )2 + (xuj − xuj yja )2
                                                                       + (1 − xui − xuj )       mod In

   If on the other hand m1 = xui yia and m2 = xvi yia for distinct u and v,
then
                                         2     2
               1 − xui yia − xvi yia ≡ ȳia + yia (1 − xui − xvi )                     mod In
   Finally for the most interesting case, when m1 = xui yia and m2 = xvj yja
for distinct i and j, and distinct u and v, we have that

 1 − xui yia − xvj yja ≡ (1 − xui yia − xvj yja + xui yia xvj yja )2
                     + (xui yia xvj yja )2 (x̄ui + x̄vj + zij − 1)
                              + (xui yia xvj yja )2 (ȳia + ȳja + z̄ij − 1)   mod In



   Unfortunately it seems that the above proof does not translate to give
poly-sized Sherali-Adams refutations of Cliquen,k ∧ Colorn,` . The problem
comes down to Lemma 5.4.1: Sherali-Adams can easily prove Lemma 5.4.1
in case all monomials mi are actually just variables. However with mono-
                                                           P
mials of degree more than 1, the Sherali-Adams proof of 1 − i∈[n] mi from
the constraints mi + mj ≤ 1 seems to blow up exponentially in size.
Chapter 6

Bit-complexity vs.
Monomial-size in Polynomial
Calculus and Sums-of-Squares

In this chapter we consider the relationship between monomial-size and
bit-complexity in Polynomial Calculus Resolution over rationals and Sums-
of-Squares. We show that there is an unsatisfiable set Q of polynomial
equality constraints in O(n2 ) Boolean variables that has both PCR/Q and
SOS refutations of degree 2 and with polynomially many monomials in n,
but which requires exponential bit-complexity to refute in both systems.
   O’Donnell considered the bit-complexity of Sums-of-Squares proofs in
[66] in connection with degree automatability of Sums-of-Squares proofs.
O’Donnell showed that there is a set of polynomial constraints Q1 (in non-
Boolean variables) and a polynomial p such that p has a degree 2 proofs
of non-negativity from Q1 , but any degree 2 proof requires coefficients of
doubly exponential magnitude. This shows that a degree d Sums-of-Squares
proof cannot always be found, if one exists, in time nO(d) . O’Donnell’s
example however has small proofs of degree 4.
   A more severe example was given by Raghavendra and Weitz in [78].
They gave an example of a set Q2 of polynomial constraints in O(n2 ) Boolean
variables and a polynomial q that has degree 2 proofs of non-negativity from

                                    111
Q2 , but any proof of degree O(n) requires coefficients of magnitude doubly
exponential in n. Their example is built on O’Donnell’s by replacing every
non-Boolean variable by an instance of Knapsack. The proof uses Grig-
oriev’s degree lower bound for Knapsack in Sums-of-Squares [36] and the
degree O(n) pseudoexpectations for Knapsack provided by the degree lower
bound, and completeness of degree bounded pseudoexpectations operators.
   For Polynomial Calculus it has also often been stated that a degree
d Polynomial Calculus proofs can be found in time nO(d) if they exist. This is
certainly true over finite fields as already observed in Section 5.1.2. However
for Polynomial Calculus over reals or rationals there is no way to control
the potential coefficient bloat in the proof search algorithm of Section 5.1.2.
   The example of Raghavendra and Weitz leaves however open the pos-
sibility that there are proofs of non-negativity of q from Q2 of polynomial
bit-complexity. Our result implies that this is not the case. Our set of
constraints is built, in turn, from that of [78] by adjoining an additional
constraints to their set of constraints. We consider here an unsatisfiable set
of constraints especially, since this allows us to translate the result also to
Polynomial Calculus.
   For Sums-of-Squares we prove a trade-off result between the number of
monomials and the size of coefficients appearing in the refutations of our set
of constraints Q. We prove that any Sums-of-Squares refutation of Q that
uses less than exponentially many monomials in n must contain a coefficient
of doubly exponential magnitude in n. Our proof is similar to the proof of
Raghavendra and Weitz, but we use a lower bound on the number of distinct
significant monomials in any refutation of Knapsack given by Grigoriev’s
degree lower bound [36] and Theorem 4.4.3, and pseudoexpectations over
sets of monomials given by the lower bound and Theorem 3.2.8.
   For Polynomial Calculus Resolution over rationals we prove a three-
way trade-off showing that any PCR/Q refutation of Q with coefficients
smaller than doubly exponential in n, and with less than exponentially
many monomials in n, must be of height exponential in n. This proof
uses the p-simulation of PCR/Q by SOS as proved in Section 3.4, which
gives bounds on the SOS simulation in terms of the size of coefficients and
the height of the given PCR/Q refutation. Originally the fact that SOS
p-simulates PCR/Q was proved in [15].


6.1      The constraints
In this section we introduce the set of constraints that we use to prove our
claims about lower bounds on bit-complexity.
   Recall first the knapsack constraint KNAPSACK(n, k):

                              x1 + . . . + xn = k.

If k is not an integer, the constraint is unsatisfiable over the Boolean values.
However, for any ε strictly between 0 and 1, KNAPSACK(2n, n+ε) requires
degree at least 2n to refute in SOS [36].
   Now, by Theorem 4.4.3, to refute KNAPSACK(2n, n + ε) in SOS one
needs at least sn distinct significant monomials, where
                                       (2n − 5)2
                                                
                           sn = exp                .
                                      32(2n + 1)
A lower bound of the same order for the monomial-size was also obtained
earlier in [39] using more ad hoc methods.
   For our purposes it is important that our lower bound is for the number
of distinct significant monomials. It follows that for any ε strictly between
0 and 1 and for any set S of monomials containing all the variables and
the empty monomial 1 of size less than sn , there is no SOS refutation
of KNAPSACK(2n, n + ε) over S, and thus, by Theorem 3.2.8 there is a
pseudoexpectation for KNAPSACK(2n, n + ε) over S. This property will
be key in the proof of Theorem 6.3.1.
   Now we turn to the set of constraints we consider here. The set is
slightly modified from [78], we add the constraint (6.1) in order to obtain
an unsatisfiable set of constraints.
   For each i ∈ [n], introduce 2n variables xij , j ∈ [2n]. Denote by ksi the
           P
polynomial j∈[2n] xij − n. Note that the constraint ksi = ε is just the
constraint KNAPSACK(2n, n + ε) in the variables xij , j ∈ [2n]. Denote by
Qn the following set of constraints
   • ks1 = 1/2;                                                            (6.1)

   • ks2i = ksi+1 for each i ∈ [n − 1];                                    (6.2)

   • ks2n = 0.                                                             (6.3)

   Now, as noted above already, the constraint (6.1) is by itself unsatisfiable
over the Boolean cube. However, both PCR/Q and SOS require linear
degree to refute (6.1) by itself. The role of (6.2) and (6.3) is two-fold: on
one hand they decrease the degree needed to refute the constraints, but the
repeated squaring inherent in the constraints also forces the coefficients to
blow-up.


6.2        The upper bounds
In this section we show that both PCR/Q and SOS have refutations of Qn of
degree 2 and of monomial-size polynomial in n. Each of these refutations
however uses coefficients of exponential bit-complexity in n and thus the
refutations themselves have bit-complexities that are exponential in n. In
the next section we show that exponential bit-complexities are necessary
for both PCR/Q and SOS.

Lemma 6.2.1. There is a PCR/Q refutation of Qn of degree 2 and of
monomial-size poly(n).

Proof. We prove by induction that for any i ∈ [n] there is a PCR/Q proof
                 i
of ks2i = 1/22 from Qn of degree 2 and monomial-size poly(n). For i = 1,
we obtain this as follows. First derive ks21 = ks1 /2 from ks1 = 1/2. This can
be done in n + 1 steps, in degree 2 and with polynomially many monomials.
Secondly derive ks1 /2 = 1/4 from ks1 = 1/2. This can be done in one step.
Finally combine the two derivations to obtain a derivation of ks21 = 1/4.
                                                               i
   Suppose then that we have a proof of ks2i = 1/22 from Qn . We derive
                i+1                                        i              i
ks2i+1 = 1/22         as follows. First derive ksi+1 = 1/22 from ks2i = 1/22 and
                                                       i             i        i+1
ks2i = ksi+1 . Secondly derive both ks2i+1 = ksi+1 /22 and ksi+1 /22 = 1/22
                       i                                                      i+1
from ksi+1 = 1/22 , and combine these to obtain a proof of ks2i+1 = 1/22            .
                                                     n
   In the end we have a proof of ks2n = 1/22 from Qn of degree 2 and
of monomial-size poly(n). By combining this with the axiom ks2n = 0 we
reach a contradiction. Note that this last step involves a multiplication by
a coefficient of doubly exponential magnitude.

Lemma 6.2.2. There is an SOS refutation of Qn of degree 2 and of monomial-
size poly(n).

Proof. The following is an SOS refutation of Qn :
                           !2
        X 1 − 2n2i−1 ksi         
                                         1
                                           
  −1=              √          + 4 ks1 −
                     n                   2
        i∈[n]
                                            i                    n
                                   X
                                        4n2 −1 ks2i − ksi+1 − 4n2 −1 ks2n
                                                           
                               −
                                     i∈[n−1]




6.3      Lower bound for Sums-of-Squares
In this section we prove our main claim about bit-complexity of SOS refu-
tations. The proof of the claim is very similar to the one in [78] with the
use of S-pseudoexpectations instead of degree bounded pseudoexpectations
being the central novel idea in the proof.
   For a monomial m in variables xij , i ∈ [n], j ∈ [2n], for each i ∈ [n] de-
note by mi the monomial in variables xij , j ∈ [2n] such that m = m1 · · · mn .
                         Q
For any I ⊆ [n] let mI = i∈I mi . We call mi and mI the projections of
m to index i and set I, respectively. For a set S of monomials in vari-
ables xij , i ∈ [n], j ∈ [2n], denote by Si and SI the sets of projections of all
elements of S to index i and set I, respectively.

Theorem 6.3.1. There is a constant c > 0 such that for large enough n,
any SOS refutation of Qn has at least 2cn distinct explicit monomials or
                                                 n
contains a coefficient of magnitude at least 22 /2cn .

Proof. Let c be such that sn ≥ 22cn for large enough n. Let n be large
enough, let Π be an SOS refutation of Qn with less than 2cn distinct explicit
monomials and let S be the set of explicit monomials appearing in the
refutation Π. Now Si2 has size less than sn for any i ∈ [n]. Now by Section
6.1 and by Theorem 3.2.8, for any i ∈ [n] there is a pseudoexpectation Ei
                  i−1
for {ksi = 1/22         } over Si2 .
      Now define a linear functional E : R[S 2 ] → R as follows: for each m ∈ S 2
let
                              E(m) := E1 (m1 ) · · · En (mn ),

and extend linearly to the whole of R[S 2 ].
      We prove that E has the following properties:

      • E(1) = 1;                                                           (6.4)
      • E(p2 ) ≥ 0 for any p ∈ R[S];                                        (6.5)
      • E(m(x2ij − xij )) = 0 for any i ∈ [n], j ∈ [2n] and m ∈ S;          (6.6)
      • E(m(x̄2ij − x̄ij )) = 0 for any i ∈ [n], j ∈ [2n] and m ∈ S;        (6.7)
      • E(m(xij + x̄ij − 1)) = 0 for any i ∈ [n], j ∈ [2n] and m ∈ S;       (6.8)
      • E(m(ks1 − 1/2)) = 0 for any m ∈ S;                                  (6.9)
      • E(m(ks2i − ksi+1 )) = 0 for any i ∈ [n − 1] and m ∈ S;             (6.10)
      • |E(pks2n )| ≤ |S|kpk∞ /22 for any polynomial p ∈ R[S].
                                       n
                                                                           (6.11)

      Now applying E to the given refutation Π, we have that −1 ≥ E(pks2n ),
where p is the lift of ks2n = 0 in Π, and thus
                                                            n
                              1 ≤ |E(pks2n )| ≤ |S|kpk∞ /22 .

By rearranging the inequality we obtain that
                                           n          n
                                kpk∞ ≥ 22 /|S| ≥ 22 /2cn .

      Finally we prove that E has the desired properties. (6.4) follows since
Ei (1) = 1 for any i ∈ [n].
    To see that (6.5) holds, define for each i ∈ [n], a linear function Ti with
                 Q
Ti (m) = Ei (mi ) i0 6=i mi0 . Now clearly E(m) = T1 (T2 (. . . Tn (m) . . .)). We
show that for any i ∈ [n] and any p ∈ R[S[i] ], Ti (p2 ) is a sum of squares
of polynomials in R[S[i−1] ], where S[i] is the projection of S to the initial
segment [i]. To simplify notation, we prove the case when i = 2. The
general case is not conceptually any harder. So write p as
                             XX
                                     aαβ xα1 xβ2 ,
                                           α       β

where x1 and x2 are sequences of the variables in S1 and S2 , respectively.
Now
                                  XX                                          0               0
                    T2 (p2 ) =                     aαβ aα0 β 0 xα1 xα1 E2 (xβ2 xβ2 ).
                                  α,α0 β,β 0
                              β0
Now the matrix (E2 (xβ2 x2 ))β,β 0 is positive semidefinite, and so there are
                                    0
some vectors u such that E2 (xβ2 x2β ) = u uβ uβ 0 . Now
                                           P

                                                   0
                        XX                           X
             T2 (p2 ) =        aαβ aα0 β 0 xα1 xα1     uβ uβ 0
                          α,α0 β,β 0                                     u
                                                              0
                       X XX          XX
                        (   aαβ uβ )(   aα0 β 0 uβ 0 )xα1 xα1
                       α,α0      β      u                     β0         u
                         XXX
                       =(    aαβ uβ xα )2
                              α        β       u

    For (6.6), we have that E(m(x2ij −xij )) = Ei (mi (x2ij −xij ))
                                                                                                    Q
                                                                                                        i0 6=i Ei0 (mi0 ) =
0, since Ei (mi (x2ij −xij )) = 0. The items (6.7) and (6.8) are proved similarly.
    For (6.9), we have that
                                                                                  Y
             E(m(ks1 − 1/2)) = E1 (m1 (ks1 − 1/2))                                         Ei0 (mi0 ) = 0,
                                                                                  i0 6=1

since E1 (m1 (ks1 − 1/2)) = 0 as E1 is a pseudoexpectation for {ks1 = 1/2}
over S12 .
    For (6.10) we evaluate the terms E(mks2i ) and E(mksi+1 ) separately and
show that they are equal. Firstly we have that
                                           Y
                 E(mks2i ) = Ei (mi ks2i )   Ei0 (mi0 )
                                                            i0 6=i
                                                               i−1
                                                                         Y
                                     = Ei (mi ksi /22                )            Ei0 (mi0 )
                                                                         i0 6=i
                                                i−1 2 Y
                                     = Ei (mi / 22     )  Ei0 (mi0 )
                                                                             i0 6=i
                                                        i
                                     = E(m)/22 .
Here the second equality follows from the facts that Ei is a pseudoexpecta-
                     i−1
tion for {ksi = 1/22       } over Si2 and all the monomials from the polynomial
mi ksi are among Si2 . The third equality follows similarly, since the mono-
mials mi is among Si2 .
   Secondly we have that
                                                            Y
                  E(mksi+1 ) = Ei+1 (mi+1 ksi+1 )                  Ei0 (mi0 )
                                                        i0 6=i+1
                                                   i
                                                        Y
                               = Ei+1 (mi+1 )/22                  Ei0 (mi0 )
                                                       i0 6=i+1
                                             i
                               = E(m)/22 ,
where the second equality follows since Ei+1 is a pseudoexpectation for
              i
{ksi+1 = 1/22 } over Si+1
                      2                     2
                          , and mi+1 is in Si+1 .
   Finally for (6.11) first note that for any m ∈ S we have that
                                            Y
                  E(mks2n ) = En (mn ks2n )   Ei (mi )
                                                 i<n
                                                   n−1
                                                          Y
                               = En (mn ksn )/22                  Ei (mi )
                                                            i<n
                                           n−1 2 Y
                               = En (mn )/ 22        Ei (mi )
                                                            i<n
                                            2n
                               = E(m)/2 .
Here the second equality follows again from the facts that En is a pseudo-
                                 n−1
expectation for {ksn = 1/22            } over Sn2 and all the monomials from the
polynomial mn ksn are among Sn2 . The third equality follows similarly, since
the monomials mn is among Sn2 .
                P
   Now write p = m∈S am m. We have that
                                                   n
                           |E(pks2n )| = |E(p)/22 |
                                                         n
                                         X
                                       ≤     |am E(m)|/22
                                         m∈S
                                                        n
                                       ≤ |S|kpk∞ /22 ,
where the last inequality follows from the fact that 0 ≤ E(m) ≤ 1. This in
turn follows from previous items as for any m ∈ S we have that m ≡ m2
mod In and 1 − m ≡ (1 − m)2 mod In .
   As a corollary to the above theorem, we obtain the following lower bound
for the bit-complexity of SOS refutations.

Corollary 6.3.2. Any SOS refutation of Qn has bit-complexity 2Ω(n) .



6.4      Lower bound for Polynomial Calculus
Finally in this section we prove an analogue of Theorem 6.3.1 for Polynomial
Calculus Resolution over rationals. Already from the Corollary 6.3.2 alone
we obtain lower bounds on the bit-complexity of PCR/Q refutations of Qn
using the simulation of [15]. It is however instructive to prove an analogue
of Theorem 6.3.1 also for PCR/Q.
   For SOS we were able to pinpoint exactly where the large coefficient
resides in an SOS refutation that uses too few monomials: it must reside in
the lift of the constraint ks2n = 0. However for PCR/Q we will not be able
to be this precise. Moreover we need to bring height of the refutation also
into the picture. We show that any PCR/Q refutation that uses only few
monomials and coefficients of small magnitude must be very tall.
   To prove the theorem for Polynomial Calculus we use the simulation of
Lemma 3.4.2. The important thing here is that the lemma gives explicit
bounds on coefficients in the SOS simulation in terms of the height of a
given PCR/Q refutation. This is how we bring the height of a PCR/Q
refutation also into the picture.
   For any set S of monomials, let S̃ denote some minimal set of monomials
so that there for any m ∈ S 2 there are ui , vi ∈ S̃ such that
                             X
                                     ui (x2i − xi ) + vi (x̄2i − x̄i ) ,
                                                                      
                  m̄ − m =
                             i∈[n]


where m̄ denotes the multilinearization of m. In other words S̃ contains
just enough monomials in order to certify the equivalence of each m ∈ S 2 to
its multilinearization. It is clear that for any S there is S̃ of size polynomial
in the size of S and the maximum degree of a monomial in S.
Theorem 6.4.1. There are constants c > 0 and d > 0 such that for large
                        n/2
enough n, every 22            -bounded PCR/Q refutation of Qn that uses at most
 dn
2     different monomials has height at least
                                                 cn   5
                                   2n/2−2 −         −   .
                                              2n/2+2 4
Proof. Let c be as in Theorem 6.3.1, and let d be such that for any set S
of monomials of size at most 2dn with maximum degree at most 10n, the
size of S ∪ S̃ is less than 2cn for large enough n. Let n be large enough and
               n/2
let Π be a 22        -bounded PCR/Q refutation of Qn of height h that uses at
most 2dn different monomials. Without a loss of generality we may assume
that the degree of Π is at most 10n. Let S be the set of all monomials in
                                                               n/2 (4h+5)
the refutation. Now by Lemma 3.4.2, there is an 22                          -bounded SOS
refutation of Qn over S.
      We may assume that the explicit monomials of the SOS refutation are
among S ∪ S̃. Now the size of S ∪ S̃ is less that 2cn . Thus, by the proof
of Theorem 6.3.1, the lift of the constraint ks2n = 0 contains a coefficient of
                              n
magnitude at least 22 /2cn .
      Putting everything together we obtain that
                                    n/2 (4h+5)        n
                                   22            ≥ 22 /2cn .

After solving for h we obtain the wanted lower bound for the height.

      We obtain a lower bound on bit-complexity for Polynomial Calculus as
a corollary to the above theorem.

Corollary 6.4.2. Any PCR/Q refutation of Qn has bit-complexity 2Ω(n) .
Chapter 7

Conclusion and future work

We conclude by considering some open questions related to the work pre-
sented in this thesis.


Size-degree trade-offs for Sums-of-Squares and Sherali-Adams
                                              p
Most important question here is whether the O( n log(s)+k) upper bound
in the degree-reduction lemma is tight? For Resolution and Polynomial Cal-
culus, whose size-width/degree trade-offs adopt the same form, the bound
is known to be tight. In both cases different version of the ordering principle
witnesses the necessity of the square root of the number of variables in the
upper bound [17, 34]. Similarly for Sherali-Adams the ordering principle
gives a tight example of the trade-off [25]. Interestingly, also the pigeonhole
               n+1
principle PHPn       is a tight example for the trade-off for Sherali-Adams
[25, 7].
   It was recently shown by Potechin that the total ordering principle,
                                                                    √
which has N = n(n − 1) variables, can be refuted in SOS in degree O( n),
                    √                                                √
whence in degree O( 4 N ) [71]. Since the relationship between N and n
is a 4th root, this means that the total ordering principle cannot be used
for witnessing the necessity of the square root of the number of variables
                                      √
in our theorem. The degree upper of 4 N for the total ordering principle is
also known to be essentially tight [71].
    A note is in order about the encoding Potechin uses. Rather than en-

                                     121
coding the wide clauses in the total ordering principle as linear inequality
constraints, Potechin uses auxiliary non-Boolean variables zi for any i ∈ [n]
and encodes the wide clause with

   •                    2
       P
        j6=i xji = 1 + zi .                                               (7.1)

Hence the upper bound does not immediately apply to the situation con-
sidered here with only Boolean variables. In the appendix of [71], Potechin
sketches out a solution by replacing the single auxiliary variables zi by a
bunch of Boolean auxiliary variables.
   We want to point out here that both the upper bound and the lower
bound of [71] apply also for the encoding with Boolean inequality con-
straints instead of (7.1). For the lower bound this follows, since one can
easily simulate an SOS refutation that uses the encoding with inequality
constraints using the encoding (7.1). For the upper bound, a close look at
Potechin’s proof reveals that only a minor rewording of the proof gives the
upper bound also for encoding with the wide clauses encoded as inequality
constraints.
   The remaining question is thus whether one can find an example that
shows that the upper bound given by the degree-reduction lemma is tight
for SOS, or whether one can improve the bound given by the lemma. The
proof of the upper bound in [71] uses the totality of the order in an essential
way, and thus leaves open the possibility that by relaxing the principle to
a partial ordering principle we could still obtain a tight example from the
ordering principle for the size-degree trade-off of SOS.
   A second important open question concerns both SOS and SA, and the
interplay of the two complexity measures considered, degree and monomial
size. In the proof of the size-degree trade-off we show how to transform
a refutation with a small number of monomials into a refutation of small
degree. This transformation however blows up the number of monomials
exponentially. The question is thus whether this blow-up is necessary, or
whether one can minimize both measures simultaneously. For Resolution
and Polynomial Calculus, the necessity of (a superpolynomial) blow-up has
been demonstrated in [89] and [58], respectively. In short, both papers
show that there is a CNF that has both polynomially sized refutations of
relatively high degree, and refutations of small degree, but for which any
refutation of minimal degree must have superpolynomially many monomi-
als.


Feasible interpolation for Polynomial Calculus, Sums-of-Squares
and Sherali-Adams

We have seen that Sums-of-Squares cannot admit monotone feasible in-
terpolation with respect to polynomial-sized monotone Boolean circuits.
Pudlák and Sgall prove in [75] that degree bounded Polynomial Calculus ad-
mits monotone feasible interpolation with respect to monotone polynomial
programs. Also recently Fleming et al proved in [32] that Sherali-Adams
admits a monotone feasible interpolation with respect to monotone linear
programming circuits. It is however open whether one can prove mono-
tone feasible interpolation for Polynomial Calculus or Sherali-Adams with
respect to monotone Boolean circuits.
       We obtain feasible interpolation for Polynomial Calculus only over finite
fields, since we have the poly-time search algorithm for PC proofs over a
set of monomials only over finite fields (See Remark 5.1.3). However, as
Polynomial Calculus is deductive proof system, it is most likely that one
can give a syntactic proof, similar to the one for Resolution [56], of the
feasible interpolation property for PC. Such syntactic proof might give new
insights into the issue of bit-complexity, and better handle on the size of
the coefficients.
       Finally we want to emphasize that although we proved the feasible inter-
polation for Sums-of-Squares and Sherali-Adams only over the {0, 1}-values,
the argument works equally well for Boolean values over the ±1 basis.


Bit-complexity of PCR/Q and SOS refutations

From the point of view of proof complexity the most important open ques-
tion related to Chapter 6 is whether the phenomenon presented in the chap-
ter can occur when the set of constraints comes from a translation of a CNF,
or whether the monomial size and bit-complexity are polynomially equiv-
alent when PCR/R or SOS is considered as a refutation system for CNFs.
The constraints in Chapter 6 do not arise from any CNF.
Bibliography

[1] Michael Alekhnovich, Eli Ben-Sasson, Alexander A. Razborov, and
    Avi Wigderson. Space complexity in propositional calculus. SIAM J.
    Comput., 31(4):1184–1211, 2002. doi:10.1137/S0097539700366735.

[2] Michael Alekhnovich and Alexander A. Razborov. Lower bounds for
    polynomial calculus: Non-binomial case. In 42nd Annual Symposium
    on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2001, 14-17 October 2001,
    Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, pages 190–199. IEEE Computer Society,
    2001. doi:10.1109/SFCS.2001.959893.

[3] Noga Alon and Ravi B. Boppana. The monotone circuit complexity of
    boolean functions. Comb., 7(1):1–22, 1987. doi:10.1007/BF02579196.

[4] Elizabeth A. Arnold.    Modular algorithms for computing Gröbner
    bases.   J. Symb. Comput., 35(4):403–419, 2003.       doi:10.1016/
    S0747-7171(02)00140-2.

[5] Albert Atserias and Vı́ctor Dalmau. A combinatorial characterization
    of resolution width. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 74(3):323–334, 2008. doi:
    10.1016/j.jcss.2007.06.025.

[6] Albert Atserias and Tuomas Hakoniemi. Size-Degree Trade-Offs for
    Sums-of-Squares and Positivstellensatz Proofs. In Amir Shpilka, ed-
    itor, 34th Computational Complexity Conference (CCC 2019), vol-
    ume 137 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs),
    pages 24:1–24:20, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2019. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-
    Zentrum fuer Informatik. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.CCC.2019.24.

                                  125
[7] Albert Atserias and Massimo Lauria. Circular (yet sound) proofs. In
    Mikolás Janota and Inês Lynce, editors, Theory and Applications of
    Satisfiability Testing - SAT 2019 - 22nd International Conference, SAT
    2019, Lisbon, Portugal, July 9-12, 2019, Proceedings, volume 11628
    of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 1–18. Springer, 2019.
    doi:10.1007/978-3-030-24258-9\_1.

[8] Albert Atserias, Massimo Lauria, and Jakob Nordström. Narrow proofs
    may be maximally long. ACM Trans. Comput. Log., 17(3):19:1–19:30,
    2016. Preliminary version in CCC 2014. doi:10.1145/2898435.

[9] Boaz Barak, Fernando G. S. L. Brandão, Aram Wettroth Harrow,
    Jonathan A. Kelner, David Steurer, and Yuan Zhou. Hypercontrac-
    tivity, sum-of-squares proofs, and their applications. In Proceedings
    of the 44th Symposium on Theory of Computing Conference, STOC
    2012, New York, NY, USA, May 19 - 22, 2012, pages 307–326, 2012.
    doi:10.1145/2213977.2214006.

[10] Boaz Barak and David Steurer. Sum-of-squares proofs and the quest
    toward optimal algorithms. In Proceedings of International Congress
    of Mathematicians (ICM), 2014. URL: http://eccc.hpi-web.de/
    report/2014/059/.

[11] Paul Beame, Russell Impagliazzo, Jan Krajı́ček, Toniann Pitassi, and
    Pavel Pudlák. Lower bounds on hilbert’s nullstellensatz and propo-
    sitional proofs. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, s3-
    73(1):1–26, 1996. doi:10.1112/plms/s3-73.1.1.

[12] Paul Beame and Toniann Pitassi. Simplified and improved resolution
    lower bounds. In 37th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
    Science, FOCS ’96, Burlington, Vermont, USA, 14-16 October, 1996,
    pages 274–282, 1996. doi:10.1109/SFCS.1996.548486.

[13] Eli Ben-Sasson and Russell Impagliazzo. Random cnf’s are hard for
    the polynomial calculus. Comput. Complex., 19(4):501–519, 2010. doi:
    10.1007/s00037-010-0293-1.
[14] Eli Ben-Sasson and Avi Wigderson. Short proofs are narrow - resolu-
    tion made simple. J. ACM, 48(2):149–169, 2001. Preliminary version
    in STOC 1999. doi:10.1145/375827.375835.

[15] Christoph Berkholz.    The Relation between Polynomial Calculus,
    Sherali-Adams, and Sum-of-Squares Proofs. In Rolf Niedermeier and
    Brigitte Vallée, editors, 35th Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of
    Computer Science (STACS 2018), volume 96 of Leibniz International
    Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 11:1–11:14, Dagstuhl, Ger-
    many, 2018. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik. doi:
    10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.2018.11.

[16] Maria Luisa Bonet, Carlos Domingo, Ricard Gavaldà, Alexis Maciel,
    and Toniann Pitassi. Non-automatizability of bounded-depth frege
    proofs. In Proceedings of the 14th Annual IEEE Conference on Compu-
    tational Complexity, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, May 4-6, 1999, pages 15–
    23. IEEE Computer Society, 1999. doi:10.1109/CCC.1999.766258.

[17] Maria Luisa Bonet and Nicola Galesi. Optimality of size-width trade-
    offs for resolution. Computational Complexity, 10(4):261–276, 2001.
    doi:10.1007/s000370100000.

[18] Maria Luisa Bonet, Toniann Pitassi, and Ran Raz. No feasible inter-
    polation for tc0-frege proofs. In 38th Annual Symposium on Founda-
    tions of Computer Science, FOCS ’97, Miami Beach, Florida, USA,
    October 19-22, 1997, pages 254–263. IEEE Computer Society, 1997.
    doi:10.1109/SFCS.1997.646114.

[19] Samuel R. Buss. Lower bounds on nullstellensatz proofs via designs. In
    Paul Beam and Samuel R. Buss, editors, Proof Complexity and Feasible
    Arithmetics, Proceedings of a DIMACS Workshop, New Brunswick,
    New Jersey, USA, April 21-24, 1996, volume 39 of DIMACS Series in
    Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science, pages 59–71.
    DIMACS/AMS, 1996. doi:10.1090/dimacs/039/04.
[20] Samuel R. Buss, Dima Grigoriev, Russell Impagliazzo, and Toniann
    Pitassi.   Linear gaps between degrees for the polynomial calculus
    modulo distinct primes. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 62(2):267–289, 2001.
    doi:10.1006/jcss.2000.1726.

[21] Eden Chlamtac and Madhur Tulsiani. Convex relaxations and integral-
    ity gaps. In Miguel F. Anjos and Jean B. Lasserre, editors, Handbook
    on Semidefinite, Conic and Polynomial Optimization, pages 139–169.
    Springer US, Boston, MA, 2012. doi:10.1007/978-1-4614-0769-0_
    6.

[22] Matthew Clegg, Jeff Edmonds, and Russell Impagliazzo. Using the
    groebner basis algorithm to find proofs of unsatisfiability. In Gary L.
    Miller, editor, Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual ACM Sympo-
    sium on the Theory of Computing, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA,
    May 22-24, 1996, pages 174–183. ACM, 1996. doi:10.1145/237814.
    237860.

[23] Stephen A. Cook and Robert A. Reckhow. The relative efficiency of
    propositional proof systems. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 44(1):36–50,
    1979. doi:10.2307/2273702.

[24] David A. Cox, John Little, and Donal O’Shea. Ideals, Varieties, and
    Algorithms. Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer, fourth
    edition, 2015. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-16721-3.

[25] Stefan Dantchev, Barnaby Martin, and Mark Rhodes. Tight rank lower
    bounds for the sherali–adams proof system. Theoretical Computer Sci-
    ence, 410(21):2054 – 2063, 2009. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    tcs.2009.01.002.

[26] Stefan S. Dantchev. Rank complexity gap for lovász-schrijver and
    sherali-adams proof systems. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Ninth An-
    nual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’07, page
    311–317, New York, NY, USA, 2007. Association for Computing Ma-
    chinery. doi:10.1145/1250790.1250837.
[27] Sanjeeb Dash. Exponential lower bounds on the lengths of some classes
    of branch-and-cut proofs. Math. Oper. Res., 30(3):678–700, 2005. doi:
    10.1287/moor.1050.0151.

[28] Mateus de Oliveira Oliveira and Pavel Pudlák. Representations of
    monotone boolean functions by linear programs. ACM Trans. Comput.
    Theory, 11(4):22:1–22:31, 2019. doi:10.1145/3337787.

[29] G. L. Ebert. Some comments on the modular approach to gröbner-
    bases. SIGSAM Bull., 17(2):28–32, may 1983. doi:10.1145/1089330.
    1089336.

[30] Yuval Filmus. Another look at degree lower bounds for polynomial
    calculus. Theoretical Computer Science, 796:286–293, 2019.

[31] Samuel Fiorini, Serge Massar, Sebastian Pokutta, Hans Raj Tiwary,
    and Ronald de Wolf. Linear vs. semidefinite extended formulations:
    exponential separation and strong lower bounds. In Proceedings of the
    44th Symposium on Theory of Computing Conference, STOC 2012,
    New York, NY, USA, May 19 - 22, 2012, pages 95–106, 2012. doi:
    10.1145/2213977.2213988.

[32] Noah Fleming, Mika Göös, Stefan Grosser, and Robert Robere. On
    Semi-Algebraic Proofs and Algorithms. In Mark Braverman, editor,
    13th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS
    2022), volume 215 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informat-
    ics (LIPIcs), pages 69:1–69:25, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2022. Schloss
    Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.
    ITCS.2022.69.

[33] Noah Fleming, Denis Pankratov, Toniann Pitassi, and Robert Robere.
    Random Θ(log n)-cnfs are hard for cutting planes. In Chris Umans,
    editor, 58th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
    Science, FOCS 2017, Berkeley, CA, USA, October 15-17, 2017, pages
    109–120. IEEE Computer Society, 2017. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2017.19.
[34] Nicola Galesi and Massimo Lauria. Optimality of size-degree tradeoffs
    for polynomial calculus. ACM Trans. Comput. Log., 12(1):4:1–4:22,
    2010. doi:10.1145/1838552.1838556.

[35] Dima Grigoriev. Tseitin’s tautologies and lower bounds for nullstel-
    lensatz proofs. In 39th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Com-
    puter Science, FOCS ’98, November 8-11, 1998, Palo Alto, Cali-
    fornia, USA, pages 648–652. IEEE Computer Society, 1998. doi:
    10.1109/SFCS.1998.743515.

[36] Dima Grigoriev. Complexity of positivstellensatz proofs for the knap-
    sack. Computational Complexity, 10(2):139–154, 2001. doi:10.1007/
    s00037-001-8192-0.

[37] Dima Grigoriev. Linear lower bound on degrees of positivstellensatz
    calculus proofs for the parity. Theor. Comput. Sci., 259(1-2):613–622,
    2001. doi:10.1016/S0304-3975(00)00157-2.

[38] Dima Grigoriev, Edward A. Hirsch, and Dmitrii V. Pasechnik. Com-
    plexity of semi-algebraic proofs. In STACS 2002, 19th Annual Sympo-
    sium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, Antibes - Juan les
    Pins, France, March 14-16, 2002, Proceedings, pages 419–430, 2002.
    doi:10.1007/3-540-45841-7\_34.

[39] Dima Grigoriev, Edward A. Hirsch, and Dmitrii V. Pasechnik. Com-
    plexity of semi-algebraic proofs. In Helmut Alt and Afonso Ferreira,
    editors, STACS 2002, 19th Annual Symposium on Theoretical Aspects
    of Computer Science, Antibes - Juan les Pins, France, March 14-16,
    2002, Proceedings, volume 2285 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
    pages 419–430. Springer, 2002. doi:10.1007/3-540-45841-7\_34.

[40] Dima Grigoriev and Nicolai Vorobjov. Complexity of null-and posi-
    tivstellensatz proofs. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 113(1-3):153–
    160, 2001. doi:10.1016/S0168-0072(01)00055-0.
[41] Martin Grötschel, László Lovász, and Alexander Schrijver. The el-
    lipsoid method and its consequences in combinatorial optimization.
    Combinatorica, 1(2):169 – 197, June 1981. doi:10.1007/BF02579273.

[42] Martin Grötschel, László Lovász, and Alexander Schrijver. Geometric
    Algorithms and Combinatorial Optimization, volume 2 of Algorithms
    and Combinatorics. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 1993. doi:
    10.1007/978-3-642-78240-4.

[43] Armin Haken.     The intractability of resolution.    Theoretical Com-
    puter Science, 39:297–308, 1985. Third Conference on Foundations
    of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science.            doi:
    10.1016/0304-3975(85)90144-6.

[44] Sören Halldén. On the semantic non-completeness of certain lewis
    calculi. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 16(2):127–129, 1951. URL:
    http://www.jstor.org/stable/2266686.

[45] Pavel Hrubes and Pavel Pudlák. Random formulas, monotone circuits,
    and interpolation. In Chris Umans, editor, 58th IEEE Annual Sym-
    posium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2017, Berkeley,
    CA, USA, October 15-17, 2017, pages 121–131. IEEE Computer Soci-
    ety, 2017. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2017.20.

[46] Russell Impagliazzo, Pavel Pudlák, and Jirı́ Sgall. Lower bounds for the
    polynomial calculus and the gröbner basis algorithm. Computational
    Complexity, 8(2):127–144, 1999. doi:10.1007/s000370050024.

[47] D. M. Itsykson and A. A. Kojevnikov. Lower bounds on static lovász-
    schrijver calculus proofs for tseitin tautologies. Journal of Mathe-
    matical Sciences, 145(3):4942–4952, Sep 2007. Preliminary version in
    ICALP ’06. doi:10.1007/s10958-007-0329-5.

[48] Cédric Josz and Didier Henrion. Strong duality in lasserre’s hierarchy
    for polynomial optimization. Optimization Letters, 10(1):3–10, 2016.
    doi:10.1007/s11590-015-0868-5.
[49] Howard Karloff. Linear Programming. Modern Birkhäuser Classics.
    Birkhäuser Basel, address, 1991. doi:10.1007/978-0-8176-4844-2.

[50] L. G. Khachiyan. A polynomial algorithm in linear programming. Dokl.
    Akad. Nauk SSSR, 244(5):1093 – 1096, 1979.

[51] L.G. Khachiyan. Polynomial algorithms in linear programming. USSR
    Computational Mathematics and Mathematical Physics, 20(1):53 – 72,
    1980. doi:10.1016/0041-5553(80)90061-0.

[52] Jan Krajı́cek. Bounded arithmetic, propositional logic, and complexity
    theory, volume 60 of Encyclopedia of mathematics and its applications.
    Cambridge University Press, 1995.

[53] Jan Krajı́cek. On frege and extended frege proof systems. In Pe-
    ter Clote and Jeffrey B. Remmel, editors, Feasible Mathematics II,
    Progress in Computer Science and Applied Logic, pages 284–319.
    Birkhäuser Boston, 1995.

[54] Jan Krajı́cek and Pavel Pudlák. Some consequences of cryptographical
     conjectures for s1 2 and EF. Inf. Comput., 140(1):82–94, 1998. doi:
     10.1006/inco.1997.2674.

[55] Jan Krajı́ček. Lower bounds to the size of constant-depth propositional
    proofs. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 59(1):73–86, 1994. doi:10.2307/
    2275250.

[56] Jan Krajı́ček. Interpolation theorems, lower bounds for proof sys-
    tems, and independence results for bounded arithmetic. The Journal of
    Symbolic Logic, 62(2):457–486, 1997. URL: http://www.jstor.org/
    stable/2275541.

[57] J. L. Krivine. Anneaux préordonnés. Journal d’Analyse Mathématique,
    12(1):307–326, Dec 1964. doi:10.1007/BF02807438.

[58] Guillaume Lagarde, Jakob Nordström, Dmitry Sokolov, and Joseph
    Swernofsky. Trade-Offs Between Size and Degree in Polynomial Cal-
    culus.   In Thomas Vidick, editor, 11th Innovations in Theoretical
    Computer Science Conference (ITCS 2020), volume 151 of Leibniz
    International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 72:1–72:16,
    Dagstuhl, Germany, 2020. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer In-
    formatik. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ITCS.2020.72.

[59] Jean B. Lasserre. Global optimization with polynomials and the prob-
    lem of moments. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 11(3):796–817, 2001.
    doi:10.1137/S1052623400366802.

[60] Monique Laurent. Sums of squares, moment matrices and optimization
    over polynomials. In Mihai Putinar and Seth Sullivant, editors, Emerg-
    ing Applications of Algebraic Geometry, pages 157–270. Springer New
    York, New York, NY, 2009. doi:10.1007/978-0-387-09686-5_7.

[61] Massimo Lauria and Jakob Nordström.      Tight size-degree bounds
    for sums-of-squares proofs.   Computational Complexity, 26(4):911–
    948, 2017.    Preliminary version in CCC 2015.         doi:10.1007/
    s00037-017-0152-4.

[62] James R. Lee, Prasad Raghavendra, and David Steurer. Lower bounds
    on the size of semidefinite programming relaxations. In Proceedings
    of the Forty-Seventh Annual ACM on Symposium on Theory of Com-
    puting, STOC 2015, Portland, OR, USA, June 14-17, 2015, pages
    567–576, 2015. doi:10.1145/2746539.2746599.

[63] James R. Lee, Prasad Raghavendra, David Steurer, and Ning Tan.
    On the power of symmetric LP and SDP relaxations. In IEEE 29th
    Conference on Computational Complexity, CCC 2014, Vancouver, BC,
    Canada, June 11-13, 2014, pages 13–21, 2014. doi:10.1109/CCC.
    2014.10.

[64] László Lovász and Alexander Schrijver. Cones of matrices and set-
    functions and 0-1 optimization.     SIAM Journal on Optimization,
    1(2):166–190, 1991. doi:10.1137/0801013.

[65] Mladen Miksa and Jakob Nordström. A generalized method for proving
    polynomial calculus degree lower bounds. In David Zuckerman, editor,
    30th Conference on Computational Complexity, CCC 2015, June 17-
    19, 2015, Portland, Oregon, USA, volume 33 of LIPIcs, pages 467–
    487. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2015. doi:
    10.4230/LIPIcs.CCC.2015.467.

[66] Ryan O’Donnell. SOS Is Not Obviously Automatizable, Even Ap-
    proximately. In Christos H. Papadimitriou, editor, 8th Innovations in
    Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS 2017), volume 67 of
    Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 59:1–
    59:10, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2017. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum
    fuer Informatik. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ITCS.2017.59.

[67] Ryan O’Donnell and Yuan Zhou. Approximability and proof complex-
    ity. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual ACM-SIAM Sympo-
    sium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2013, New Orleans, Louisiana,
    USA, January 6-8, 2013, pages 1537–1556, 2013. doi:10.1137/1.
    9781611973105.111.

[68] Pablo A. Parrilo. Structured Semidefinite Programs and Semialgebraic
    Geometry Methods in Robustness and Optimization. PhD thesis, Cali-
    fornia Institute of Technology, 2000.

[69] Vern I. Paulsen and Mark Tomforde. Vector spaces with an order
    unit. Indiana University Mathematics Journal, 58(3):1319–1359, 2009.
    URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/24903253.

[70] Toniann Pitassi and Nathan Segerlind.     Exponential lower bounds
    and integrality gaps for tree-like lovász-schrijver procedures. SIAM
    J. Comput., 41(1):128–159, 2012. Preliminary version in SODA 2009.
    doi:10.1137/100816833.

[71] Aaron Potechin.   Sum of Squares Bounds for the Ordering Prin-
    ciple. In Shubhangi Saraf, editor, 35th Computational Complexity
    Conference (CCC 2020), volume 169 of Leibniz International Pro-
    ceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 38:1–38:37, Dagstuhl, Ger-
    many, 2020. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. doi:
    10.4230/LIPIcs.CCC.2020.38.

[72] Pavel Pudlák. On the complexity of the propositional calculus. In
    S. Barry Cooper and John K. Truss, editors, Sets and Proofs, London
    Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series, pages 197 – 218. Cambridge
    University Press, 1999. doi:10.1017/CBO9781107325944.010.

[73] Pavel Pudlák.   On reducibility and symmetry of disjoint NP
    pairs.   Theor. Comput. Sci., 295:323–339, 2003.       doi:10.1016/
    S0304-3975(02)00411-5.

[74] Pavel Pudlák and Samuel R. Buss. How to lie without being (eas-
    ily) convicted and the length of proofs in propositional calculus. In
    Leszek Pacholski and Jerzy Tiuryn, editors, Computer Science Logic,
    8th International Workshop, CSL ’94, Kazimierz, Poland, September
    25-30, 1994, Selected Papers, volume 933 of Lecture Notes in Computer
    Science, pages 151–162. Springer, 1994. doi:10.1007/BFb0022253.

[75] Pavel Pudlák and Jirı́ Sgall. Algebraic models of computation and
    interpolation for algebraic proof systems. In Paul Beame and Samuel R.
    Buss, editors, Proof Complexity and Feasible Arithmetics, Proceedings
    of a DIMACS Workshop, New Brunswick, New Jersey, USA, April 21-
    24, 1996, volume 39 of DIMACS Series in Discrete Mathematics and
    Theoretical Computer Science, pages 279–295. DIMACS/AMS, 1996.
    doi:10.1090/dimacs/039/15.

[76] Pavel Pudlák.   Lower bounds for resolution and cutting plane
    proofs and monotone computations.        Journal of Symbolic Logic,
    62(3):981–998, 1997. doi:10.2307/2275583.

[77] Mihai Putinar. Positive polynomials on compact semi-algebraic sets.
    Indiana University Mathematics Journal, 42(3):969–984, 1993. URL:
    http://www.jstor.org/stable/24897130.

[78] Prasad Raghavendra and Benjamin Weitz. On the Bit Complexity
    of Sum-of-Squares Proofs. In Ioannis Chatzigiannakis, Piotr Indyk,
    Fabian Kuhn, and Anca Muscholl, editors, 44th International Collo-
    quium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2017), vol-
    ume 80 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs),
    pages 80:1–80:13, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2017. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-
    Zentrum fuer Informatik. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2017.80.

[79] Motakuri V. Ramana. An exact duality theory for semidefinite pro-
    gramming and its complexity implications. Mathematical Program-
    ming, 77(1):129 – 162, April 1997. doi:10.1007/BF02614433.

[80] Alexander A. Razborov. Lower bounds on the monotone complexity
    of some boolean functions. Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 281(4):798–801,
    1985.

[81] Alexander A. Razborov.     Lower bounds for the polynomial cal-
    culus.   Comput. Complex., 7(4):291–324, 1998.         doi:10.1007/
    s000370050013.

[82] Tateaki Sasaki and Taku Takeshima. A modular method for gröbner-
    basis construction over q and solving system of algebraic equations.
    Journal of Information Processing, 12:371–379, 1990.

[83] Claus Scheiderer. Positivity and sums of squares: A guide to recent
    results. In Mihai Putinar and Seth Sullivant, editors, Emerging Ap-
    plications of Algebraic Geometry, pages 271–324. Springer New York,
    New York, NY, 2009. doi:10.1007/978-0-387-09686-5_8.

[84] Grant Schoenebeck. Linear level lasserre lower bounds for certain k-
    csps. In 49th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer
    Science, FOCS 2008, October 25-28, 2008, Philadelphia, PA, USA,
    pages 593–602, 2008. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2008.74.

[85] Hanif D. Sherali and Warren P. Adams. A hierarchy of relaxations
    between the continuous and convex hull representations for zero-one
    programming problems.      SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics,
    3(3):411–430, 1990. doi:10.1137/0403036.
[86] N.Z. Shor.     Cut-off method with space extension in convex pro-
    gramming problems. Cybernetics, 13(1):94–96, 1977. doi:10.1007/
    BF01071394.

[87] Dmitry Sokolov. (Semi)algebraic proofs over ±1 variables. In Kon-
    stantin Makarychev, Yury Makarychev, Madhur Tulsiani, Gautam
    Kamath, and Julia Chuzhoy, editors, Proccedings of the 52nd An-
    nual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC
    2020, Chicago, IL, USA, June 22-26, 2020, pages 78–90. ACM, 2020.
    doi:10.1145/3357713.3384288.

[88] Gilbert Stengle. A nullstellensatz and a positivstellensatz in semial-
    gebraic geometry. Mathematische Annalen, 207(2):87–97, Jun 1974.
    doi:10.1007/BF01362149.

[89] Neil Thapen.    A tradeoff between length and width in resolution.
    Theory of Computing, 12(5):1–14, 2016.         doi:10.4086/toc.2016.
    v012a005.

[90] G. S. Tseitin. On the complexity of derivation in propositional calculus.
    In Studies in constructive mathematics and mathematical logic. Part II,
    volume 8 of Zap. Nauchn. Sem. LOMI, pages 234 – 259. ”Nauka”,
    Leningrad. Otdel., 1968.

[91] Benjamin Weitz. Polynomial Proof Systems, Effective Derivations,
    and their Applications in the Sum-of-Squares Hierarchy. PhD the-
    sis, EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley, May
    2017.     URL: http://www2.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/
    2017/EECS-2017-38.html.

[92] Franz Winkler. A p-adic approach to the computation ofgröbner bases.
    Journal of Symbolic Computation, 6(2):287–304, 1988. doi:10.1016/
    S0747-7171(88)80049-X.
