                         Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity, Report No. 36 (2026)




         On Factorization of Sparse Polynomials of Bounded
                         Individual Degree

                 Aminadav Chuyoon*                                      Amir Shpilka*
             chuyoon1@mail.tau.ac.il                             shpilka@tauex.tau.ac.il



                                                       Abstract
          We study sparse polynomials with bounded individual degree and the class of their factors.
      In particular we obtain the following algorithmic and structural results:
        (1) A deterministic polynomial-time algorithm for finding all the sparse divisors of a sparse
            polynomial with bounded individual degree. As part of this, we establish the first upper
            bound on the number of non-monomial irreducible factors of such polynomials.
        (2) A poly(n, sd log ℓ )-time algorithm for recovering ℓ irreducible s-sparse polynomials of
            bounded individual degree d from blackbox access to their product (which is not nec-
            essarily sparse). This partially resolves a question posed in [DST24]. In particular, when
            ℓ = O(1), the algorithm runs in polynomial time.
        (3) Deterministic algorithms for factoring a product of s-sparse polynomials of bounded
            individual degree d from blackbox access. Over fields of characteristic zero or suffi-
                                                             3
            ciently large, the algorithm runs in poly(n, sd log n )-time; over arbitrary fields it runs in
                              5
            poly(n, (d2 )!, sd log n )-time. This improves upon the algorithm of [BSV20], which runs in
                       7
            poly(n, sd log n )-time and applies only to a single sparse polynomial of bounded individ-
            ual degree. In the case where the input is a single sparse polynomial, we give an algorithm
                                       2
            that runs in poly(n, sd log n )-time.
        (4) Given blackbox access to a product of (not necessarily sparse or irreducible) factors of sparse
            polynomials of bounded individual degree, we give a deterministic polynomial-time algorithm
            for finding all irreducible sparse multiquadratic factors of it (along with their multiplici-
            ties). This generalizes the algorithms of [Vol15] and [Vol17]. We also show how to decide
            whether such a product is a complete power (in case it is defined over a field of zero or
            large enough characteristic), extending the algorithm of [BV25].
         Our algorithms most naturally apply over fields of zero or sufficiently large characteristic.
      To handle arbitrary fields, we introduce the notion of primitive divisors for a class of polynomials,
      which may be of independent interest. This notion enables us to adapt ideas of [BV25] and
      remove characteristic assumptions from most of our algorithms.




   * School of Computer Science and AI, Tel Aviv University. This research was funded by the European Union (ERC,

EACTP, 101142020). Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect
those of the European Union or the European Research Council Executive Agency. Neither the European Union nor the
granting authority can be held responsible for them.



                                                                                                             ISSN 1433-8092
Contents

1   Introduction                                                                                            1
    1.1 Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         1
    1.2 Our Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     2
    1.3 Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      5
    1.4 Proof Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      6
         1.4.1 Sparse Polynomials of Bounded Individual Degree and Their Factors . . . . .                  6
         1.4.2 Finding Multiquadratic Factors of Products of Sparse Polynomials . . . . . .                 8
         1.4.3 Finding Sparse Divisors of Sparse Polynomials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           10
         1.4.4 Factorization for Sparse Polynomials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          11
    1.5 Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11

2   Preliminaries                                                                                          12
    2.1 Reverse Monic Polynomials and Normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              12
    2.2 Factorization and Interpolation of Polynomials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         13
    2.3 Sparse Polynomials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     14
    2.4 Resultants and Discriminants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       15

3   Generator Construction                                                                                 16

4   Divisibility Testing and Exact Power testing                                                           19
    4.1 Arbitrary Characteristic Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     19
         4.1.1 Arbitrary Characteristic Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      19
         4.1.2 Arbitrary Characteristic Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         24
    4.2 Zero or Large Characteristic Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       26
         4.2.1 Zero or Large Characteristic Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        26
         4.2.2 Zero or Large Characteristic Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         27

5   A Rational Interpolation Theorem                                                                       29

6   Meta-Algorithm                                                                                         31

7   Finding Multiquadratic Factors                                                                         33

8   Computing all Sparse Divisors of a Sparse Polynomial                                                   35
    8.1 Number of Divisors of Sparse Polynomials of Bounded Individual Degree . . . . . .                  35
    8.2 Finding Sparse Divisors of Sparse Polynomials with Bounded Individual Degree . .                   37
    8.3 Factoring a Product of Sparse Irreducible Polynomials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          39

9   Factoring (n, s, d)-Sparse Polynomials                                                                 40
    9.1 Factorization of Sparse Polynomials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        41
    9.2 Factorization of Products of Sparse Polynomials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          42

10 Future Work and Open Problems                                                                           43

Bibliography                                                                                               44

A An Alternative Proof of a Result from Section 4                                                          46
1     Introduction
1.1     Background and Motivation
This paper is motivated by numerous open problems concerning the factorization and complexity
of factors of multivariate sparse polynomials. These are n-variate polynomials of degree poly(n)
whose number of monomials is also poly(n). In particular, this is the class of polynomials that have
polynomial size ΣΠ circuits, which is one of the simplest classes from the algebraic complexity
point of view.
    Despite being structurally simple, sparse polynomials form a rich and non-trivial class of poly-
nomials that has been extensively studied. Efficient deterministic algorithms for polynomial iden-
tity testing and reconstruction were developed for this class [GK87, BOT88, GKS90, CDGK91,
KS01]. In particular, the work of Klivans and Spielman [KS01] introduced a special reduction
from multivariate sparse polynomials to univariate polynomials of polynomial degree, over any
field, that has since found many applications, mainly for questions concerning polynomial identity
testing and reconstruction. See the surveys [Sax09, SY10, Sax14, DG24].
    In this work we are mostly interested in understanding factors of sparse polynomials. The
seminal work of Kaltofen [Kal85a] shows that factors of sparse polynomials have polynomial-
size algebraic circuits. A recent breakthrough result of [BKR+ 25] implies that they even have
polynomial-size bounded-depth circuits.
    However, an intriguing question that remains unsolved for over forty years concerns the com-
plexity of factors of sparse polynomials in terms of their number of monomials. In other words,
how many monomials can a factor of a sparse polynomial have. The following example of von zur
Gathen and Kaltofen demonstrates that the sparsity of irreducible factors of polynomials may be
super-polynomial.

Example 1.1 (Example of [VZGK85]). Consider

                           Y
                           n                              Y
                                                          n
                    g(x) =   (xi − 1)       and    h(x) =   (1 + xi + · · · + xn−1
                                                                               i   ) + n.
                             i=1                            i=1

It is not hard to prove that h is irreducible over Q. Let

                                               Y
                                               n              Y
                                                              n
                                                   n
                                f(x) = g · h =   (xi − 1) + n   (xi − 1).
                                                  i=1             i=1

Then, f has (2n+1 − 1) monomials, and an irreducible factor h of sparsity nn , which is super-polynomial in
the sparsity of f.

      This led them to pose the following question.

Question 1.2 ([VZGK85]). Can the output size for the factoring problem actually be more than quasi-
polynomial in the sparsity of the input?

   This question is still wide open with only several special cases solved. In [Vol15] Volkovich
proved that multilinear factors of sparse polynomials are sparse. In a follow-up work [Vol17] he
proved that all factors of multiquadratic sparse polynomials are themselves sparse. This result
was extended to higher individual degrees by Bhargava, Saraf, and Volkovich [BSV20], who con-
sidered sparse polynomials with bounded individual degree d, and proved a quasi-polynomial
upper bound on the sparsity of factors of such polynomials. In particular, if f is an s-sparse

                                                        1
n-variate polynomial with individual degrees bounded by d, then every factor of f has at most
     2
sO(d log n) monomials (see Theorem 2.14). This is the first nontrivial sparsity bound for factors in
the regime d > 2. While the result of [BSV20] gives a quasi-polynomial upper bound on sparsity of
factors of polynomials with bounded individual degree, it is believed that the ”real” bound should
be polynomial. In [BV25], the authors provide some evidence for that by giving polynomial-time
algorithms for various problems for which the existence of such algorithms is implied by the con-
jectured polynomial upper bound on sparsity of factors.
    In their work von zur Gathen and Kaltofen gave a randomized algorithm for factorization
of sparse polynomials and noted another obstacle towards obtaining deterministic factorization
algorithms:

 “Also note that there does not seem to be Q a feasible way of checking deterministically whether
     the output is correct, i.e., whether f = i fi ei ” [VZGK85].

In particular, the following question is open.

Question 1.3 ([DST24, Question 1]). Can we find the factorization of polynomials whose irreducible
factors are sparse?

      In fact, Dutta et al. also asked the following special case of Question 1.3.

Question 1.4 ([DST24, Section 5]). Given a blackbox computing the product of sparse irreducible polyno-
mials fi with bounded individual degree, find the fi ’s in deterministic polynomial time.

    The aforementioned results of [Vol15, Vol17, BSV20] also have consequences for Question 1.3
and Question 1.4. In [Vol15] Volkovich gave a deterministic polynomial-time algorithm for factor-
ization of sparse polynomials whose irreducible factors are all multilinear (hence sparse) polyno-
mials. In [Vol17] he gave an efficient deterministic algorithm for factoring multiquadratic sparse
polynomials. In [BSV20] the authors combined their sparsity bound with techniques similar to
[Vol15, Vol17] to obtain a deterministic quasi-polynomial-time algorithm for factoring sparse poly-
nomials of bounded individual degree. Dutta, Sinhababu, and Thierauf [DST24] gave efficient
deterministic reconstruction of constant degree factors of sparse polynomials.
    One notable limitation of the algorithm of [BSV20] is that it does not give an efficient way to
find the sparse factors of the input polynomial, even if such factors exist. This problem is closely
related to the following question asked by Dutta, Sinhababu and Thierhauf.

Question 1.5 ([DST24, Question 2]). Design a better-than-exponential time deterministic algorithm that
outputs all the sparse irreducible factors of a sparse polynomial.

   Another outstanding open problem concerns the reconstruction of rational functions whose
numerator and denominator are sparse polynomials. Surprisingly, the best known deterministic
algorithm for this question runs in exponential time [GKS94]. While seemingly unrelated, special
cases of this question lie at the heart of our algorithms, and we solve it in two special cases where
more information is provided.
   Many more open problems were asked for sparse polynomials and the reader is referred to
[DST24] and [FS15].

1.2     Our Results
Before presenting our results, let us introduce the following notation.



                                                     2
Definition 1.6. We denote the class of n-variate, s-sparse polynomials of bounded individual de-
gree d, by P(n, s, d). We refer to polynomials in this class as (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials. It turns
out that in many cases it makes sense to talk about the class of divisors of (n, s, d)-sparse polyno-
mials; we denote this class of polynomials by PFactors (n, s, d).

    We first summarize our main contributions informally as follows:

  (1) We prove a sharp upper bound on the number of irreducible factors of (n, s, d)-sparse poly-
      nomials (Theorem 1.8).

  (2) Using this bound, we give the first deterministic polynomial-time algorithm that constructs
      all sparse divisors of (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials (Theorem 1.9).

  (3) We give a deterministic blackbox factorization algorithm for products of sparse (n, s, d)-
      sparse polynomials in quasi-polynomial time in the number of terms. This solves Ques-
      tion 1.4 when the number of terms is constant (Theorem 1.10). We note that the running time
      of this algorithm is polynomial in the number of variables n.

Remark 1.7. In stating our results we suppress the precise dependence on the field (beyond its
characteristic) and on bit complexity. As usual in factorization algorithms, an additional factor re-
flecting the complexity of univariate factorization over the field should be included. These bounds
are stated in Section 2.2.
    We now give the formal statement of our results. Our first main result gives an upper bound
for the number of sparse divisors of (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials. While its proof is not difficult, it
is instrumental in our algorithms and demonstrates the strong structural limitations that sparsity
imposes.

Theorem 1.8 (Divisor bound for (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials). Let f ∈ P(n, s, d). The number of
non-monomial irreducible factors of f, counted with multiplicities, is at most d log s. In particular, the
number of divisors of an s-sparse polynomial f with bounded individual degree d, that are not divisible by
any monomial, is at most 2d log s = sd .

   Our first main algorithmic result shows how to deterministically output all sparse divisors of
such polynomials in polynomial time. Earlier, only a quasi-polynomial-time algorithm was known
[BSV20].

Theorem 1.9 (Finding all sparse divisors of (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials). There is a deterministic,
poly(n, d!, sd )-time algorithm which, given f ∈ P(n, s, d), outputs all the s-sparse divisors of f that are
not divisible by any monomial, as well as the monomial of maximal degree dividing f.

   Our second main algorithmic result answers Question 1.4 when there are constantly many
polynomials in the product, and in the general case it provides a quasi-polynomial-time algorithm.

Theorem 1.10 (Factoring products of (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials). Let F be a field of characteris-
tic zero or larger than 2d. There is a deterministic poly(n, dd , sd log ℓ , ℓd )-time algorithm which, given
                                  Q
blackbox access to a product f = ℓi=1 ϕi , where ϕ1 , . . . , ϕℓ ∈ P(n, s, d) are all (not necessarily different)
irreducible, returns the ϕi -s. Moreover, when the assumption on the field is removed, there is an algorithm
                                                      3
that solves this problem in poly(n, (d2 )!, sd log ℓ+d , ℓd )-time.

    This theorem will follow as a consequence of the next, more general, result.



                                                       3
Theorem 1.11 (Factoring products of factors of sparse polynomials). Let F be a field with char(F) =
0 or char(F) > 2d. There is a deterministic poly(n, dd , sd log ℓ , ℓd )-time algorithm which, given blackbox
access to a product f of ℓ polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d) over the field F, returns all the s-sparse divisors of
bounded individual degree d of f that are not divisible by any monomial, as well as the multiplicity ki of
each xi as a factor of f. Moreover, if f was in fact a product of polynomials in P(n, s, d), there is such an
                                                                                                 3
algorithm that works over arbitrary fields, whose running time is poly(n, (d2 )!, sd log ℓ+d , ℓd ).

    Observe that this result is slightly weaker for fields of small characteristic. Indeed, in Section 4
we will see that some of our methods only work for zero characteristic fields, or for fields with
large enough characteristic.
    In addition to our main results we provide several improvement and generalization of earlier
work. We start by stating results concerning factorization of sparse polynomials of bounded indi-
vidual degree into irreducible factors. The first is an improvement of the best known factorization
algorithm of such polynomials [BSV20].
                                                       2
Theorem 1.12. There is a deterministic poly(n, sd log n )-time algorithm which, given an s-sparse polyno-
mial of bounded individual degree d on n-variables, returns its factorization into irreducible factors.

   The second theorem generalizes the result of [BSV20] to a significantly larger class of polyno-
mials, while achieving improved running time compared to their algorithm.

Theorem 1.13. Let F be a field with char(F) = 0 or char(F) > 2d. There is a deterministic
             3
poly(n, sd log n , (dℓ)d )-time algorithm which, given blackbox access to a product f of ℓ polynomials in
PFactors (n, s, d) over F, returns its factorization into irreducible factors. Moreover, there is an algorithm that
                                                                           5
works over arbitrary fields, whose running time is poly(n, (d2 )!, sd log n , ℓd ).

    Note that this last result considers the class of factors of sparse polynomials of bounded individual
degree. Indeed, we will see that it is more natural to consider this class in many cases, and several
results of ours actually hold for this class rather than just for the class of sparse polynomials.
    Finally, we generalize results of [Vol15, Vol17, BV25] in a similar manner to our generalization
of the results of [BSV20].
    Our next algorithm finds all the multiquadratic irreducible factors of a product of polynomials
from PFactors (n, s, d). Earlier, only factorization of polynomials whose irreducible factors are all
multiquadratic and s-sparse was known [Vol17, Theorem 47].

Theorem 1.14. Let F be a field of characteristic zero or larger than 2d. There is a deterministic
poly(n, d!, sd , ℓ)-time algorithm that, given blackbox access to a product f of ℓ elements of PFactors (n, s, d)
defined over F, returns all the s-sparse multiquadratic irreducible factors of f. In particular, the algorithm
returns all the multilinear factors of f (as these are s-sparse by Lemma 2.12). Moreover, there exists such an
                                                                                      2
algorithm that works over arbitrary fields, whose running time is poly(n, (d2 )!, sd , ℓ).

    We give a similar improvement to the perfect power testing of [BV25].

Theorem 1.15. Let F be a field of characteristic zero or larger than 2d. There is a deterministic
poly(n, d!, sd , ℓ)-time algorithm that, given blackbox access to a polynomial f that is a product of ℓ poly-
nomials in PFactors (n, s, d) (defined over F) and a positive integer e, returns if f is a complete e-th power.


    Finally, we extend the polynomial identity testing result of [BV25].



                                                           4
Theorem 1.16. Let F be a field of characteristic zero or larger than 2d. There exists a deterministic
poly(n, d!, sd , ℓ)-time algorithm that, given blackbox access to two polynomials (over F) f and g that are
products of ℓ polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d), decides if f|g. Moreover, if f and g are actually products of
ℓ polynomials in P(n, s, d), there is an algorithm that works over arbitrary fields, whose running time is
                   3
poly(n, (d2 )!, sd , ℓ)

    As mentioned in Section 1.1, we will have to solve some rational interpolation problems. Some-
what surprisingly, it is not known how to deterministically reconstruct two coprime s-sparse poly-
nomials f and g from blackbox access to their quotient g/f in polynomial time. We shall see that
with some additional information on f, this is in fact possible. Without this extra information, only
exponential deterministic algorithms are known for solving this problem [GKS94]. We note that
efficient randomized algorithms for solving this problem are known, see e.g., [CL11, vdHL21].

1.3   Related Work
The questions considered in this work have been studied extensively in recent years. We organize
the prior results around three themes that are central to this paper: sparsity bounds, factorization
and reconstruction algorithms, and divisibility and identity testing.

Sparsity of Factors of Sparse Polynomials. Volkovich [Vol15] showed that multilinear factors of
s-sparse polynomials are again s-sparse. In [Vol17] he proved that factors of an s-sparse multi-
quadratic polynomial are s-sparse as well. For general polynomials of bounded individual degree
d, Bhargava, Saraf and Volkovich [BSV20], obtained the first non-trivial bound on the sparsity of
                                                                                  2
factors of s-sparse polynomials with bounded individual degree d, namely sO(d log n) . Bisht and
Saxena [BS25] improved this bound to spoly(d) for the class of symmetric s-sparse polynomials of
bounded individual degree d. Bisht and Volkovich [BV25] obtained an sd log s bound on the spar-
sity of a quotient of an s-sparse polynomial of bounded individual degree d by a multilinear factor.
Finally, the work of Forbes [For15] and results in [BV25] imply that the sparsity of the quotient of
f ∈ P(n, s, d) by a degree r polynomial is bounded by (ns)O(dr) .

Deterministic factorization and reconstruction. Factorization results have largely paralleled the
development of sparsity bounds. Volkovich showed in [Vol15] how to efficiently factorize a sparse
polynomial whose factors are all multilinear. In [Vol17] he demonstrated how to efficiently com-
pute the irreducible factors of a polynomial from a blackbox access, given that all of them are
multiquadratic and sparse. In Theorem 1.14 we further improve this result by relaxing the condi-
tion on the input polynomial - we allow it to be a product of factors of some sparse polynomial of
bounded individual degree, and not simply a product of sparse multiquadratic polynomials.
    Using their sparsity bound, Bhargava, Saraf, and Volkovich [BSV20] derived a deterministic
quasi-polynomial algorithm for factoring sparse polynomials of bounded individual degree. How-
ever, their methods do not yield a polynomial-time algorithm for finding the sparse divisors of the
input polynomial, so they do not imply Theorem 1.9. Furthermore, their algorithm does not extend
to factorization of products of sparse, bounded degree polynomials, let alone products of factors
of such polynomials.
    Kumar, Ramanathan and Saptharishi [KRS24] and Dutta, Sinhababu, and Thierauf [DST24],
gave an algorithm that outputs all the irreducible factors of constant degree of a sparse poly-
nomial in quasi-polynomial time. As their result applies to general sparse polynomials without
restrictions on the individual degree, it does not follow from the methods of this paper.



                                                      5
   In [BV25], an algorithm for deciding if a sparse polynomial of bounded individual degree is a
complete power is given; in Section 4.2 we use our stronger methods to obtain this result when the
input polynomial is a product of polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d), and we have blackbox access to it.
However, this generalization does not work when the underlying field is of small characteristic.

Divisibility and identity testing. In [Vol17] it is also shown how to efficiently check if two s-
sparse polynomials of bounded individual degree d divide each other; this is improved in Theo-
rem 1.16, where we show a divisibility testing result for two products of factors of sparse polyno-
mials of bounded individual degree, given blackbox access to them. In the same work, Volkovich
also gave a deterministic algorithm for testing a factorization of sparse polynomials,
                                                                                 Q        with constant
individual degrees, into sparse irreducible factors. That is, testing if f =        gi when f has con-
stant individual degrees and gi -s are irreducible
                                              Q      and sparse. We note that by Corollary 8.6 we can
efficiently find the gi ’s and verify that f = gi .
    Forbes [For15] gave a quasi-polynomial-time algorithm for checking if a constant degree poly-
nomial divides a sparse polynomial. Note that while our result allows the dividing polynomial
to be much more complicated, Forbes’ result requires no restriction on the individual degree of
the given sparse polynomial. Therefore, our methods fall short in proving his result, or any other
result on sparse polynomials with no restriction on their individual degree.
    In [BV25], the authors design an efficient blackbox PIT algorithm for the class Σ[2] ΠΣΠ[ind-deg d ] ;
while doing so, they obtain some technical results about the class PFactors (n, s, d). In Section 4.1
we show that their methods imply a stronger result than this PIT. Showing PIT for this class is
essentially equivalent to giving an algorithm for determining if two products f, g of (n, s, d)-sparse
polynomials are equal, given blackbox access to them. We show that the methods of [BV25] can
be used for determining if f divides g. In Section 4.2 we further generalize and strengthen the
technical results of [BV25], but only for fields of zero or sufficiently large characteristic.

1.4     Proof Overview
We start by describing some technical results about the class of sparse polynomials of bounded
individual degree needed for our proofs. We then turn to give an overview of our results regarding
factorization of sparse polynomials. We first discuss our result on the recovery of all irreducible
sparse multiquadratic factors of a product of (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials, as the proof contains
some of the important ideas used in the proofs of our main results. We then move on to describe
the recovery of all sparse divisors of sparse polynomials of bounded individual degree and our
partial solution to Question 1.4. Finally, we briefly describe how to use our methods for factoring
general (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials and products of them, making use of the bound of [BSV20].

1.4.1     Sparse Polynomials of Bounded Individual Degree and Their Factors
The main tool we use for obtaining our results is a generator G : F6 → Fn that preserves important
properties of polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d). Roughly speaking, we want this map G to satisfy the
following two properties:

  (1) Its image Im(G) is an interpolation set for polynomials in P(n, s, d).

  (2) If ϕ and ψ are non-associate1 irreducible elements of PFactors (n, s, d), then ϕ(Gi ) and ψ(Gi )
      are coprime as polynomials in xi , where Gi should be thought of as “G when reviving the
      i-th variable” (i.e., keeping xi alive and substituting the remaining variables according to G).
  1
      Two polynomials are associate if one is a scalar product of the other.


                                                              6
    The first property is easily achieved by the basic properties of the Klivans-Speilman generator
(KS-generator), introduced in [KS01]. We show that the second property follows from the first,
together with the fact that resultants of sparse polynomials of bounded individual degree are again
sparse. However, we are able to do so only when the underlying field F is of zero characteristic,
or if its characteristic is larger than twice the bound on the individual degree. If this is not the
case then we are only able to prove something a little weaker - we prove that the second property
holds if one replaces the notion of irreducible polynomials with the new notion of primitive divisors,
which we first define in this paper (we describe this notion below).
    Before sketching the proof that the first property of G implies the second, we note that proving
that will automatically imply some algorithms for sparse polynomials. For example, it is straight-
forward to see that by factoring the composition of the input polynomials with Gi , the following
two results can be obtained from the (general) second property of G.

  (1) Given blackbox access to two products of elements of PFactors (n, s, d), we can decide if one
      divides the other in deterministic polynomial time (Theorem 1.16).

  (2) Given blackbox access to a product of elements of PFactors (n, s, d), we can decide if it is a
      complete power in deterministic polynomial time (Theorem 1.15).

This already generalizes results from [Vol17] and [BV25]. As we are able to obtain the general
second property of G only for some fields, these results do not apply to arbitrary fields. It turns
out, however, that the aforementioned weaker version of the second property of G is strong enough
to obtain Theorem 1.16 over arbitrary fields, in the case we replace PFactors (n, s, d) by P(n, s, d) (see
Theorem 4.14).
    In the rest of this subsection we describe our proofs of the second property, both for arbitrary
fields and for fields with zero or large enough characteristic.

Arbitrary Fields. In [BV25, Lemmas 4.5,4.6] it is shown that the second property of G holds for
each pair of irreducible polynomials ϕ and ψ that satisfy a certain non-degeneracy
                                                                                        condition:
                                                                                                      there
                                                                                 vϕ (f) vϕ (g)
exist (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials f, g for which ϕ|f, ψ|g and the matrix                         is invert-
                                                                                vψ (f) vψ (g)
ible, where vϕ (f) is the multiplicity of f as a factor of ϕ, and so are the other entries, respectively.
That is, a pair of polynomials ϕ, ψ ∈ PFactors (n, s, d) does not satisfy this condition if the multiplic-
ity of ϕ as a factor of an element f of P(n, s, d) determines the multiplicity of ψ as a factor of f. In
this sense, ϕ and ψ are ”inseparable” from the point of view of polynomials in P(n, s, d).
    For each irreducible ϕ ∈ PFactors (n, s, d), consider all ψs that are inseparable from it, in the sense
that ϕ, ψ do not satisfy the aforementioned non-degeneracy condition. For each f ∈ P(n, s, d),
consider the vector of multiplicities of these ψs as factors of f - (vψ (f))ψ . By the degeneracy as-
sumption, these vectors are all proportional. Consider the Z-span       Qof these vectors, and let (aψ )ψ
be a generator for this one dimensional lattice. The polynomial ψ ψaψ is called a primitive di-
visor for the class P(n, s, d). Note that by construction, as the property of being ”inseparable” is
an equivalence relation on the class of irreducible polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d), it must hold that
every two primitive divisors are coprime.
    The notion of a primitive divisor is a general notion, that applies to a general class of polyno-
mials P, and therefore may be of independent interest; a formal definition of it is given in Def-
inition 4.1. Primitive divisors for a class of polynomials P are for the class P what irreducible
polynomials are for the class of all polynomials, in the sense that every element of the class P can
be written as a product of primitive divisors for P in a unique way; this is not too difficult to see by



                                                     7
the construction given in the previous paragraph, and is formally done in Lemma 4.6. Therefore,
it makes sense to talk about the multiplicity vϕ (f) of a primitive divisor ϕ as a factor of f ∈ P.
    With this definition in hand, one can show that every two non-associate primitive divisors ϕ
and ψ for a class P satisfy the non-degeneracy condition of [BV25]. As a result, we are able to
apply the proof of the aforementioned result of [BV25] to obtain the weaker version of the second
property of G, namely, for every two non-associate primitive divisors ϕ, ψ for P(n, s, d) it holds
that gcdxi (ϕ(Gi ), ψ(Gi )) = 1.
    We further note that for every two products f, g of elements of P(n, s, d) we have that f|g if and
only if vϕ (f) ⩽ vϕ (g) for every primitive divisor ϕ for P(n, s, d); this is a simple corollary of our
unique-factorization theorem. As a result, the weaker second property of G is enough for giving
a divisibility testing for f and g: just check if f(Gi )|g(Gi ) as polynomials in xi for every i. This is
formally done in Theorem 4.14.

Zero or Large Characteristic. In the proof of [BV25, Lemma 4.5], Bisht and Volkovich consider
the Sylvester matrix Mxi (fα , gβ ) of the some suitably chosen small powers of the polynomials
f, g, viewed as polynomials in xi . They then use the first property of G to prove that the rank of
this matrix does not change when composing with the generator Gi , that is, rank(Mxi (fα , gβ )) =
rank(Mxi (f(Gi )α , g(Gi )β )). From that, they deduce that it must be the case that ϕ(Gi ) and ψ(Gi )
do not share factors, as the existence of such a factor would result in rank decrease.
     To obtain our result, instead of considering the Sylvester matrix Mxi (fα , gβ ), we consider the
matrix defining the discriminant ∆(fg) of the polynomial fg. That is, we consider the Sylvester
matrix Mxi (fg, (fg) ′ ) of fg and its formal derivative with respect to xi , (fg) ′ . We next explain the
idea behind it.
     Suppose ϕ|f, ψ|g are two irreducible elements of PFactors (n, s, d). View all polynomials as poly-
nomials in some variable xi , and consider the Sylvester matrix Mxi (fg, (fg) ′ ). It is not hard to
prove that its rank essentially counts the number of unique irreducible factors of fg (when appro-
priately counted; for the formal statement, see Claim 4.16). As all the determinants of minors of
Mxi (fg, (fg) ′ ) are sparse polynomials of low degree, we are able to show, using the first property
of G, that the rank of this matrix does not change when composing with Gi . In particular, this
means that ϕ(Gi ), ψ(Gi ) cannot share a common factor, as otherwise the number of unique factors
of fg(Gi ) would be smaller than that of fg, in contradiction to the fact that the rank remains un-
changed. With this result in hand, we obtain Theorem 1.16 and Theorem 1.15 by considering the
factorization of the inputs composed with the generators Gi .

1.4.2   Finding Multiquadratic Factors of Products of Sparse Polynomials
We next show how to use the results of Section 1.4.1 to obtain Theorem 1.14. For the sake of
presentation we assume here that char(F) = 0.
    We first consider the following general setting. Let f be a product of polynomials in
PFactors (n, s, d); that is, f is a product of factors of s-sparse polynomials of bounded individual
degree d. Consider some irreducible ϕ ∈ PFactors (n, s, d). By the second property of G it follows
that for every i for which xi ∈ var(ϕ), the highest power of ϕ(Gi ) that divides f(Gi ) is precisely
the multiplicity of ϕ as a factor of f. In particular, this is true whenever ϕ is an irreducible s-sparse
polynomial of bounded individual degree d. With this observation in mind, we are now ready to
                                                                          Q
describe the algorithm for finding multilinear factors. Suppose f = ℓi=1 ϕei i ∈ F[x0 , x] where ϕi
are factors of (n + 1, s, d)-sparse polynomials. Suppose further that we have blackbox access to




                                                    8
f, and we want to recover all of its irreducible multilinear factors. 2 Our algorithm follows the
following steps:

Step 1 - Normalization and Recursion. In this step, we would like to replace our input poly-
nomial f with another polynomial f̃ that still captures all the information about the factors of f,
but is normalized (in the sense that its free term is 1 as a polynomial in x0 ). To do that, we use a
                                                                                      P
standard method, employed for example in [BV25, BSV20]. Let f = ℓd                              i
                                                                                        i=0 fi x0 where fi ∈ F[x] and
                                                            3
let f̃(y, x1 , . . . , xn ) = f(f0 y, x1 , . . . , xn )/f0 . Note that as we have blackbox access to f, we also have
blackbox access to f0 and therefore to f̃. It is straightforward to see that each multilinear factor
fi (x) = ai (x)x0 + bi (x) of f now corresponds to a multilinear factor abi fi 0 y + 1 of f̃. Thus, one sees
that:
  (1) If ai ̸= 0, then all the information about ai and bi is captured in f̃.

  (2) If ai = 0, then the factor bi cannot be studied from f̃. However, note that in this case bi |f0 ,
      and therefore it can be studied from a factorization of f0 .
    Note that f0 has the same structure of f - it is itself a product of factors of s-sparse polynomi-
als of individual degree d. Therefore, by applying one recursive call, we can find all irreducible
multilinear factors of f0 . Thus, to understand the factors with ai = 0, we just need to understand,
for any multilinear irreducible factor ϕ of f0 , how many times it divides f. We will show a way
to do so in the next step. For now, the main benefit from this step is the normalization f̃ and the
calculation of the multilinear factors ϕi of f0 .

Step 2 - Obtaining the factorization. As we saw in the first step, there are two types of factors -
those with ai = 0 and those with ai ̸= 0. Thus, we split the algorithm into two parts:
  (1) Recovering the factors for which ai = 0. In this case, it holds that bi |f0 . Therefore, as we
      already saw, it suffices to determine which irreducible factors of f0 divide f (and to what
      power). To that end, note that for a given sparse irreducible factor ϕ of f0 , it follows from the
      second property of G and from the fact that f is a product of elements of PFactors (n + 1, s, d),
      that to calculate the multiplicity of ϕ as a factor of f it suffices to check how many times ϕ(Gj )
      divides f(Gj ), where xj ∈ var(ϕ). This can be easily done, for example, by factoring both
      polynomials, which is possible as they have a constant number of variables and polynomial
      degree.

  (2) Recovering the factors for which ai ̸= 0. In this case, using the first step, we can get access
      to ai (G)f  0 (G)
             bi (G)     , by factoring f̃(y, G). Recovering ai from such an expression is the rational in-
      terpolation problem that we earlier alluded to. Here we have the additional information that
      bi is a multilinear factor of f0 . Thus, to find bi , it suffices to understand, for each multilinear
      irreducible factor ϕ of f0 , what is the maximal power of ϕ that divides bi . For any such factor
      ϕ, using the fact that ai and bi are coprime (as otherwise ai x0 + bi will not be irreducible),
      we have that ϕk |bi if and only if ϕt−k+1 ∤ abi fi 0 , where t is the multiplicity of ϕ as a factor of
       f0 . It follows that we just have to understand the multiplicity of ϕ as a factor of abi fi 0 . Since ai
       is sparse and f0 is a product of polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d), we have that abi fi 0 is a product
       of polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d) as well, so we can finish by computing the multiplicity of
   2
     The general algorithm finds the multiquadratic, sparse, irreducible factors of the input. To keep the presentation
here as simple as possible, we consider only the multilinear factors.
   3
     It is easy to reduce to the case f0 ̸= 0, so to keep the presentation as simple as possible we assume it to be the case.


                                                             9
                            a (G )f (G )
        ϕ(Gj ) as a factor of i bij(G0j ) j (where xj ∈ var(ϕ)). This recovers bi and subsequently ai
        as well, completing the algorithm.

    In the above, we actually solved a rational interpolation problem. That is, we had access to afb ,
where b|f, and needed to recover a and b from this information. We claim that in fact, the algorithm
described above works in greater generality. The exact formulation of this generalization and its
proof are given in Theorem 5.1 and Theorem 5.2.
    We conclude with the following remarks. First, we note that it is possible to modify this al-
gorithm to recover all the multiquadratic irreducible factors of f, rather than just the multilinear
ones. We further note that the algorithm described above still works when the assumption on the
field F is removed, albeit with a slightly worse running time. These claims are proven in full detail
in Section 7.

1.4.3    Finding Sparse Divisors of Sparse Polynomials
We now describe the ideas behind our main result (Theorem 1.9). Recall that our goal is to output
all the sparse divisors of a given (n, s, d)-sparse polynomial f. That is, we wish to efficiently find
those divisors of f that can be “written down” efficiently.
     To obtain such an algorithm, a natural thing to do is to follow the lines of the algorithm pre-
sented in Section 1.4.2. The first step of this algorithm is performing a normalization and then
applying a recursive call for factoring the free term f0 . But now, a problem arises - this recursive
call only returns the irreducible sparse factors of f0 , while the free term of each factor of f (bi in
the language of Section 1.4.2) might be a reducible sparse divisor of f0 whose irreducible factors are
not sparse; in this case, the recursive call did not provide us with any valuable information about
bi . In particular, we cannot reconstruct bi by studying how many times each sparse irreducible
factor of f0 divides it as we did in Section 1.4.2. In fact, the true reason the algorithm presented in
Section 1.4.2 works is that in that context, bi is sparse multilinear (or sparse multiquadratic in the
more general case), and therefore so are its irreducible factors; hence, we indeed get information
about bi from the recursive call. In other words, the free terms there belong to a class of sparse
polynomials that is closed under factorization.
     This motivates considering the problem of finding all the sparse divisors of a sparse polynomial.
This way, we will still have information about the free terms of the factors of f - the recursive call
will actually compute them. Indeed, as sparse divisors of sparse divisors of (n, s, d)-sparse poly-
nomials are themselves sparse divisors of (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials, so this class is closed under
factorization. This enables us to recover all these sparse divisors in deterministic poly(n, spoly(d) )-
time. Indeed, the recursive call returns all the sparse divisors of the free term f0 rather than just
the set of irreducible factors of it, so we can directly brute-force over the list of these factors to find
bi . This yields Theorem 1.9.
     At first glance, this approach may seem surprising, as the existence of such an algorithm sug-
gests that the possible number of outputs is bounded above by poly(n, spoly(d) ). Indeed, The-
orem 1.8 ensures that s-sparse polynomials of bounded individual degree d have no more than
d log s irreducible factors (that are not monomials), and therefore, no more than sd divisors (not
divisible by a monomial) overall. To prove Theorem 1.8, we show that if f ∈ P(n, s, d) is not di-
visible by any monomial, then one can identify a set of log s variables that satisfy the property
that every irreducible factor of f depends on at least one of them. From this claim it easily follows
that f has at most d log s irreducible factors, and therefore at most 2d log s = sd divisors overall. To
prove that such a set of variables exist, we analyze the Newton polytope of f, and show that if the
minimal set of variables satisfying the property is of size k, then the Newton polytope of f has at


                                                    10
least 2k vertices. This is somehow intuitive, as each additional variable in the set effectively adds
a dimension to the polytope and therefore doubles the number of its vertices.
    We note that Theorem 1.9 is not implied by the methods of [BSV20]; indeed, there the bound on
the sparsity of all irreducible factors of f is needed to hit all resultants of different factors; therefore,
                                                                                               2
applying their methods to this problem must result in a running time of at least sO(d log n) , which
is their bound on the sparsity of the factors of f.
    One main drawback of our algorithm is that it does not tell us what are the irreducible sparse
divisors of the input polynomial, as we are not familiar with a way of efficiently identifying the
irreducible polynomials from the outputs we get. On the other hand, if we are guaranteed that f is
a product of irreducible sparse factors then we can easily find the irreducible factors among all the
sparse divisors. This establishes Corollary 8.6, thereby solving Question 1.3 for the special case of
(n, s, d)-sparse polynomials.
    These ideas are also used in the proof of Theorem 1.10. Recall that Question 1.4 asks for a
deterministic, polynomial-time algorithm that given blackbox access to a product of (n, s, d)-sparse
polynomials returns the factors. While we do not know a polynomial-time algorithm when the
number of terms is unbounded, we show an algorithm that runs in quasi-polynomial time in their
number, making the first step towards a resolution of the problem. The algorithm is the natural,
straightforward generalization of the algorithm described above. Unfortunately, it requires quasi-
polynomial time as we actually find all the s-sparse divisors of bounded individual degree d of f,
and there are (possibly) quasi-polynomially many of them (as shown by Corollary 8.3).

1.4.4   Factorization for Sparse Polynomials
Lastly, we discuss our algorithms for factoring (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials and their products.
These algorithms are essentially the same as the algorithms we already presented; the only dif-
ference is that now, when dealing with elements of PFactors (n, s, d), we view them as elements of
           2
P(n, sO(d log n) , d).
    Consider for example our algorithm for finding all the sparse divisors of an (n, s, d)-sparse
                                                                                     2
polynomial. With a slight modification, we can make it output all the (n, sO(d log n) , d)-sparse
                                                 2
divisors of the input polynomial in poly(n, sd log n )-time. By [BSV20], these are all the possible
divisors. Identifying the irreducible factors among these can be easily done. For example, we can
check for any two divisors ϕ and ψ if ψ|ϕ by trying to sparse-interpolate their quotient - which
                     2
should be an sO(d log n) -sparse polynomial.
    As for our algorithm for factoring products of PFactors (n, s, d) elements, it is identical to the
algorithm described in Section 1.4.2, now taking into account that all irreducible factors of interest
         2
are sO(d log n) -sparse, rather than s-sparse and multiquadratic.

1.5     Organization
In Section 2 we give all the background needed for this paper. In Section 3 we construct the gen-
erator G, which is the main technical tool of this paper. In Section 4 we prove the basic properties
of G we need, both for arbitrary fields and when the characteristic is zero or large enough, and
apply them to obtain our divisibility testing and exact power testing results (Theorem 1.16, Theo-
rem 1.15). In Section 5 we prove our rational interpolation result.
    We give a meta-algorithm, according to which all of our algorithms are modeled, in Section 6.
We then demonstrate how to apply it to recover the multiquadratic sparse irreducible factors of
a product of polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d) (Theorem 1.14) in Section 7. In Section 8 we bound
the number of divisors of (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials (Theorem 1.8), and use it to find the all the


                                                     11
sparse divisors of such polynomials (Theorem 1.9), as well as to give one partial solution to Ques-
tion 1.4 (Theorem 1.10). In Section 9 we give our algorithms for factoring (n, s, d)-sparse polyno-
mials and products of them, based on the bound of [BSV20] (Theorem 1.12,Theorem 1.13). The
second result gives another partial solution to Question 1.4. We conclude with a short discussion
in Section 10. In Section A we give different, yet weaker, proofs for some technical claims from
Section 4. Since the proof technique is different, we decided to give the proof in spite of the results
being slightly weaker.


2     Preliminaries
We use x to denote the n-variate vector of variables, x = (x1 , . . . , xn ). In general, bold-face letters
such as x, e will be used to denote n-tuples, where the domain of the n-tuple will always be clear
from the context.
   We say that two nonzero polynomials f, g are associate if one is a scalar product of the other.
We also state the following special case of Gauss’ lemma.
                                                                  P
Lemma 2.1 (Gauss’s Lemma). A polynomial f(x0 , x) = d                 i=0 ci (x)x0 ∈ F[x][x0 ] \ F[x] is irreducible if
                                                                                 i

and only if it is both irreducible in F(x)[x0 ] and gcd(c0 , . . . , cd ) = 1.

2.1    Reverse Monic Polynomials and Normalization
Throughout the paper we will use the following definition.

Definition 2.2. A polynomial f ∈ F[x0 , x] is said to be reversed-monic with respect to x0 if its free
term as a polynomial
                 P in F(x)[x0 ] is 1. Equivalently, f is reversed-monic with respect to x0 if it is of
the form f = 1 + i⩾1 fi xi0 where fi ∈ F[x].

      We prove the following simple claim about reversed-monic polynomials.

Claim 2.3. Let f ∈ F[x0 , x] be a reversed-monic polynomial with respect to x0 . Then, the number of
irreducible factors of f is at most degx0 (f).

Proof. We first note that all irreducible factors of f must depend on x0 . Indeed, write f =
Pdegx0 (f)
   i=0     fi xi0 where fi ∈ F[x]. By definition of reversed-monic polynomials, f0 = 1. Clearly,
any divisor of f that does not depend on x0 must divide f0 , and hence no such non-trivial divisors
exist. The claim follows, since there are at most degx0 (f) irreducible factors of f depending on
x0 .

   We next define a normalization operation that turns a polynomial into a reverse monic one.
                                                  P
Definition 2.4 (Normalization). Let f(x0 , x) = d              i
                                                    i=0 fi (x)x0 ∈ F[x0 , x], such that x0 ∤ f. The nor-
malization of f with respect to x0 is the reverse monic polynomial

                                                                          X
                                                                          d
                          f̃(y, x) = f(yf0 , x1 , . . . , xn )/f0 = 1 +         fi (x)fi−1   i
                                                                                       0 (x)y .                    (1)
                                                                          i=1

    Normalization is a standard and well-known technique, and different versions of our next
claim can be also found in [BSV20, BV25]. Our version of the claim describes the structure of the
factorization of f̃, which will play an important role in our proofs and reconstruction algorithms.


                                                           12
                                                       Q
Claim 2.5. Let f as in Definition 2.4. Suppose f = N         h ∈ F[x0 , x] is the factorization of f into irre-
                                                     Pdi i=0 i j
ducible factors hi , and denote each factor by hi = j=0 ci,j x0 (where ci,j ∈ F[x]). Then, the factorization
of f̃ is given by
                                        Y
                                        N                    X
                                                             di
                                                                 ci,j j j
                                   f̃ =    h̃i , where h̃i =          f0 y .
                                                                 ci,0
                                       i=0                      j=0
                                                                       P
Moreover, every factor (not necessarily irreducible) of f of the form d           j
                                                                         j=0 ζj x0 (where ζj ∈ F[x]) corre-
                                    P d ζj j j
sponds to a factor of f̃ of the form j=0 ζ0 f0 y . In particular, every multiquadratic factor of f of the form
                                                                                 a2 f20 2
a2 x20 + a1 x0 + b corresponds to a factor of f̃ of the form 1 + ab
                                                                  1 f0
                                                                       y+         b y . In addition, we have blackbox
access to f̃ from blackbox access to f.
                               Q
Proof. First, note that f0 = N    i=0 ci,0 . Next, let

                                                               Y
                                                               N
                                                                 hi (yf0 , x)
                                  f̃(y, x) = f(yf0 , x)/f0 =                         .
                                                                          ci,0
                                                               i=0

Define
                                  hi (yf0 , x) X  ci,j (yf0 )j X
                                                id              i     d
                                                                  ci,j j j
                    h̃i (y, x) :=             =               =        f0 y ∈ F[y, x] .
                                      ci,0            ci,0        ci,0
                                                j=0                   j=0

     We claim that h̃i is irreducible. If di = 0, then h̃i = 1, so this is clear. Assume di > 0.
By definition, hi is an irreducible polynomial as an element of F[x0 , x], and therefore it is also
irreducible as an element of F(x)[x0 ]. In this ring it holds that h̃i (x0 ) = hi (f0 x0 )/ci,0 . In particular,
h̃i differs from hi by a linear change of variables and a multiplication by scalar (in the field F(x)),
so it is irreducible as well. Since the free term of h̃i is 1, it follows from Gauss’ lemma (Lemma 2.1)
that h̃i is irreducible as an element of F[x0 , x], as we wanted.
     The ”moreover” part follows from the fact that the argument on the form of h̃i holds regardless
of the irreducibility of hi .
     The claim regarding blackbox access to f̃ follows from simple interpolation: given an evaluation
point (y0 , α) we interpolate the polynomial f(x0 , α) as a polynomial in x0 to get access to each fi (α).
One can then obtain f̃(y0 , α) simply by using the right hand side of (1). In particular, every query
to f̃ requires at most d + 1 queries to f.

2.2     Factorization and Interpolation of Polynomials
We start by stating a result on factorization of univariate polynomials. The first is the classical
algorithm of Lenstra, Lenstra and Lovasz [LLL82].

Theorem 2.6 (Univariate factorization over Q). Let f ∈ Q[x] have degree d and bit complexity B. Then,
there is a deterministic algorithm that outputs all irreducible factors of f whose running time is poly(d, B).

      For the following theorem see e.g., [vzGS92, Section 9].

Theorem 2.7 (Univariate factorization over Finite Fields). Let Fq be a field of size q = pk and charac-
teristic p > 0. Let f(x) ∈ Fq [x] be a polynomial of degree d. Then, there is a deterministic algorithm that
outputs all irreducible factors of f in time poly(p, log q, d).




                                                       13
    We next state a theorem concerning deterministic multivariate factorization in the multivariate
case. See e.g., [Len85, Kal85b]. These results determine the dependence on the field, its character-
istic and the bit complexity of the input polynomial, in all our algorithms that invoke polynomial
factorization.

Theorem 2.8. There exists a deterministic algorithm that given an n-variate polynomial f ∈ F[x] of total
degree d, and bit complexity B, outputs its factorization into irreducible polynomials. Its running time is
poly(dn ) · T (d, B, F), where T (d, B, F) is the running time of univariate factorization of degree d polyno-
mials, with bit complexity B, over F.

   Next, we state the following folklore lemma on interpolation of polynomials on a small num-
bers of variables.

Lemma 2.9. Let f ∈ F[x1 , . . . , xn ] be an n-variate polynomial of total degree d. Then, there is a deter-
ministic polynomial-time algorithm that given blackbox access to f returns its monomial representation. Its
running time is poly((d + 1)n ).

      Finally, we conclude this section by recalling the definition of Lagrange interpolation.

Definition 2.10. Let α1 , . . . , αr ∈ F be different field elements. Then the polynomials
                                                       Y         x − αj
                                         Ai (x) =                                                           (2)
                                                                 αi − αj
                                                    1⩽j⩽r,j̸=i

satisfy deg(Ai ) = r − 1 and Ai (αj ) = δi,j , where δi,j is Kronecker’s delta. The Ai -s are called the
Lagrange interpolating polynomials of α1 , . . . , αr .

2.3     Sparse Polynomials
We give some definitions and state several known results concerning sparse polynomials.

Definition 2.11. An s-sparse polynomial f ∈ F[x1 , . . . , xn ] is a polynomial which is a sum of at
most s monomials. It is said to be of bounded individual degree d if f is of degree at most d as an
element of F(x1 , . . . , xi−1 , xi+1 , . . . , xn )[xi ] for every 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n. We denote the class of n-variate,
s-sparse polynomials of bounded individual degree d by P(n, s, d), and refer to its elements as
(n, s, d)-sparse polynomials. Furthermore, we denote the class of factors of elements of P(n, s, d)
by PFactors (n, s, d). Note that by factors we mean all possible factors of (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials,
not just the irreducible ones.

   The next two lemmas give two special cases in which upper bounds on sparsity of factors of
sparse polynomials is known.

Lemma 2.12 ([GKL12, Lemma 10]). A multilinear factor of an s-sparse polynomial is again s-sparse.

Lemma 2.13 ([Vol17, Lemma 32]). Let g be an s-sparse multiquadratic polynomial (that is, g is of indi-
vidual degree at most two) and suppose that f|g. Then f is also s-sparse.

   In [BSV20], Bhargava, Saraf and Volkovich upper bounded the sparsity of factors of (n, s, d)-
sparse polynomials, and obtained the best known factorization algorithm for (n, s, d)-sparse poly-
nomials. We state these results next.
                                                                           2
Theorem 2.14 ([BSV20, Theorem 1]). PFactors (n, s, d) ⊂ P(n, sO(d log n) , d). In other words, every
                                                                                      2
factor of an s-sparse polynomial of bounded individual degree d in n-variables is sO(d log n) -sparse.

                                                       14
      In the next result, one should add a factor that depends on the field according to Theorem 2.8.
                                                                                   7
Theorem 2.15 ([BSV20, Theorem 2]). There is a deterministic poly(n, dd , sd log n )-time algorithm, that
given an (n, s, d)-sparse polynomial, returns its factorization into irreducible factors.
   To obtain Theorem 2.14, the authors study sparse polynomials via the study of their Newton
polytopes. As we will use the language of Newton polytopes as well, we give the definition of
Newton polytopes here.
                                                               P
Definition 2.16. The Newton polytope of a polynomial f = e γe xe , denoted by Pf , is the convex
hull of the points e ∈ Rn . The set of vertices of the polytope Pf is denoted by V(Pf ).
      The following well known fact can be found in [BSV20, Corollary 3.5].
Lemma 2.17. Let f|g be two polynomials, and suppose that g is s-sparse. Then, |V(f)| ⩽ |V(g)| ⩽ s.

2.4     Resultants and Discriminants
We next discuss resultants and discriminants. See [GKZ08] for a detailed treatment.
Definition 2.18. Let f, g ∈ F[x] be two univariate polynomials of degrees d1 , d2 respectively. Define
ϕ : F[x]⩽(d1 −1) × F[x]⩽(d2 −1) → F[x]⩽(d1 +d2 −1) by

                                          ϕ(h1 , h2 ) = h1 g + h2 f.                                       (3)

Here, F[x]⩽(d) is the (d+1)-dimensional F-vector space of univariate polynomials over F of degree
at most d. This space has a standard monomial basis given by the monomials 1, x, . . . ., xd .
    The Sylvester matrix M(f, g) of f and g is the (d1 + d2 ) × (d1 + d2 ) matrix representing ϕ with
respect to the standard monomial basis. The determinant of this matrix is called the resultant of f
and g, and is denoted by res(f, g) ∈ F. If f, g ∈ F[x0 , x1 , . . . , xn ] are two multivariate polynomials,
we denote by Mx0 (f, g) and resx0 (f, g) ∈ F[x1 , . . . , xn ] the Sylvester matrix and resultant of f and g
when viewed as elements of F(x1 , . . . , xn )[x0 ].
Definition 2.19. Let f ∈ F[x] be a univariate polynomial. The discriminant of f is given by

                                             ∆(f) = res(f, f ′ ),                                          (4)

where f ′ is the standard formal derivative of f.                     For a multivariate polynomial f ∈
F[x], denote by ∆xi (f) ∈ F[x1 , . . . , xi−1 , xi+1 , . . . , xn ] the discriminant of f as an element of
F(x1 , . . . , xi−1 , xi+1 , . . . , xn )[xi ].
Lemma 2.20. Let F be a field.
                                                                       Q
  (1) Let f, g ∈ F[x] be two monic polynomials. Then, res(f, g) =          α:f(α)=0 g(α), where the product is
      over all the roots α of f over F.

  (2) f, g ∈ F[x] have a common factor in F[x] if and only if their resultant vanishes.

  (3) If char(F) = 0, a polynomial f is square free if and only if ∆(f) ̸= 0. Moreover, the last statement is
      also true if deg(f) < char(F).

  (4) Let f, g ∈ F[x0 , x] be two s-sparse polynomials of bounded individual degree d. Then, their Sylvester
      matrix Mx0 (f, g) is a 2d × 2d matrix whose entries are s-sparse elements of F[x], and moreover,
      dim(ker (Mx0 (f, g))) = degx0 (gcd(f, g)). In particular,

                                                     15
       (1) If f, g ∈ F[x0 , x] are two s-sparse polynomials of bounded individual degree d, then resx0 (f, g) ∈
           F[x] is a (2d)!s2d -sparse polynomial of bounded individual degree 2d2 .
       (2) If f ∈ F[x0 , x] is an s-sparse polynomial of bounded individual degree d, then ∆x0 f ∈ F[x] is a
           (2d)!s2d -sparse polynomial of bounded individual degree 2d2 .

Proof. The first three statements are standard. The last statement is also well known, and its expla-
nation is given for example in [Vol17], in the language of subresultants. We give the full proof of
the ”moreover” part here as well, as it plays an important role in the proof of Lemma 4.15.
    Suppose f, g ∈ F[x0 , x] are two s-sparse polynomials of bounded individual degree d. Think
                                                   Q            Q bi
of both as elements of F(x)[x0 ], and write f = i ha      i
                                                        i ,g =   i hi , where hi are all the irreducible
factors of fg, and ai , bi ⩾ 0 (for example, if f, g are coprime, then ai bi = 0 for every i). Note that
             Q min (ai ,bi )                 Q max (ai ,bi )
gcd(f, g) = i hi             and lcm(f, g) = i hi             .
    Consider an element (w1 , w2 ) ∈ ker (Mx0 (f, g)). Then, by definition,

                                                         w1 g = −w2 f.                                                 (5)

Therefore, by considering the factorization into irreducible factors of both sides, it must be the case
    Q max(ai −bi ,0)         Q max(bi −ai ,0)
that i hi            |w1 and i hi              |w2 . Thus, we can write
                            Y max(a −b ,0)                Y max(b −a ,0)
                                      i   i                          i   i
                      w1 =      hi           w̃1 , w2 =       hi           w̃2 .                    (6)
                                      i                                              i

It follows that we have
                            Y             b +min(ai −bi ,0)
                                                                      Y            max(ai ,bi )
                   w1 g =            hi i                     w̃1 =            hi                 w̃1 = lcm(f, g)w̃1
                                i                                         i
                           Y         a +min(bi −ai ,0)
                                                                    Y          max(ai ,bi )
                                                                                                                       (7)
                  w2 f =            hi i                    w̃2 =             hi              w̃2 = lcm(f, g)w̃2 .
                            i                                         i

Combining (5) and (7), we get that w̃1 = −w̃2 . Since deg w1 , deg w2 ⩽ d − 1, we get from (6) that
an element in ker (Mx0 (f, g)) corresponds to a polynomial w̃ of degree at most
           X                             X
    d−1−       max(ai − bi , 0) deg hi =     (ai − max(ai − bi , 0)) deg(hi ) − 1
             i                                          i
                                                        X                                                              (8)
                                                    =         min(ai , bi ) deg(hi ) − 1 = degx0 (gcd(f, g)) − 1 .
                                                        i

Therefore, ker (Mx0 (f, g)) is isomorphic to F[x]⩽(degx gcd(f,g)−1) , and hence is of dimension
                                                       0
degx0 gcd(f, g), as claimed.


3   Generator Construction
In this section, we construct our generator, which is a map G : F6 → Fn that satisfies the properties
described in Section 1.4.1.
    In what follows we let m be some parameter (in our setting we will usually set it to m = (nsd)2
when dealing when (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials). To define our generator G(m) we will use the
following notational conventions. Let q = Θ(m) be a prime (for concreteness q can be the first
prime larger than m). We shall also assume that |F| > ndq. If this is not the case then we work
over an extension field F ⊂ E of size dnq < |E| ⩽ (dnq)2 .
    Fix the following sets:

                                                                 16
  (1) A set of integers I = {1, . . . , m} of size m, that contains m different residues mod q.

  (2) A set of field elements A = {α1 , . . . , αm } ⊂ F of size m. For every 1 ⩽ i ⩽ m let Ai be the
      Lagrange interpolating polynomials for A.

  (3) A set of field elements B = {β1 , . . . , βn } ⊂ F of size n. For every 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n let Bi be the
      Lagrange interpolating polynomials for B.

  (4) A set of field elements C = {γ1 , . . . , γn } ⊂ F of size n. For every 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n let Ci be the
      Lagrange interpolating polynomials for C.

  (5) A set of field elements T = {δ1 , . . . , δndq } ⊂ F of size ndq.

    To define our generator we first define the generator of Klivans and Spielman and state some
of its properties.

Definition 3.1 (The KS-generator). In the notations above, the KS-generator is defined as

                        X
                        m                                                                      n
                                                                                                      
  GKS
   (m) (x, y, z, w) =         Ai (y) (1 + B1 (z)(w − 1))xi mod q , . . . , (1 + Bn (z)(w − 1))xi mod q .    (9)
                        i=1

Theorem 3.2 ([KS01, Theorem 11]). Let f ∈ F[x] be an (n, s, d)-sparse polynomial. Let m = (nds)2 .
Then, f can be reconstructed in time poly(n, s, d) from the following set of evaluations:
                                                 
                            f GKS (m) (x, y, z, w)  | y ∈ A, z ∈ B, x, w ∈ T .

Proof. Observe that when setting y = ai and z = bj we obtain
                                                                                                  
         KS                      i mod q        ij−1 mod q     ij mod q ij+1 mod q        in mod q
        G(m) (x, ai , bj , w) = x        ,...,x            , wx        ,x          ,...,x            .

The claim follows from the analysis in [KS01, Theorem 11].

   Another tool that we will use is the generator defined in [SV09], which is given by the formula

                                     GSV (u, v) = (C1 (v)u, . . . , Cn (v)u) .                             (10)

The basic property of this generator is that it makes it possible to ”revive” a variable of our choice.
E.g., by setting v = γj we get the vector that has zeros in all coordinates except of the j-th coordinate
where we have the variable u.
    We are now ready to define our generator.

Definition 3.3 (The generator G(m) ). The generator G(m) : F6 → Fn is defined as

                          G(m) (x, y, z, w, u, v) = GKS                  SV
                                                     (m) (x, y, z, w) + G (u, v) .                         (11)

We further define the generators obtained from reviving a variable. Denote with GKS
                                                                                 (m) (x, y, z, w)i
the i-th coordinate of GKS (m) (x, y, z, w).
    For any 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n, let G(m,i) be the generator obtained from G(m) by restricting to u =
u − GKS(m) (x, y, z, w)i and v = γi . That is,
                                                                                                 
               G(m,i) (x, y, z, w, u) = GKS
                                         (m) (x, y, z, w)1 , . . . , u, . . . , GKS
                                                                                 (m) (x, y, z, w)n .       (12)

                                                        17
   Let’s explain this definition. The first part GKS
                                                  (m) enables us to interpolate (n, s, d)-sparse poly-
nomials (Theorem 3.2). The second part allows us to “revive” a variable of our choice, a feature
that will play an important role in the analysis.
   The following lemma shows that our generator indeed satisfies the first property described in
Section 1.4.1.

Lemma 3.4. Let f be an (n, s, d)-sparse polynomial and m = (nds)2 . Then one can recover f from f(G(m) )
in time poly(m). In particular, it holds that f = 0 if and only if f(G(m) ) = 0. In fact, for every 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n,
the statement is also true when replacing G(m) with G(m,i) and with GKS   (m) .

Proof. For every 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n, the image of each one of G(m) , G(m,i) and GKS
                                                                        (m) includes image of
GKS
 (m) , so the claim follows from Theorem 3.2.

       We conclude this section with the following three corollaries of the previous lemma.

Corollary 3.5. Suppose f ∈ PFactors (n, s, d). Then f(G(m) ) ̸= 0 for m = (nds)2 . In fact, for every
1 ⩽ i ⩽ n, the statement is also true when replacing G(m) with G(m,i) and with GKS
                                                                                (m) .

Proof. Let g ∈ P(n, s, d) so that f|g, and let G be any one of G(m) , G(m,i) and GKS
                                                                                  (m) . Lemma 3.4
implies that g(G) ̸= 0. The claim follows from the fact that f(G)|g(G).

Corollary 3.6. Let f ∈ PFactors (n, s, d). Then, degu (f(G(m,i) )) = degxi (f) for every 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n and
m = (nsd)2 .

Proof. Consider the leading coefficient4 LCxi (f) of f as a polynomial in xi , and let g ∈ P(n, s, d) be
any polynomial such that f | g. Then the leading coefficient LCxi (g) of g (viewed as a polynomial
in xi ) is divisible by LCxi (f). Since g is s-sparse, its leading coefficient is also s-sparse. Therefore,
LCxi (f) is a factor of an (n − 1, s, d)-sparse polynomial, and hence, by Corollary 3.5, we have
LCxi (f)(GKS (m) ) ̸= 0 when substituting all variables except xi .
   By (12), LCxi (f)(GKS
                      (m) ) is precisely the leading coefficient of f(G(m,i) ) as a polynomial in u.
Therefore, we must have degu f(G(m,i) ) = degxi (f).

Corollary 3.7. There is a deterministic poly(n, d, s, ℓ)-time algorithm that, given blackbox access to a
product f of ℓ polynomials in PFactors (n + 1, s, d) ⊂ F[x0 , x], returns the multiplicity k of x0 as a factor of f.
Moreover, if f = x0 k g, one can obtain blackbox access to g from blackbox access to f.
                     Q
Proof. Let f = x0 k i fi be the factorization of f into irreducible factors, where fi ̸= x0 . For each
i, let gi be an (n + 1, d, s)-sparse polynomial such that fi |gi . Let m = ((n + 1)ds)2 . Consider the
polynomial                                                  Y
                                       f(x0 , G(m) ) = x0 k     fi (G(m) ) .
                                                                  i
                                   Pd                            Pd
Fix some i, and denote fi = j=0 fi,j x0 j and gi = j=0 gi,j x0 j , where fi,j , gi,j ∈ F[x]. As x0 ∤ fi , it
follows that fi,0 ̸= 0 for every i. By dividing out powers of x0 we may therefore assume that x0 ∤ gi
(note that when doing so, we do not change the sparsity of gi ).
      Since gi is an (n + 1, d, s)-sparse polynomial it follows that gi,0 is (n, s, d)-sparse polyno-
mial. Furthermore, for every i we have fi,0 |gi,0 . Therefore, it follows from Corollary 3.5 that
fi,0 (G(m) ) ̸= 0, and hence x0 ∤ fi (G(m) ). That is, the multiplicity of x0 as a factor of f is the same
   4
     The leading coefficient of a polynomial in a variable x is the coefficient of the highest power of x appearing nontriv-
ially in the polynomial.


                                                            18
as its multiplicity as a factor of f(x0 , G(m) ). As the latter is a polynomial on a constant number of
variables of bounded individual degree poly(n, d, s, ℓ), we can interpolate it using Lemma 2.9 and
directly find k (which is the minimal power of x0 dividing all monomials of f(x0 , G(m) )).
    For the ”moreover” part, let f = x0 k g, and suppose α = (α0 , α1 , . . . , αn ) ∈ Fn+1 is a point we
want to evaluate g on. Consider h(x) = f(x, α1 , . . . , αn ) = xk g(x, α1 , . . . , αn ) as a polynomial in
F[x]. One can use a standard one-variable interpolation (as stated in Lemma 2.9) to recover h(x)
from blackbox access to f, and therefore to recover the polynomial g(x, α1 , . . . , αn ) = h(x)/xk . By
plugging x = α0 one can then recover g(α), as we wanted.

Corollary 3.8 (Finding monomial divisors). There is a deterministic poly(n, d, s, ℓ)-time algorithm that,
given blackbox access to a product f of ℓ polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d) ⊂ F[x], returns the multiplicity ki
of xi as a factor of f. Moreover, if M is the largest monomial divisor of f, such that f = Mg, then we can
obtain blackbox access to g from blackbox access to f.

Proof. This is an immediate corollary of Corollary 3.7. We find the maximal power of each variable
dividing f. This gives us the monomial M. To get blackbox access to g we do the following: Given
a point α ∈ Fn , if all coordinates of α are nonzero then we can compute g(α) = f(α)/M(α). If
some coordinates of α are zero, so we cannot divide by M(α), then we do the following. Consider
the substitution x ← α + (t, . . . , t), where t is a new variable. By evaluating g̃α (t) := (f/M)(α +
(t, . . . , t)) at more than dn values of t such that t ̸∈ {−α1 , . . . , −αn }, we can interpolate g̃(t). Then
we can evaluate g(α) = g̃α (0). Thus, any query to g requires O(dn) queries to f.

Remark 3.9. The first part of the previous corollary is an easy special case of the technical lemmas in
Section 4. In particular, it is always possible to determine the multiplicity of an irreducible sparse
polynomial as a factor of such an f using the factorization of f(x0 , G(m) ). However, as we show in
the next section, a larger value of m is required in general.


4     Divisibility Testing and Exact Power testing
In this section we prove our divisibility testing and exact power testing results. For that we first
have to prove some technical results about our generator G. We split the discussion on these
technical results into two parts. In Section 4.1 we obtain some results that are valid over arbitrary
fields; in Section 4.2 we prove a stronger version of these results, that is only valid over zero or
large enough characteristic.

4.1     Arbitrary Characteristic Results
In this subsection we build on the methods of [BV25] to obtain our divisibility testing results over
fields of arbitrary characteristic. To do that, we define and study the notion of primitive divisors for
a class of polynomials and develop the tools needed for our algorithms; this is done in Section 4.1.1.
In Section 4.1.2 we use these tools to obtain our algorithms.

4.1.1    Arbitrary Characteristic Tools
We start with the definition of a primitive divisor.

Definition 4.1. Let P ⊂ F[x] be a class of polynomials. We say that a polynomial g ∈ F[x] is a
primitive divisor for P if it satisfies the following two conditions.



                                                      19
  (1) For every f ∈ P and every t ∈ N, the polynomial gcd(f, gt ) is a power of g. Equivalently, for
      every f ∈ P, there exists k ⩾ 0 and a polynomial g̃ coprime to g such that f = gk · g̃.

  (2) No non-scalar multiple of g satisfies the first condition.

Example 4.2. An irreducible polynomial f ∈ P is clearly a primitive divisor for P.

Remark 4.3. Every primitive divisor for P divides some polynomial f ∈ P. Indeed, suppose that g
is a primitive divisor for P that does not divide any polynomial in P. Then, for every f ∈ P, we
have gcd(f, g) = 1, and hence g is coprime to every element of P. It follows that gcd(f, g2 ) = 1 for
every f ∈ P, so g2 also satisfies the first condition. This contradicts the second condition for g.
Remark 4.4. It is not true that primitive divisors for P are necessarily elements of P. Consider for
example the class of polynomials P = {g2 , g3 } for some non-constant polynomial g ∈ F[x]. Then,
the only primitive divisor (up to multiplication by scalars) for P is g, which is not an element of P.
    In some sense, primitive divisors are to a class of polynomials P what irreducible polynomials
are to the class of all polynomials. To make this statement precise, we prove that every f ∈ P can
be written uniquely as a product of primitive divisors. That is, primitive divisors for P are indeed
the ”minimal building blocks” for the polynomials in P.
    To prove that, we start by showing that any two different primitive divisors for a class P are
coprime.

Lemma 4.5. Let P ⊂ F[x] be a class of polynomials, and let g and h be two non-associate primitive divisors
for it. Then gcd(g, h) = 1.

Proof. Suppose for the sake of contradiction that gcd(g, h) ̸= 1, and let f1 , . . . , fN be the irreducible
factors of it, for N ⩾ 1. Write:
                                 Y         Y e            Y              Y r
                          g=       fi ui ·   gj j , h =         fi v i ·  hj j                          (13)
                                  1⩽i⩽N              j                     1⩽i⩽N              j

where fi , gj , hj are all different irreducible polynomials, and all the exponents ui , vi , ej , rj are pos-
itive integers.
    We claim that the vectors (u1 , . . . , uN ) and (v1 , . . . , vN ) are proportional. Indeed, consider some
ϕ ∈ P for which g|ϕ. Then, by the first condition of Definition 4.1, we must have k ′ and t ′ for
which
                                           ′
                                  ϕ = gk · g̃, where gcd(g, g̃) = 1 and
                                               ′
                                     ϕ = ht · h̃, where gcd(h, h̃) = 1 .
Therefore, by considering the multiplicities of the fi ’s as factors of ϕ, we must have that

                                         k ′ (u1 , . . . , un ) = t ′ (v1 , . . . , vn ).                         (14)

Let (k, t) := (k ′ / gcd(k ′ , t ′ ), t ′ / gcd(k ′ , t ′ )). That is, (k, t) is the smallest pair of positive integers
satisfying (14). Consider the polynomial given by:
                                               Y                  Y     ke
                                                                               Y       tr
                                      ϕ̃ =               fku
                                                          i
                                                            i
                                                              ·       gj j ·         hj j .                       (15)
                                             1⩽i⩽n                j              j

Note that as k, t ⩾ 1 (k ⩾ 1 because g|ϕ, and t ⩾ 1 by (14)), ϕ is a non-trivial multiple of g and h.



                                                               20
    We claim that ϕ̃ satisfies the first condition of Definition 4.1. Indeed, let ψ ∈ P. Since g and h
are primitive divisors, we can write:
                                      ψ = gk0 · ĝ where gcd(g, ĝ) = 1.                                       (16)
                                             t0
                                      ψ = h · ĥ where gcd(h, ĥ) = 1.
By examining the multiplicities of fi as factors of ψ, we get that k0 (u1 , . . . , uN ) = t0 (v1 , . . . , vN ). As
(k, t) is the minimal pair of positive integers satisfying (14), we must have that k0 = ck and t0 = ct
for some non-negative integer c. Now, by plugging this information back to (16), it can be easily
checked that ψ = ϕ̃c · ψ̂ for some polynomial ψ̂ coprime to ϕ̃. This proves that ϕ̃ satisfies the
first condition of Definition 4.1. However, this is a contradiction to the fact that g and h satisfy the
second condition of it. This proves that g and h cannot share an irreducible factor, and completes
the proof.

    We next state a lemma capturing the intuition that primitive divisors play a similar role to
irreducible polynomials.
Lemma 4.6. Let P be some class of polynomials, and let f ∈ P. Then, f can be uniquely written as a product
of primitive divisors for P.
Proof. Let f ∈ P. Consider some irreducible factor f0 of f. Clearly, f0 satisfies the first condition of
Definition 4.1. Let g0 be a maximal divisor of f that satisfies the property that it is divisible by f0
and satisfies the first condition of Definition 4.1. We claim that g0 must be a primitive divisor. For
this we must show that it satisfies the second condition of Definition 4.1. Assume for a contradic-
tion that there is some h, which is a non-trivial multiple of g0 , that satisfies the first condition of
Definition 4.1. By maximality of g0 , h ∤ f. From the first condition we obtain that gcd(f, h) = 1.
However, since f0 | g0 and g0 | h, we get that f0 | gcd(f, h), in contradiction.
    Thus, we identified some primitive divisor g0 |f. By definition, we can write f = gk          0 g̃0 with
gcd(g0 , g̃0 ) = 1. If g̃0 = 1 then we are done. If not, fix some irreducible factor f1 |g̃0 . By the same
reasoning as before, there is a multiple of f1 , denoted g1 , which is a primitive divisor for P, and
that divides f. By Lemma 4.5, and by the fact that f1 divides g1 but not g0 , it follows that we must
                                                                        0 k1
have that g0 and g1 are coprime. Therefore, we can write f = gk        0 g1 g̃1 , where g̃1 is coprime to
both g0 and g1 . Continuing this way, we can obtain the desired factorization of f to a product of
primitive divisors.
    To end the proof, we note that the uniqueness of the factorization thus obtained follows from
Lemma 4.5.

    We can therefore define the multiplicity with which a primitive divisor divides a polynomial
in the class.
Definition 4.7. Let f ∈ P, and let g be a primitive divisor for P. The multiplicity of g as a factor of
f, denoted by vg (f), is the power of g appearing in the factorization of f to primitive divisors.
   Next, we discuss the connection of the definition of primitive divisors and the non-degeneracy
condition of [BV25]. The proof of the next lemma follows from [BV25, Lemma 4.5,4.6].
Lemma 4.8 ([BV25, Lemma 4.5,4.6]). Let ϕ and ψ be two non-associate irreducible polynomials. Fix
some i for which xi ∈ var(ϕ). Suppose that there are s-sparse polynomials f and g of bounded individual
degree d so that ϕ|f and ψ|g. Denote
                                   with vϕ (f) the multiplicity of ϕ as a factor of f, and similarly for
                                    vϕ (f) vϕ (g)
ψ and g. Suppose that the matrix                      is invertible. Then, the polynomials ϕ(G(m,i) ) and
                                    vψ (f) vψ (g)
                                                                                   3
ψ(G(m,i) ) are coprime as polynomials in u for some explicit m = poly(n, (d2 )!, sd ).

                                                        21
    The condition of the lemma can be better understood in terms of primitive divisors, as demon-
strated by the following claim.

Claim 4.9. Let P be a class of polynomials, and let ϕ and ψ be two irreducible polynomials that divide some
(not necessarily the same) polynomial in P. Then, the following are equivalent.

  (1) ϕ and ψ divide the same primitive divisor of P.
                                                                 
                                                    vϕ (f) vϕ (g)
  (2) For every f, g ∈ P it holds that the matrix                   is not invertible.
                                                   vψ (f) vψ (g)

Proof. First, note that the term ”the primitive divisor that ϕ divides” is well defined, as by
Lemma 4.5 there is at most one (up to multiplication by scalars) such primitive divisor, and by
the fact that ϕ divides some polynomial in P there is at least one such divisor; clearly, the same is
also true for ψ.
    For the implication ((1)) =⇒ ((2)) note that if h is the primitive divisor that ϕ and ψ divide,
by Lemma 4.5 and Lemma 4.6 it follows that for every f ∈ P we have that (vϕ (f), vψ (f)) =
vh (f)(vϕ (h), vψ (h)). Therefore, it is clear that for every pair f, g ∈ P the vectors (vϕ (f), vψ (f))
and (vϕ (g), vψ (g)) are proportional, and hence the matrix whose columns are these vectors is not
invertible.
    The next claim establishes the implication ((2)) =⇒ ((1)).
Claim 4.10. Let h1 and h2 be two  non-associate primitive
                                                             divisors for a class P. Then, there are polynomials
                                  vh1 (f1 ) vh1 (f2 )
f1 , f2 ∈ P for which the matrix                        is invertible.
                                  vh2 (f1 ) vh2 (f2 )

Proof. Consider the set of vectors (vh1 (f), vh2 (f))f∈P . To prove the claim, it is enough to prove that
there are two independent vectors in this set. Suppose for the sake of contradiction that this is not
the case. Then, it follows that the Z-span of this set is a one dimensional lattice, generated by some
vector (k, t).
    We claim that h := hk      t
                            1 h2 must satisfy the first condition of Definition 4.1. Indeed, consider
                                                                           vh (f) vh (f)
some element f̃ ∈ P. By Lemma 4.6 we can write f̃ = h1 1 h2 2 g, for some polynomial g
coprime to both h1 and h2 . By definition of (k, t), there is some non-negative integer c for which
(vh1 (f), vh2 (f)) = c(k, t). Thus, f̃ = hck ct      c
                                          1 h2 g = h g, where g is coprime to h. That is, h indeed
satisfies the first condition of Definition 4.1. As h1 is a primitive divisor, vh1 (f̃) ⩾ 1 for some
f̃ ∈ P, and therefore we must have that k ⩾ 1. Similarly, we obtain t ⩾ 1. That is, h is a non-
trivial multiple of h1 and h2 satisfying the first condition of Definition 4.1, in contradiction. This
concludes the proof.

   Observe that Claim 4.10 implies ¬ ((1)) =⇒ ¬((2)). Indeed, let h1 and h2 be the primitive divi-
sors that ϕ and ψ divide, respectively. Suppose
                                                    that h1 andh2 are not associated. By Claim 4.10,
                                               vh1 (f1 ) vh1 (f2 )
there are f1 , f2 ∈ P such that the matrix                          is invertible. From divisibility we
                                               vh2 (f1 ) vh2 (f2 )
conclude                                                                   
                                                        vϕ (f1 ) vϕ (f2 )
                               vh1 (f1 ) vh1 (f2 )
                                                     =  vvϕψ(h 1)
                                                             (f1 )
                                                                   vϕ (h1 ) 
                                                                   vψ (f2 )
                               vh2 (f1 ) vh2 (f2 )
                                                                vψ (h2 )     vψ (h2 )

and therefore
                                                                                           
                        vϕ (f1 ) vϕ (f2 )                                 vh1 (f1 ) vh1 (f2 )
                  det                           = vϕ (h1 )vψ (h2 ) det                          ̸= 0.
                        vψ (f1 ) vψ (f2 )                                 vh2 (f1 ) vh2 (f2 )

                                                          22
                                  
                 vϕ (f1 ) vϕ (f2 )
Hence the matrix                     is invertible. This concludes the proof.
                 vψ (f1 ) vψ (f2 )

    Claim 4.9 explains in a more natural way the condition from Lemma 4.8: if the matrix of mul-
tiplicities is degenerate, then ϕ and ψ divide the same primitive divisor for P(n, s, d), and are
therefore ”inseparable” from the point of view of this class. This motivates us to formulate an
analog of Lemma 4.8 for every two primitive divisors of P(n, s, d).

Lemma 4.11. Let ϕ and ψ be two non-associate primitive divisors for P(n, s, d). Fix some 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n such
                                                                     3
that xi ∈ var(ϕ). Then for some explicit value m = poly(n, (d2 )!, sd ) we have that ϕ(G(m,i) ) is coprime
to ψ(G(m,i) ), when both are viewed as polynomials in u.

    The proof will be nearly identical to the proof of Lemma 4.8, which captures [BV25, Lemma
4.6], with the main difference being that Lemma 4.8 concerns irreducible polynomials while
Lemma 4.11 considers primitive divisors. We give a sketch of it for the sake of completeness.

Proof. In this proof, whenever we refer to a primitive divisor, we mean a primitive divisor for
P(n, s, d).
   By Claim 4.9, there are f1 , f2 ∈ P(n, s, d) for which the matrix
                                                                    
                                      k1 t 1         vϕ (f1 ) vϕ (f2 )
                                               :=
                                      k2 t 2        vψ (f1 ) vψ (f2 )

is invertible. Let h1 = ft11 +t2 and h2 = fk
                                           2
                                             1 +k2
                                                   . By a simple calculation it can be shown that, up to
switching h1 and h2 , we have h1 = gcd(h1 , h2 )ϕa H1 and h2 = gcd(h1 , h2 )ψb H2 , where a, b ⩾ 1
and H1 , H2 are coprime to ϕ, ψ (by unique factorization and properties of primitive divisors).
    Consider the Sylvester matrix of Mxi (h1 , h2 ). As both f1 and f2 have individual degrees
bounded by d we have that k1 + k2 , m1 + m2 ⩽ 2d. Therefore, h1 and h2 are s2d -sparse polynomials
of bounded individual degree 2d2 . Thus, by Lemma 2.20, determinants of minors of Mxi (h1 , h2 )
              3
are (4d2 )!s8d -sparse polynomials of individual degree at most 8d4 . Lemma 3.4 implies that for
                                                     3    2                   3
                            m = (n(8d4 )((4d2 )!s8d )) = poly(n, (d2 )!, sd )

no nonzero determinant of a minor vanishes when composing with G(m,i) . Therefore, it follows
that
                   rank(Mxi (h1 , h2 )) = rank(Mu (h1 (G(m,i) ), h2 (G(m,i) ))) .
Lemma 2.20((4)) then ensures that degxi (gcd(h1 , h2 )) = degu (gcd(h1 (G(m,i) ), h2 (G(m,i) ))).
Hence, composition with G(m,i) did not change the degree in u. Consequently, ϕ(G(m,i) ) and
ψ(G(m,i) ) are coprime as polynomials in u, since otherwise their common factor would increase
the degree of the gcd.
    This concludes the sketch of the proof. We note that in Lemma 4.15, we prove a similar claim,
where we explain in more detail the technical points in the argument above. These are also ex-
plained, of course, in [BV25, Lemma 4.5,4.6].

   We next state an important corollary.

Corollary 4.12. Let ϕ ∈ P(n, s, d) be an irreducible polynomial, and let ψ ∈ PFactors (n, s, d) be an irre-
ducible factor of some g ∈ P(n, s, d), which is not associate to ϕ. Fix some 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n such that xi ∈ var(ϕ).
                                                3
Then, for an explicit m = poly(n, (d2 )!, sd ), we have that ϕ(G(m,i) ) is coprime to ψ(G(m,i) ), when
                                                                                                    2
viewed as polynomials in u. Moreover, if ϕ is multiquadratic, we can take m = poly(n, (d2 )!, sd ).

                                                     23
Proof. Intuitively, this should follow from Lemma 4.11 (recalling that an irreducible polynomial
in P(n, s, d) is also a primitive divisor for it Example 4.2). Technically speaking we have in hand
an irreducible polynomial ψ, which is not necessarily a primitive divisor (as it might not belong
to P(n, s, d)). We get around this issue in a similar manner to the proof of Claim 4.9. We instead
consider the (unique, up to multiplication by scalars) primitive divisor ψ̃ that ψ divides. Clearly ϕ
and ψ̃ are non-associate, so we can just apply Lemma 4.11 with ϕ and ψ̃ and conclude the claim.
    For the ”moreover” part, we note that the proof of Lemma 4.11 actually gives a better result
when ϕ is multiquadratic. We describe what changes should be made in the proof of Lemma 4.11
to see it; from now on, we use the notations from that argument.
    In this case, as ϕ ∈ P(n, s, d) is irreducible, one can take f1 = ϕ, and f2 to be some polynomial
that ψ̃ divides. Therefore, we have that k1 = 1, k2 = 0. It follows that:

   • h1 = ft11 +t2 = ϕt1 +t2 is a polynomial of degree at most 2(t1 + t2 ) ⩽ 4d, instead of 2d2 , as a
     polynomial in xi . Its sparsity is bounded above by s2d .

   • h2 = fk2
              1 +k2
                    = f2 is a polynomial of degree at most d, instead of 2d2 , as a polynomial in xi .
     Its sparsity is bounded above by s.
                                                                                                2
As a result, it follows that any determinant of a minor of Mxi (h1 , h2 ) is an sO(d ) -sparse poly-
nomial, of bounded individual degree at most O(d2 ). This implies that it is sufficient to take
                      2
m = poly(n, (d2 )!, sd ) in this case.

4.1.2   Arbitrary Characteristic Algorithms
Our next goal is to obtain a divisibility testing result for products of sparse polynomials of bounded
individual degree. To do that, we need the following lemma, which is the heart of the divisibility
testing algorithm. This lemma will play a crucial part in Section 5, when we prove our rational
interpolation result.
                                                            3
Lemma 4.13. There is a deterministic poly(n, (d2 )!, sd , ℓ)-time algorithm that, given blackbox access to
a product f of ℓ (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials, and blackbox access to a primitive divisor ϕ for P(n, s, d),
returns the multiplicity of ϕ as a factor of f (in the sense of Definition 4.7). In fact, the algorithm only needs
                                                                                                                3
to know the values of f on the image of the generator G(m) , for some explicit value m = poly(n, (d2 )!, sd ).
Moreover, if ϕ is an irreducible s-sparse polynomial, this algorithm works if f is a product of polynomials in
                                                                                                                 2
PFactors (n, s, d) (rather than P(n, s, d)); if furthermore ϕ is multiquadratic, taking m = poly(n, (d2 )!, sd )
                                                                2
suffices, and the running time reduces to poly(n, (d2 )!, sd , ℓ).
                                                                                  3
Proof. Fix some i for which xi ∈ var(ϕ), and let m = poly(n, (d2 )!, sd ) so that the conclusion of
Lemma 4.11 holds. Corollary 3.6 implies that degu (ϕ(G(m,i) )) = degxi (ϕ) ⩾ 1.
                                           Q
    By Lemma 4.6 we can write f = ϕk · ψj , where ψj are primitive divisors for P(n, s, d) that
are not associate to ϕ. From Lemma 4.11 it follows that for every ψj we have that ϕ(G(m,i) ) is
coprime to ψj (GQ(m,i) ), when both are viewed as polynomials in u. In particular, we have that
gcdu (ϕ(G(m,i) ), ψj (G(m,i) )) = 1. As degu (ϕ(G(m,i) )) ⩾ 1, we must have that the highest
power of ϕ(G(m,i) ) that divides f as a polynomial in u is exactly k.
    Thus, to recover the desired multiplicity, we will calculate, for every 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n, the highest
power of ϕ(G(m,i) ) that divides f as polynomials in u, and return the minimal value. This power
can be calculated by interpolating both ϕ(G(m,i) ) and f(G(m,i) ) using Lemma 2.9 and computing
the highest power of ϕ(G(m,i) ) dividing f(G(m,i) ) as polynomial in u (just by regular polynomial



                                                       24
division, there is no need for polynomial factorization here). Note that the degree of both polyno-
mials is at most poly(n, d, s, m, ℓ) so the claim on the running time holds. This ends the description
of the algorithm.
    As for the ”moreover” part, it follows from the same proof, by considering the factorization into
irreducible polynomials (rather than to primitive divisors), and by replacing the use of Lemma 4.11
with Corollary 4.12.

   We are finally ready to obtain our divisibility testing result. This is a generalization of the
divisibility testing result of [Vol17, Theorem 7].
                                                                   3
Theorem 4.14. There exists a deterministic poly(n, (d2 )!, sd , ℓ)-time algorithm that, given blackbox ac-
cess to two products f, g of ℓ (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials, decides if f|g. Moreover, if all irreducible factors
of f are in fact sparse (that is, f is a product of irreducible (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials), this algorithm works
even if g is a product of polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d) (rather than in P(n, s, d)); if furthermore all factors
                                                                                                            2
of f are multiquadratic, then the running time of this algorithm can be reduced to poly(n, (d2 )!, sd , ℓ).
                                           3
Proof. Fix some m = poly(n, (d2 )!, sd ) such that Lemma 4.13 applies. For every 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n check if
f(G(m,i) ) divides g(G(m,i) ), and return that f|g if all these checks passed. Clearly, if f|g we return
the correct answer. Suppose now that f ∤ g. By Lemma 4.6, we know that there is a primitive
divisor ϕ whose multiplicity as a factor of f exceeds its multiplicity in g. Then, by the proof of
Lemma 4.13 it follows that for every i for which xi ∈ var(ϕ), the highest power k for which
ϕ(G(m,i) )k divides f(G(m,i) ) actually equals the multiplicity of ϕ as a factor of f, and analogously
for g(G(m,i) ). In particular, for such values of i it cannot be the case that f(G(m,i) )|g(G(m,i) ), so we
will indeed return that f ∤ g.
    As for the ”moreover” part, it follows from the same proof, when considering the factoriza-
tion of f and g into irreducible polynomials (rather than to primitive divisors), and by using the
”moreover” part of Lemma 4.13.

    As we saw in this subsection, the method of [BV25] is pretty strong for dealing with problems
concerning the factorization of products of sparse polynomials of bounded individual degree. In-
deed, we will see in Section 5 that Lemma 4.13 is what we need for our rational interpolation result,
and as a consequence, for our algorithm that recovers multiquadratic sparse irreducible factors of
a product of sparse polynomials of bounded individual degree.
    However, this method has some limitations. Consider for example the problem of deciding if a
given product of sparse polynomials of bounded individual degree is a complete power. A natural
thing to do is to apply an algorithm that is similar to the one presented in Theorem 4.14 - check if
f(G(m,i) ) are complete powers for every i. This algorithm, however, does not work. To see why,
suppose our input polynomial is a primitive divisor of the form ϕ = ϕ1 ϕ2 where ϕ1 , ϕ2 are two
non-associate irreducible polynomials. The methods of this subsection do not say anything about
the interaction of ϕ1 (G(m,i) ) and ϕ2 (G(m,i) ). In particular, it might be the case that for every i,
ϕ1 (G(m,i) ) = ϕ2 (G(m,i) ), so that ϕ(G(m,i) ) is a perfect square.
    The goal of the next subsection is to generalize the results of this subsection from dealing only
with primitive divisors to dealing with irreducible polynomials. This allows us, for example, to
make the suggested complete power testing work. Moreover, it enables us to generalize all re-
sults from the class of products of sparse polynomials to the class of products of factors of sparse
polynomials.
    Our generalization, however, only works for fields of characteristic zero, or when the charac-
teristic is larger than twice the bound on the individual degree. In particular, the results of the
present subsection are the best we can do for small characteristic fields.


                                                        25
4.2     Zero or Large Characteristic Results
In this subsection we prove stronger versions of the results of Section 4.1, both in terms of gener-
ality and running times. However, the results of this subsection are valid only when char(F) = 0
or when char(F) > 2d (where d is the bound on the individual degree).
    Similar to Section 4.1, in Section 4.2.1 we build the tools that we will use in our algorithms, and
in Section 4.2.2 we give our algorithms.

4.2.1    Zero or Large Characteristic Tools
The main technical tool we will need is a generalization of Lemma 4.11 and Lemma 4.13 for the
case of irreducible factors rather than primitive divisors. We prove the following analogue of
Lemma 4.11.

Lemma 4.15. Let F be a field of characteristic zero, or of characteristic larger than 2d. Let ϕ, ψ be non-
associate irreducible polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d) that divide the (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials f, and g
(possibly identical to f), respectively. Fix some i for which xi ∈ var(ϕ). Then, for some explicit value
m = poly(n, d!, sd ), we have that ϕ(G(m,i) ) is coprime to ψ(G(m,i) ), when viewed as polynomials in u.
Moreover, ϕ(G(m,i) ) and ψ(G(m,i) ) are both square free as polynomials in u.

Proof. Fix some i for which xi ∈ var(ϕ). From now on, view all polynomials as polynomials in xi .
Consider                  ′
      Q M     xi (fg, (fg) ), the Sylvester matrix of fg and its formal derivative with respect to xi . Let
           ej
fg = j hj be the factorization of fg into irreducible factors (as a polynomial in xi over F(x \ xi )).
Claim 4.16. Let FQas in Lemma 4.15. Let f ∈ F[x] be a non-constant univariate polynomial of degree at most
                         ei                                                                              ′
P Suppose f = i hi is the factorization of f into irreducible polynomials. Then dim(ker (M(f, f )) =
2d.
   i deg(hi )(ei − 1).
                        P
Proof. Clearly, f ′ = i ei hei i −1 hi′ ĥi , where we denote by ĥi the product of the factors of f different
than hi . As hi is a non-constant polynomial of degree at most 2d, the conditions on char(F) imply
hi′ ̸= 0. Since hi is irreducible, it must be the case that it is coprime to hi′ . Moreover, as hi and ĥi are
clearly coprime, and as ei ̸= 0 (because of the condition on char(F)), we have that the multiplicity
of hi as a factor of f ′ is precisely ei − 1. As hi are the only irreducible factors of f, it follows
                    Q
that gcd(f, f ′ ) = i hei i −1 . Lemma 2.20 then implies that dim(ker (M(f, f ′ )) = deg(gcd(f, f ′ )) =
      Q              P
deg( i hei i −1 ) = i deg(hi )(ei − 1), as claimed.

    Continuing with the proof, we     P clearly have that degxi (fg) ⩽ 2d. Therefore, by Claim 4.16
r := dim(ker (Mxi (fg, (fg) ′ ))) = j degxi (hj )(ej − 1). As Mxi (fg, (fg) ′ ) is an (4d − 1) × (4d − 1)
matrix, it contains an invertible (4d − 1 − r) × (4d − 1 − r) minor M. As fg and (fg) ′ are s2 -
sparse, it follows from Lemma 2.20 that the entries of M are s2 -sparse polynomials of bounded
individual degree 2d, and hence det M is an (4d)!s8d -sparse polynomial of individual degree 8d2 .
                                                                     2
Therefore, Corollary 3.5 implies that for m = (n(8d2 )((4d)!s8d )) = poly(n, d!, sd ), it holds that
det M(G(m,i) ) ̸= 0 (where we substitute G(m,i) to all coordinates except the i-th). Note that
det M(G(m,i) ) is precisely the determinant of a (4d − 1 − r) × (4d − 1 − r) minor of the matrix
Mu (fg(G(m,i) ), (fg ′ )(G(m,i) )), and therefore it follows that

                             dim(ker Mu (fg(G(m,i) ), (fg) ′ (G(m,i) )) ⩽ r.
                                                                       
                                                                                                         (17)
                                     Q                               Q
Now, we know that fg(G(m,i) ) = j hj (G(m,i) )ej ; let fg(G(m,i) ) = k h̃rkk be the factorization
into irreducible factors of fg(G(m,i) ). We now claim the following.


                                                     26
Claim 4.17.                  X                            X
                                  deg h̃k (rk − 1) ⩾            deg hj (G(m,i) )(ej − 1)
                              k                            j

and equality holds if and only if the set {hj (G(m,i) )} is a set of square free, pairwise coprime polynomials.

Proof. By considering the factorization into irreducible polynomials, we can write hj (G(m,i) ) =
Q ej,k                                   P
  k h̃k . Now, for every k we have that    j ej ej,k = rk . Therefore:
           X                          X               X
                 deg h̃k (rk − 1) =       deg h̃k (       ej ej,k − 1)
             k                        k               j
                                      X               X                      X               X
                                  ⩾       deg h̃k (       ej,k (ej − 1)) =        (ej − 1)       ej,k deg h̃k
                                      k               j                       j              k
                                      X
                                  =       deg hj (G(m,i) )(ej − 1).
                                      j
                                                                                       P
This proves the inequality. Note that equality holds if and only if, for every k, j ej,k = 1. But this
clearly holds if and only if the set {hj (G(m,i) )} is a set of square free, pairwise coprime polynomials,
as claimed.

    Thus, from Claim 4.17, Claim 4.16 and (17) we deduce that:
                                                                  X
                   r ⩾ dim(ker Mu (fg(G(m,i) ), (fg(G(m,i) )) ′ ) =  deg h̃k (rk − 1)
                                                                                  k
                        X                                      X
                    ⩾       deg hj (G(m,i) )(ej − 1) =             deg hj (ej − 1) = r
                        j                                      j

Here we used that deg hj (G(m,i) ) = deg hj , where the degree is with respect to u in the LHS and
the with respect to xi in the RHS. Indeed, note that when viewed as an element of F[x], we have
that hj ∈ PFactors (n, s2 , 2d), therefore the equality follows from Corollary 3.6.
    Thus, it follows that we are in the equality case of Claim 4.17, and therefore the set {hj (G(m,i) )}
is a set of square free, pairwise coprime polynomials. This ends the proof, as {hj } contains, by
definition, ϕ. If ψ is also there then we are done. Otherwise, in the case where xi ∈    / var(ψ), the
claim is trivial.

Remark 4.18. In fact, we can use the results of Section 4.1 to say something even if d < char(F) ⩽ 2d:
Consider the primitive divisors h1 , h2 that ϕ, ψ divide. There are two cases:

   • If h1 and h2 are not associates, then the claim follows from Lemma 4.11, but now we must
                                3
     take m = poly(n, (d2 )!, sd ).

   • If h1 = h2 , consider some h̃ ∈ P(n, s, d) so that h1 = h2 |h̃. Then, we can replace the poly-
     nomial fg in the proof above by the polynomial h̃ and get the result for m = poly(n, d!, sd ).
     Note that now degxi (h̃) ⩽ d, so indeed we only need that char(F) ⩾ d + 1 (or char(F) = 0).

4.2.2   Zero or Large Characteristic Algorithms
From Lemma 4.15, we are able to obtain the following generalization of Lemma 4.13.




                                                           27
Lemma 4.19. Let F be a field of characteristic zero, or of characteristic larger than 2d. There is a deter-
ministic poly(n, d!, sd , ℓ)-time algorithm that, given blackbox access to a product, f, of ℓ polynomials in
PFactors (n, d, s) and blackbox access to an irreducible polynomial ϕ in PFactors (n, s, d), both defined over F,
returns the multiplicity of ϕ as a factor of f. In fact, the algorithm only needs to know the values of f and ϕ
on the image of the generator G(m) for some explicit m = poly(n, d!, sd ).
Proof. Let m = poly(n, d!, sd ) as required by Lemma 4.15. For every 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n, using Lemma 2.9,
we can recover ϕ(G(m,i) ) and f(G(m,i) ). Therefore, using regular division of univariate polynomi-
als, we can find the largest k for which for every i it holds that ϕ(G(m,i) )k |f(G(m,i) ) as polynomials
in u.
    Denote with t the multiplicity of ϕ as a factor of f. We claim that k = t. Indeed, for every i it
holds that ϕ(G(m,i) )k |f(G(m,i) ), so clearly t ⩽ k. For the inequality in the other direction, fix some
                                                 Q
i for which xi ∈ var(ϕ), and write f = ϕk · j ψj where ψj are all irreducible and non-associate
to ϕ. Then, by the Lemma 4.15,   Q ϕ(G(m,i) ) is coprime to ψj (G(m,i) ) for any j (as polynomials in
u), and therefore ϕ(G(m,i) ) ∤ j ψj (G(m,i) ). Note that here we used that xi ∈ var(ϕ), as in this
case we know that degu (ϕ(G(m,i) )) = degxi (ϕ) ⩾ 1 by Corollary 3.6. Thus, ϕ(G(m,i) ) divides
f(G(m,i) ) precisely k times as polynomials in u, and the lemma follows.
    As we did in the previous subsection, we can use the proof of Lemma 4.19 to obtain a divisi-
bility testing result. Since the results of the present subsection apply to general irreducible factors
of sparse polynomials, the resulting divisibility testing algorithms are valid not just for products
of sparse polynomials, but for products of factors of sparse polynomials. In contrast, the results in
Section 4.1.2 apply only to products of polynomials from P(n, s, d).
Theorem 4.20. Let F be a field of characteristic zero or larger than 2d. There exists a deterministic
poly(n, d!, sd , ℓ)-time algorithm that given blackbox access to polynomials f and g, such that each is a
product of ℓ polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d), decides if f|g.
Proof. Fix some m = poly(n, d!, sd ), satisfying the conclusion of Lemma 4.19. For every 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n
check if f(G(m,i) ) divides g(G(m,i) ) (as polynomials in u; throughout this argument, we view them
in this way), and return that f|g if all these checks passed. Note that no polynomial factorization is
needed to do that; regular univariate polynomial division actually suffices. Clearly, if f|g we return
the correct answer. Suppose now that f ∤ g; let ϕ be an irreducible factor whose multiplicity as a
factor of f is larger than its multiplicity as a factor of g. Then, by the proof of Lemma 4.19 it follows
that for every i for which xi ∈ var(ϕ), the highest powers k1 , k2 for which ϕ(G(m,i) )k1 divides
f(G(m,i) ) and ϕ(G(m,i) )k2 divides g(G(m,i) ), actually equal the multiplicity of ϕ as a factor of f
and g, respectively. In particular, for these values of i it cannot be the case that f(G(m,i) )|g(G(m,i) ),
so we will indeed return that f ∤ g.
    We can now prove Theorem 1.16. We repeat its statement for convenience.
Theorem 1.16. Let F be a field of characteristic zero or larger than 2d. There exists a deterministic
poly(n, d!, sd , ℓ)-time algorithm that, given blackbox access to two polynomials (over F) f and g that are
products of ℓ polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d), decides if f|g. Moreover, if f and g are actually products of
ℓ polynomials in P(n, s, d), there is an algorithm that works over arbitrary fields, whose running time is
                   3
poly(n, (d2 )!, sd , ℓ)
Proof. The proof follows from combining Theorem 4.14 and Theorem 4.20.
   Taking a closer look at the proof of Theorem 4.20, we are able to obtain Theorem 1.15 that
generalizes a result of [BV25]. As mentioned at the end of the previous subsection, we currently
do not know a version that works over arbitrary fields, as we need the full power of Lemma 4.15.

                                                       28
Theorem 1.15. Let F be a field of characteristic zero or larger than 2d. There is a deterministic
poly(n, d!, sd , ℓ)-time algorithm that, given blackbox access to a polynomial f that is a product of ℓ polyno-
mials in PFactors (n, s, d) (defined over F) and a positive integer e, returns if f is a complete e-th power.

Proof. As before, fix some large enough m = poly(n, d!, sd ) so that Lemma 4.15 holds. For every
1 ⩽ i ⩽ n compute the factorization of f(G(m,i) ), using Lemma 2.9 and Theorem 2.8. From these
factorizations, it is easy to check, for every 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n, if f(G(m,i) ) is a complete e-th power. Indeed,
a polynomial is an e-th power if and only if every irreducible factor of it divides it with multiplicity
divisible by e, and its leading coefficient is an e-th power as an element of F. The former can be
easily checked for f(G(m,i) ) from its factorization into irreducible factors. As for the latter, it can
be directly checked for every polynomial h ̸= 0. For instance:
                                                                                                        q−1
     • If F = Fq for some prime power q, check if the leading coefficient α of h satisfies that α e =
       1.

     • If F = Q, use Theorem 2.6 to check if xe − α has a rational root, where α is the leading
       coefficient of h.

We return that f is a complete e-th power if f(G(m,i) ) is a complete e-th power for every 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n.
     Clearly, if f is a complete e-th power, the algorithm returns the right answer. So, suppose that
f is not a complete e-th power. Then, by the discussion above, one of the following must hold.

     • There’s an irreducible factor ϕ|f so that its multiplicity as a factor of f is some integer k, not
       divisible by e. Consider some value i for which xi ∈ var(ϕ), and consider some irreducible
       factor ϕ̃ of ϕ(G(m,i) ). We note that such an irreducible factor of positive degree in u exists,
       by Corollary 3.6. We claim that the multiplicity of ϕ̃ as a factor of f(G(m,i) ) is k. Indeed,
       by Lemma 4.15 it is coprime to ψ(G(m,i) ) for every irreducible ψ|f that is not associate to
       ϕ. In addition, it divides ϕ(G(m,i) ) precisely once (by the ”moreover” part of the lemma).
       Therefore ϕ̃ is an irreducible factor of f(G(m,i) ) that divides it exactly k times, hence f(G(m,i) )
       is not a complete e-th power. Thus, we will indeed return that f is not an e-th power.

     • f = αge for some g ∈ F[x] and α ∈ F, so that α is not an e-th power in F. In this case, for
       every 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n have that f(G(m,i) ) = αg(G(m,i) )e is not an e-th power as well, hence we
       indeed return that f is not an e-th power.

This completes the proof.


5     A Rational Interpolation Theorem
In this section we prove our rational interpolation result.
    We state our rational interpolation result. The result requires a lot of information about the
functions involved, but in our applications we show how to obtain that information.

Theorem 5.1. Suppose we have blackbox access to some rational function of the form af
                                                                                   b , defined over a
field F, where:

    (1) a is an (n, s, d)-sparse polynomial.

    (2) We have blackbox access f, which is a product of ℓ polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d).

    (3) We have a set F of s-sparse irreducible factors of f, call them ϕi .


                                                         29
  (4) b is an s-sparse factor of f whose irreducible factors are all elements of F.
  (5) a and b are coprime.
Then, there is an algorithm that recovers a and b from evaluating af
                                                                   b on the image of the generator G(m)
for some explicit m (depending on char(F)), such that the running time is poly(m, ℓ), where:
   • If char(F) = 0 or char(F) > 2d, one can take m = poly(n, d!, sd ).
                                                     3
   • Over arbitrary fields, m = poly(n, (d2 )!, sd ). If we further assume that all elements of F are multi-
                                                         2
     quadratic, then we can take m = poly(n, (d2 )!, sd ).
Proof. Assume first that the characteristic of the field is zero or larger than 2d. Fix some m =
poly(n, d!, sd ) for which the conclusion of Lemma 4.19 holds. We start by recovering b. As all irre-
ducible factors of b belong to F, it suffices to understand the multiplicity of each ϕ ∈ F as a factor
of b. Fix such an irreducible factor ϕ ∈ F. Using Lemma 4.19 we can compute the multiplicity of
ϕ as a factor of f, which we denote by t.
     As a and b are coprime, it follows that, for any k, ϕk |b if and only if ϕt−k+1 ∤ af b . Therefore,
                                                                    af
it is sufficient to understand the multiplicity of ϕ as a factor of b . As f is a product of factors of
s-sparse polynomials, b|f, and a is s-sparse, afb is also a product of factors of s-sparse polynomials.
We can therefore apply Lemma 4.19 to learn the multiplicity of ϕ as a factor of af     b . We conclude
that we can learn the factorization of b into irreducible polynomials. In particular, we can explicitly
recover b using Lemma 3.4. To learn a, we can simply compute a(G(m) ) = f(G(m) )/b(G(m) ) and
apply Lemma 3.4.
     For fields of small characteristic, and the multiquadratic case, we repeat the same argument,
replacing the use of Lemma 4.19 by the ”moreover” part of Lemma 4.13.
    We next state a slight generalization of the theorem above that we will later use.
Theorem 5.2. Suppose we have blackbox access to a set of rational functions, defined over a field F, of the
       aj fj
form    b , for 1 ⩽ j ⩽ D, where:
  (1) aj is an (n, s, d)-sparse polynomial for every 1 ⩽ j ⩽ D.
  (2) f is a product of ℓ polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d) to which we have blackbox access.
  (3) We have a set F of s-sparse irreducible factors of f, call them ϕi .
  (4) b is an s-sparse factor of f whose irreducible factors are all elements of F.
  (5) gcd(a1 , . . . , aD , b) = 1.
                                                                              a fj
Then, there is an algorithm that recovers the aj -s and b from evaluations of bj on the image of the generator
G(m) , for some explicit m (depending on char(F)), such that the running time is poly(m, ℓ, D), where:
   • If char(F) = 0 or char(F) > 2d, one can take m = poly(n, d!, sd , D).
                                                              3
   • For arbitrary fields we have m = poly(n, (d2 )!, sd , D). If we further assume that all elements of F
                                                                 2
     are multiquadratic, then we can take m = poly(n, (d2 )!, sd , D).
Proof. The proof goes along the same lines as the proof of Theorem 5.1. The only difference is
that now, when recovering b, it is does not necessarily hold that gcd(aj , b) = 1. To overcome this
obstacle, observe that for every ϕ ∈ F of multiplicity t as a factor of f, it holds that, for every k ⩾ 1,
                                                                   a fj
ϕk |b if and only if there is 1 ⩽ j ⩽ D for which ϕtj−k+1 ∤ bj . This is true by the same reasoning
as before. Indeed, there is some 1 ⩽ j ⩽ D for which ϕ ∤ aj , as otherwise ϕ| gcd(a1 , . . . , aD , b). The
algorithm then proceeds in the exact same way as before.

                                                         30
6     Meta-Algorithm
In this section we present a meta-algorithm that will be used, with some variations, in the proofs of
Theorems 1.9, 1.10, 1.11, 1.12, 1.13 and 1.14, which state our algorithmic results. Since Theorem 1.10
follows as a corollary of Theorem 1.11, we will not discuss it here.
    Each of these algorithms follows the outline of the meta-algorithm, and in their proofs we will
refer to steps of the meta-algorithm and describe how they are implemented in the relevant setting.
    (1) Setting:
        We assume that we want to learn properties of a polynomial f such that f is either
         (1) (n, s, d)-sparse (Theorem 1.9, Theorem 1.12)
         (2) a product of polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d) (Theorem 1.11, Theorem 1.13, Theorem 1.14)
        and we want to find a list F(f) of divisors of f having certain properties. For every variable
        xi , the polynomial f|xi =0 is also of the same type as f. This is clearly true when f is (n, s, d)-
        sparse. When f is a product of polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d), this follows from Lemma 6.2,
        whose formulation and proof are given at the end of this section.
        In what follows, for the sake of convenience, we assume that f is an n + 1-variate polynomial
        and is an element of F[x0 , x].
    (2) Preprocessing:

         (1) Remove from f its largest monomial divisor (using Corollary 3.8).
         (2) Normalize f to get f̃(y, x) = f(yf0 , x1 , . . . , xn )/f0 . Set f̂ = f(y, G) for an appropriate
             generator G. Observe that f̃(y, x) is reverse monic with respect to y, and hence so is f̂. By
             Claim 2.3 it then follows that f̂ has at most degy (f̂) ⩽ d irreducible factors if f is (n, s, d)-
             sparse, and at most degy (f̂) ⩽ ℓd if f is a product of ℓ polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d).
         (3) Use Lemma 2.9 to interpolate f̂ as a polynomial in O(1) many variables. Then apply
             Theorem 2.8 to obtain its factorization into irreducible factors.

    (3) Recursive call to solve for f0 : Recursively solve the problem for f0 = f|x0 =0 , obtaining a list
        F(f0 ) of divisors not divisible by a monomial or irreducible factors, according to the problem.
    (4) Generating a list of candidate solutions:
                                         P                                        Pd ci i i
        By Claim 2.5, every divisor h = d          i
                                           i=0 ci x0 of f gives rise to a divisor  i=0 c0 f0 y of f̃ and
                                Pd ci (G) i i
        hence to a divisor ĥ = i=0 c0 (G) f0 y of f̂. We would like to get access to ci (G) in order
        to interpolate them, and through that obtain access to h. This leads us to the rational inter-
        polation problem, where we have some information about c0 (or even c0 itself) coming from
        F(f0 ).

         (1) In Theorem 1.9, Theorem 1.11 we will have that c0 ∈ F(f0 ). In Theorem 1.12 c0 is
             a product of elements of F(f0 ), but we have enough time to enumerate all relevant
             products so we can pretend that c0 ∈ F(f0 ).
             In fact, the above statement is not entirely accurate. The recursive call returns the set
             F(f0 ) of all divisors of f0 that are not divisible by a monomial, together with the largest
             monomial dividing f0 . It might be the case that c0 is a divisor of f0 that is divisible by a
             monomial. In this case, c0 will not belong to F(f0 ). However, c0 does lie in F(f0 ) up to a
             multiplication by a monomial. As we shall see, this suffices for our purposes.

                                                      31
      (2) In Theorem 1.13 and Theorem 1.14 the situation is a bit different. Here, c0 may be a
          product of elements from F(f0 ), and we cannot go over all possible ways to obtain c0 .
          However, in this case we will have that F(f0 ) contains all the irreducible factors of c0 ,
          which is what Theorem 5.2 requires.
                                         Pd           i we compose a list F as follows:
     Accordingly, for each factor ĥ =     i=0 ei y                        ĥ

      (1) When we have a list containing (up to multiplication by a monomial) the correct c0
          (Theorem 1.9, Theorem 1.11, Theorem 1.12), we iterate over all possible candidates
          c0 in that list. For     each such candidate, we interpolate the polynomials of the form
           (x1 · · · xn )d c0 /fi0 (G) ei in order to recover the coefficients ci . We then add to Fĥ those
                            P
          polynomials d                i
                               i=0 ci x0 that are valid candidates for the problem, after dividing by their
          largest monomial divisor:
           (1) In Theorem 1.9, Theorem 1.11 we keep all (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials.
                                                                                                  2
           (2) In Theorem 1.12 we keep all (n, S, d)-sparse polynomials, where S = sO(d log n) is
               the upper bound on sparsity of factors of (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials obtained in
               Theorem 2.14.
          The term (x1 · · · xn )d is needed to deal with the fact that c0 is in F(f0 ) only up to division
          by a monomial. We shall explain this point in full detail in the proof of Theorem 1.9.
      (2) If we only have a list of irreducible factors of c0 (Theorem 1.13 and Theorem 1.14), apply
          Theorem 5.2 on the coefficients of ĥ to recover potential c0 and c1 , . . . , cd . We put the
                                  P
          resulting polynomial d     i=0 ci x0 in the list Fĥ if:
                                             i

           (1) For Theorem 1.13 it is (n, S, d)-sparse.
           (2) For Theorem 1.14, it is multiquadratic and (n, s, d)-sparse.
          We note that, in both cases, we set Fĥ = F(f0 ) for ĥ = 1.

 (5) Pruning the list:
     Depending on the application we either have to keep divisors or irreducible divisors. We
     do that in two steps - we first find the divisors in the list of candidates, and then, if needed,
     identify the irreducible polynomials among them. The implementation of the two steps vary
     in the different algorithms; we give here a solution that works for all cases, though not always
     optimal, and provide a better implementation in the proofs of the algorithms.
     In all cases we apply Theorem 1.16 to remove from the list those polynomials that do not
     divide f. This already suffices for Theorem 1.9 and Theorem 1.11.
     To obtain irreducible divisors as required in Theorem 1.12, Theorem 1.13, Theorem 1.14, we
     apply Theorem 1.16 to each two polynomials g, h in the list of divisors to check whether g
     divides h, and keep only those divisors that are not divisible by any other divisor.

 (6) Computing multiplicities:
     To compute multiplicities, where needed, we apply Lemma 4.19 or Lemma 4.13, depending
     on the characteristic. Here as well there are better solutions in some cases; these are described
     in the proofs of the algorithms.

    The analysis of the running time of the algorithm depends on the exact setting. However, in all
settings we perform exactly one recursive call so the overall complexity is determined by the cost
of the different steps of the algorithm, and it does not blow up because of the recursive call.

                                                      32
Remark 6.1. The described meta-algorithm provides the outline that all our algorithms follow. It
is, however, not an algorithm that generalizes all of them. It is possible to formulate two concrete
algorithms which all our results follow - one generalizing Theorems 1.9, 1.11 and 1.12, and one
generalizing Theorems 1.13 and 1.14. However, the precise formulations of these general algo-
rithms are rather complicated and not particularly intuitive; hence, we have chosen not to include
them in the present paper.
    We close this section by proving the following lemma.

Lemma 6.2. Let f be a product of ℓ polynomials in PFactors (n + 1, s, d) ⊂ F[x0 , x]. Suppose further that x0 ∤
f, and let f0 be the free term of f as a polynomial in x0 . Then, f0 is a product of ℓ elements of PFactors (n, s, d) ⊂
F[x].
                      Q                                                                         P            j
Proof. Write f = ℓi=1 gi , where gi ∈ PFactors (n + 1, s, d). Denote further gi = d                j=0 gi,j x0 , where
gi,j ∈ F[x], and let ĝi be an (n + 1, s, d)-sparse polynomial that gi divides. First, note that f0 =
Qℓ
   i=1 gi,0 . Next, observe that gi,0 divides the trailing monomial of ĝi as a polynomial in x0 . As this
trailing monomial is clearly (n, s, d)-sparse, it follows that gi,0 ∈ PFactors (n, s, d). Consequently, f0
is indeed a product of ℓ polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d).


7    Finding Multiquadratic Factors
In this section we prove Theorem 1.14.

Theorem 1.14. Let F be a field of characteristic zero or larger than 2d. There is a deterministic
poly(n, d!, sd , ℓ)-time algorithm that, given blackbox access to a product f of ℓ elements of PFactors (n, s, d)
defined over F, returns all the s-sparse multiquadratic irreducible factors of f. In particular, the algorithm
returns all the multilinear factors of f (as these are s-sparse by Lemma 2.12). Moreover, there exists such an
                                                                                      2
algorithm that works over arbitrary fields, whose running time is poly(n, (d2 )!, sd , ℓ).

Proof. We follow the outline of the meta-algorithm described in Section 6. As this is the first time
we implement the meta-algorithm, we give the full details of the implementation. We describe the
algorithm for the case char(F) = 0 or char(F) > 2d and then explain which components change
when we work over arbitrary fields.
    To simplify the presentation we shall assume that the input f is an element of F[x0 , x], and
is a product of ℓ elements of PFactors (n + 1, s, d). As described in Section 6(2), we begin with a
preprocessing step.

Preprocessing: By Corollary 3.8 we may assume that f is not divisible by any monomial. In par-
                                                 P
ticular, we may assume that x0 ∤ f. Write f = ℓd            i
                                                    i=0 fi x0 , where fi ∈ F[x]. Let f̃ be the normalization
of f as in Definition 2.4. By Claim 2.5 f̃ is reverse monic and we have blackbox access to it. Denote

                                                    f̂ := f̃(y, G),

for G = G(m) , with m as given in Theorem 5.2. Using Lemma 2.9 and Theorem 2.8, obtain the
factorization of f̂. Note that, as f̃ is reversed-monic with respect to y, so is f̂. Thus, by Claim 2.3,
f̂ has at most ℓd irreducible factors. Consequently, it has at most O((ℓd)2 ) (not necessarily irre-
ducible) factors of degree at most two in y overall. We note that f̂ is a polynomial in O(1) variables
of degree poly(m, ℓ), therefore the running time of this step is at most poly(m, ℓ).



                                                          33
Recursive call: We would like to first solve the problem for f0 . By Lemma 6.2, f0 is also a product
of ℓ elements of PFactors (n, s, d). Hence, we can, by applying one recursive call, find the set of all
multiquadratic, s-irreducible factors of it. Denote this set by F.

Generating a list of candidate solutions:       Recall that Claim 2.5 shows that for every irreducible
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                 a2 f0 2
factor ϕ = b + a1 x0 + a2 x20 of f, there is a corresponding irreducible factor ϕ̃ = 1 + ab
                                                                                          1 f0
                                                                                               y+ b   y of
f̃, which corresponds to some (not necessarily irreducible) quadratic factor of f̂, which we denote
by ϕ̂ = ϕ̃(y, G). Our plan is to learn the (a1 , a2 , b)’s, corresponding to the different factors, from
the factorization of from f̂ and F.
     For that, we run over all factors ϕ̂ of f̂, that have degree at most two as polynomials in y. For
each such ϕ̂ we run the algorithm of Theorem 5.2 to try and recover corresponding a1 , a2 and b (or
(a1 , b) if degy (ϕ̂) = 1). If b + a1 x0 + a2 x20 is an s-sparse multiquadratic polynomial then we add it
to the list of candidate factors.
Claim 7.1. In the notation above, assume that ϕ = b + a1 x0 + a2 x20 corresponds to a multiquadratic (or
multilinear) irreducible factor of f. Then the procedure described above will add ϕ to the list of candidate
multiquadratic factors when executed on ϕ̂.

Proof. We need to show that we have all the required information to run Theorem 5.2 successfully.
Indeed:

  (1) As ϕ is s-sparse, a1 , a2 are s-sparse as well.

  (2) f0 is a product of ℓ elements of PFactors (n, s, d) to which we have a blackbox access.

  (3) By the recursive call, we have a set F containing all multiquadratic, s-sparse irreducible fac-
      tors of f0 .

  (4) As ϕ is multiquadratic then so is b. Therefore, by Lemma 2.13, all irreducible factors of b are
      s-sparse and multiquadratic as well. Since b|f0 , these factors must be elements of F.

  (5) From the irreducibility of ϕ we obtain gcd(a1 , a2 , b) = 1.

Thus, Theorem 5.2 will return a1 , a2 and b.

    Therefore, by running over all factors of f̂ of degree at most 2 in y, we are guaranteed to have
included all irreducible multiquadratic factors of f in the list of candidates. Since f may have mul-
tiquadratic factors that do not depend on x0 , we also add the elements of F to the list of candidates
for factors of f.
    Our next step is finding all the “true” factors. Indeed, our list of candidates may contain ”fake”
candidates as well. For example, these may come from a successful interpolation process to some
factor ϕ that has degree higher than two in some variable xi , a property that was not maintained
in the composition, factorization and interpolation process.

Pruning the list: We now have a set of O((ℓd)2 ) candidates for divisors of f, all of which are
multiquadratic and s-sparse, and we are left with the problem of identifying the real irreducible
divisors among them and computing their multiplicities.
   By running the algorithm of Theorem 1.16 we decide, for every candidate ϕ ∈ F, if it really
divides f. We now have a set of candidates, all of which are multiquadratic and s-sparse, that
divide f, and we have to identify the irreducible ones.


                                                    34
    Lemma 2.13 implies that since each factor ϕ is multiquadratic and s-sparse, then so are all its
factors. In particular, it is divisible by some multiquadratic irreducible factor of f, which must be
in the list. Therefore, for every pair ϕ, ψ, we check if ψ|ϕ (using Theorem 1.16). The candidates ϕ
for which there are no other candidates that divide them are the desired irreducible factors.

Computing the multiplicities: We have found all the multiquadratic, s-sparse irreducible factors
of f. To compute their multiplicities as factors of f we invoke Lemma 4.19.

Arbitrary fields: For arbitrary fields we let m be as in Theorem 5.2 for the case of multiquadratic
polynomials. Instead of using Theorem 1.16 we apply the ”moreover” part of Theorem 4.14. Simi-
larly, instead of Lemma 4.19 we rely on the ”moreover” part of Lemma 4.13.

Running time: Note that for fields of characteristic zero or larger than 2d, each step runs in
time poly(n, d!, sd , ℓ). This is the running time guaranteed by Theorem 5.2, Theorem 1.16, and
Lemma 4.19. Since we have one recursive call the total running time is also poly(n, d!, sd , ℓ). For
                                                        2
arbitrary fields, the running time is poly(n, (d2 )!, sd , ℓ), as this is what we obtain from Theorem 5.2,
the ”moreover” part of Theorem 4.14 and the ”moreover” part of Lemma 4.13.
      This completes the description, and analysis, of the algorithm.


8     Computing all Sparse Divisors of a Sparse Polynomial
In this section, we analyze the set of sparse divisors of a sparse polynomial of bounded individual
degree, and give a polynomial time algorithm for constructing it. We then apply our methods to
give a partial solution to the problem raised in [DST24] regarding the recovery of sparse irreducible
polynomials of bounded individual degree from blackbox access to their product (Question 1.4).

8.1     Number of Divisors of Sparse Polynomials of Bounded Individual Degree
We first prove an upper bound on the number of divisors (that are not divisible by any monomial)
of sparse polynomials with bounded individual degree.

Theorem 1.8 (Divisor bound for (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials). Let f ∈ P(n, s, d). The number of
non-monomial irreducible factors of f, counted with multiplicities, is at most d log s. In particular, the
number of divisors of an s-sparse polynomial f with bounded individual degree d, that are not divisible by
any monomial, is at most 2d log s = sd .

Proof. By dividing by a monomial, we may assume that f is not divisible by any xi . We choose a
sequence of variables in the following iterative way. First, choose some xi1 ∈ var(f). Suppose we
have already chosen xi1 , . . . , xik , and consider the factorization of f into irreducible polynomials. If
there is an irreducible factor ϕ that contains none of the variables chosen thus far, we choose some
xik+1 ∈ var(ϕ). If no such factor exists, then the process terminates.
    Assume that in the process we chose k variables (in sequence), which we denote without loss
of generality by x1 , x2 , . . . , xk (i.e., we assume that i1 = 1 etc.). The sequence of chosen variables
naturally corresponds to a sequence of multisets of irreducible factors of f. The first multiset I1 is the
multiset of irreducible factors that depend on x1 (counted with multiplicities); the second multiset
I2 consists of irreducible factors that do not depend on x1 but depend on x2 ; the j-th multiset Ij is
the multiset of irreducible factors that do not depend on x1 , . . . , xj−1 but depend on xj . It is easy to
see that {Ij }1⩽j⩽k form a partition of the multiset of irreducible factors of f.

                                                    35
    As f is of bounded individual degree d and every factor of Ij depends on xj , it must be the
case that |Ij | ⩽ d as a multiset. Thus, the total number of irreducible factors of f, counted with
multiplicities, is at most kd. Therefore, to prove our theorem, it is sufficient to show that k ⩽ log s.
                                                                                    Q
    To this end, let hj be the product of all the polynomials in Ij , so that f = k    j=1 hj .
                           Q
Claim 8.1. Denote fj = k      t=k−j+1 ht . Then, 2 ⩽ |V(Pfj )|, where Pfj is the Newton polytope correspond-
                                                      j

ing to fj and V(Pfj ) is the set of its vertices (as defined in Definition 2.16).
    We first conclude the proof of the theorem and then prove the claim. By the claim, it follows
that 2k ⩽ |V(Pfk )| = |V(Pf )| ⩽ s, and thus k ⩽ log s, as we wanted to show. Note that we used
here that f is s-sparse, to get, using Lemma 2.17, that |V(Pf )| ⩽ s. Note that as d log s is an upper
bound on the number of factors, including multiplicities, the number of divisors of f is at most
2d log s = sd .

Proof of Claim 8.1. The proof is by induction of j. For j = 1, the claim follows from the fact that
f1 = hk is not a monomial (as we removed all monomial divisors of f).
    For the inductive step, suppose that 2j ⩽ |V(Pfj )|. We will show that 2j+1 ⩽ |V(Pfj+1 )|.
                                                                           Pdk−j       i
To this end, express hk−j as a polynomial in xk−j . That is, hk−j =           i=0 gi xk−j where gi ∈
F[xk−j+1 , . . . , xn ]. By construction, xk−j ∈ var(hk−j ), so dk−j = degxk−j (hk−j ) > 0. Moreover,
                                                                                        Pdk−j
since xk−j ∤ hk−j , it must be the case that g0 ̸= 0. Observe that fj+1 = fj hk−j = i=0       fj gi xik−j ,
where fj gi ∈ F[xk−j+1 , . . . , xn ]. We claim the following.

  (1) Any vertex u ∈ V(Pfj g0 ) ⊂ Rn+j−k corresponds to a vertex (0, u) ∈ Rn+j−k+1 of V(Pfj+1 ).

  (2) Any vertex v ∈ V(Pfj gdk−j ) ⊂ Rn+j−k corresponds to a vertex (dk−j , v) ∈ Rn+j−k+1 of
      V(Pfj+1 ).

  (3) We have |V(Pfj g0 )| ⩾ 2j and |V(Pfj gdk−j )| ⩾ 2j .

The first and second claims are clear from the fact that the described sets of vertices are precisely
the sets of vertices with the lowest/largest value on the first coordinate (that is, the coordinate that
corresponds to the exponent of xk−j ), respectively. For the third claim, note that by Lemma 2.17
and the induction hypothesis we get

                   |V(Pfj g0 )| ⩾ |V(Pfj )| ⩾ 2j ,   and       |V(Pfj gdk−j )| ⩾ |V(Pfj )| ⩾ 2j .

Therefore, we showed that overall there are at least 2j+1 elements in V(Pfj+1 ), completing the proof
of inductive step.

Remark 8.2. The above theorem is easily seen to be tight, for example by considering f(x1 , . . . , xn ) =
Qlog s d
  i=1 (xi − 1) over C.
    As corollary we obtain the following upper bound on the number of sparse divisors of a prod-
uct of factors of (n, s, d)-polynomials.

Corollary 8.3. Let f be a product of ℓ elements of PFactors (n, s, d). The number of (n, s, d)-sparse divisors
of f that are not divisible by a monomial is at most

                                        X
                                       d log s 
                                                ℓd log s
                                                           
                                                               ⩽ sd(2+log ℓ) .
                                                    i
                                        i=0



                                                       36
Proof. We assume without loss of generality that f is not divisible by any monomial.
                       Qℓ
    Suppose that f =      i=1 ϕi where ϕi ∈ PFactors (n, s, d), and denote by gi an (n, s, d)-sparse
polynomial that ϕi divides.
    By Theorem 1.8, each gi has at most d log s irreducible factors (we repeat a factor several times
according to its multiplicity), so this must also be the case for ϕi . Therefore, f has at most ℓd log s
irreducible factors, which we denote by {ψj }. We note that this is a multiset where factors may
appear several times according to their multiplicity in the factorization of f.
    We claim that any (n, s, d)-sparse divisor of f is a product of at most d log s such factors ψj .
Indeed, any divisor of f is a product of a subset of the ψj s, and by Theorem 1.8, any such s-sparse
divisor cannot be a product of more than d log s of the ψj s. Thus, the number of s-sparse factors of
bounded individual degree d of f is bounded from above by

                                             X
                                            d log s 
                                                    ℓd log s
                                                             
                                                              .                                        (18)
                                                        i
                                             i=0

                                                                  ℓd log s
Now, if ℓ = 1, (18) equals 2d log s = sd . If ℓ ⩾ 2, we have that d log s
                                                                            is the largest summand in
                                                                                            log s
(18), and it can be easily seen that our expression (18) is bounded above by d log s ℓd  d log s
                                                                                                  . Either
way, we get that the number of relevant factors is upper bounded by
                                                                        d log s 
                                 ℓd  log s                        eℓd log s
               max sd , d log s              ⩽ max sd , d log s
                                  d log s                          d log s

                                                = max sd , d log s(eℓ)d log s
                                                = (d log s)sd(log ℓ+log e)
                                                ⩽ sd(2+log ℓ) ,

where the last inequality follows from the fact that for every c > 0 and x ⩾ 1 it holds that (ce) ln x ⩽
xc , which can be verified by noting that lnxcx is maximized at x = e1/c . Applying this inequality for
c = d(2 − log e) and using the fact that e ln 2(2 − log e) > 1 we obtain the claimed result.

8.2   Finding Sparse Divisors of Sparse Polynomials with Bounded Individual Degree
In this section we prove Theorem 1.9. We recall its statement.

Theorem 1.9 (Finding all sparse divisors of (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials). There is a deterministic,
poly(n, d!, sd )-time algorithm which, given f ∈ P(n, s, d), outputs all the s-sparse divisors of f that are
not divisible by any monomial, as well as the monomial of maximal degree dividing f.

Proof. As in the proof of Theorem 1.14, we follow the steps of the meta-algorithm of Section 6, first
studying fields such that char(F) = 0 or char(F) > 2d, and then arbitrary fields. For the sake of
presentation, we shall assume that f ∈ P(n + 1, s, d) ⊂ F[x0 , x].

Preprocessing: This step is performed as in the proof of Theorem 1.14. We first learn the mono-
                                                        P
mial divisors of f. We thus assume x0 ∤ f. Write f = d            i
                                                          i=0 fi x0 , where fi ∈ F[x], and note that
f0 ̸= 0 by our assumption. Furthermore, f0 ∈ P(n, s, d). Let f̃ denote the normalization of f and
f̂ := f(y, G), for G = G(m) with m = (2nsd)2 , as given by Lemma 3.4 for (n, s, 2d)-sparse polyno-
mials. Using Lemma 2.9 and Theorem 2.8, obtain the factorization of f̂ = f(y, G) into irreducible


                                                        37
polynomials. As f̃ is reversed-monic with respect to y, so is f̂. By Claim 2.3 it follows that f̂ has
at most d irreducible factors, and therefore at most 2d divisors overall. Since f̂ has O(1) variables
and degree poly(m), this step runs in time poly(m).

Recursive call: Since f0 is clearly an (n, s, d)-sparse polynomial, we can, by applying one recur-
sive call, find the set of all s-sparse divisors of it. Denote this set by F(f0 ). By Theorem 1.8, we
have that |F(f0 )| ⩽ sd .

Generating, and pruning, a list of candidate solutions: By Claim 2.5, every divisor h =
Pd       i
                                              Pd ci i i
 i=0 ci x0 of f corresponds to a divisor h̃ =  i=0 c0 f0 y of f̃, and therefore to a divisor


                                                         X
                                                         d
                                                           ci (G)
                                      ĥ := h̃(y, G) =                  f0 (G)i yi
                                                               c0 (G)
                                                         i=0
                                                    P
of f̂. As before, we run over all divisors ĥ = d              i
                                                       i=0 ei y of f̂. For each such divisor we produce a list
Fĥ of at most |F(f0 )| potential     candidates for s-sparse divisors of f as follows: For each c ∈ F(f0 ), let
êi = (x1 · . . . · xn )d c (G) fie(G)
                                   i
                                       . Using Lemma 3.4 we sparse interpolate ê0 , ê1 , . . . , êd to (n, s, 2d)-
                                0
polynomials ẽ0 , ẽ1 , . . . , ẽd . If the interpolation failed, for any reason, then we move to the next
c ∈ F(f0 ). If the interpolation succeeded then we compute the largest monomial M that divides
                                                    Pd
                                                          ẽ xi
each of the polynomials ẽ0 , ẽ1 , . . . ẽd . If h = i=0M i 0 is an (n, s, d)-sparse polynomial then we run
Theorem 1.16 to check whether it divides f, and in that case we add it to Fĥ .
   We let F ′ (f0 ) be those elements of F(f0 ) that   divide f (again, using Theorem 1.16 to check that).
   We return the set F(f) = F ′ (f0 ) ∪ ∪ĥ|f̂ Fĥ , which is the union of all the sets produced by the
algorithm.
                                                  P
Claim 8.4. F(f) is the set of all the divisors h = d        i
                                                    i=0 ci x0 of f.

Proof. Since F(f) only contains divisors of f, we need to show that it contains all the divisors of f.
                                  P                                              Pd ci (G) i
   Recall that every divisor h = d           i
                                     i=0 ci x0 of f gives rise to a divisor ĥ =
                                                                                                    i
                                                                                  i=0 c0 (G) f0 (G)y of
f̂. Moreover, c0 is an (n, s, d)-sparse polynomial satisfying c0 | f0 . Therefore, for if M is the largest
monomial dividing c0 then c0 = Mc for some c ∈ F.
                                                Pd
     Denote ei = cc0i (G)  i
                      (G) f0 (G), so that ĥ =
                                                           i                                          d
                                                   i=0 ei y . Observe that for M̃ = (x1 · . . . · xn ) /M we
have
                                              ei               c0 (G) cc0i (G)  i
                                                                           (G) f0 (G)
             êi = (x1 · . . . · xn )d c (G) i
                                        
                                                   = M̃(G) ·                          = M̃(G)ci (G).
                                            f0 (G)                   fi0 (G)
Since ci is an (n, s, d)-sparse polynomial and M̃ is a monomial of individual degree bounded by
d, M̃ci is an (n, s, 2d)-sparse polynomial. Therefore, Lemma 3.4 will return the polynomial M̃ci
                                                 P
when run on êi . Consequently, we will add h = d   i=0 ci x0 to Fĥ and hence to F(f).
                                                            i



Arbitrary fields: The assumption on the field is used only to invoke Theorem 1.16 for pairs of
(n + 1, s, d)-sparse polynomials. [Vol17, Lemma 42] gives a deterministic algorithm for divisibility
testing of pairs of (n + 1, s, d)-sparse polynomials whose running time is poly(n, d!, sd ). Therefore,
by replacing Theorem 1.16 with this result, we can remove the assumption on the field.




                                                         38
Running time: As before, the preprocessing step requires poly(nsd) time. Lemma 3.4 requires
poly(nsd) time. Theorem 1.16 and [Vol17, Lemma 42] take poly(n, d!, sd ) time. Since we make one
recursive call the total running time is poly(n, d!, sd ).

Remark 8.5. The algorithm above solves another rational interpolation problem. Suppose we have
blackbox access to af   0
                      b , where f0 is a known s-sparse polynomial of bounded individual degree
d, and a, b are unknown, relatively prime, (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials. Suppose further that b|f0 .
Then it is possible to recover a, b in poly(n, d!, sd )-time. This algorithm works over arbitrary fields
as well. Indeed, we first compute all the divisors of f0 using Theorem 1.9 and then proceed as
above.
   As a corollary we obtain the following result that settles Question 1.3 for the case of bounded
individual degree polynomials. We note that this result also follows from the techniques of earlier
work such as [BSV20, Vol15], but we explicitly state it as we could not find it in the literature.
Corollary 8.6 (Question 1.3 for (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials). Let F be a field. There exists a deter-
ministic, poly(n, d!, sd )-time algorithm that given Qane(n,     s, d)-sparse polynomial f (over F) that factors as
a product of irreducible s-sparse polynomials f =        gi i , outputs all the gi s. Moreover, there is a determin-
istic algorithm for computing the multiplicities ei , where: If char(F) = 0 or char(F) > 2d, the algorithm
                                                                                                   3
runs in time poly(n, d!, sd ). If F is arbitrary, the algorithm runs in time poly(n, (d2 )!, sd ).
Proof. Computing the multiplicities ki of xi as factors of f is trivial as f is given to us (it is (n, s, d)-
sparse). Therefore, we may assume that f is not divisible by any monomial. By Theorem 1.9 we
can find the set F of all the s-sparse divisors of f. By Theorem 1.8, we have that |F| ⩽ sd . As all
irreducible factors gi of f are s-sparse, gi ∈ F. Thus, we are left with the problem of identifying
the gi s from F. To that end, for every pair of two (non-constant) elements of F, use the divisibility
testing of [Vol17] to check if one divides the other. All non-constant elements of F that are not
divisible by any other member of F are clearly the desired irreducible factors gi .
    As for the ”moreover” part, we compute multiplicities using Lemma 4.19 if char(F) = 0 or
char(F) > 2d; and Lemma 4.13 for arbitrary fields.

8.3   Factoring a Product of Sparse Irreducible Polynomials
In this subsection we show our partial solution to the open problem from [DST24] (Question 1.4).
As shown in the previous sections, it is natural to consider products of factors of sparse polyno-
mials, as well as to seek a larger class of sparse divisors beyond the irreducible ones. Accordingly,
we deduce our algorithm for solving Question 1.4 from the following more general theorem.
Theorem 1.11 (Factoring products of factors of sparse polynomials). Let F be a field with char(F) =
0 or char(F) > 2d. There is a deterministic poly(n, dd , sd log ℓ , ℓd )-time algorithm which, given blackbox
access to a product f of ℓ polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d) over the field F, returns all the s-sparse divisors of
bounded individual degree d of f that are not divisible by any monomial, as well as the multiplicity ki of
each xi as a factor of f. Moreover, if f was in fact a product of polynomials in P(n, s, d), there is such an
                                                                                                 3
algorithm that works over arbitrary fields, whose running time is poly(n, (d2 )!, sd log ℓ+d , ℓd ).
Proof. We again use the meta-algorithm of Section 6. Let f ∈ F[x0 , x] be a product of ℓ polynomials
in PFactors (n + 1, s, d).

Preprocessing: This step is identical to the corresponding step in the proof of Theorem 1.14,
where we use G = G(m) for m = (2nds)2 , in the definition of f̂. Note that f̃ has at most ℓd
irreducible factors (as polynomials in y). Hence, it has O((ℓd)d ) divisors of degree at most d in y.

                                                        39
Recursive call: Since f0 is a product of ℓ polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d) (by Lemma 6.2), we can
find the set of all (n, s, d)-sparse divisors of f0 not divisible by a monomial by applying one recur-
sive call. Denote this set by F(f0 ). By Corollary 8.3, we have that |F(f0 )| ⩽ poly(sd log ℓ ).

Generating, and pruning, a list of candidate solutions: This step is identical to the correspond-
ing step in the proof of Theorem 1.9. Indeed, generating the set of candidates from F(f0 ) can be
done in a similar manner, when we consider divisors ĥ of f̂ of degree at most d in y, as we are in-
terested only in divisors of bounded individual degree d. Pruning can be done again by invoking
Theorem 1.16.

Arbitrary fields: The only problem with extending the proof to arbitrary fields is the use of The-
orem 1.16. Therefore, for fields with small characteristic, we assume that f is a product of s-sparse
polynomials. In this case we can apply the ”moreover” part of Theorem 1.16 and the argument
goes through.

Running time: As in the previous proofs, the running time is determined by the size of the lists
and the running time of Theorem 1.16. The claim bound follows.

   We finish with the following straightforward corollary of the last theorem, which gives the
promised partial solution to Question 1.4.

Theorem 1.10 (Factoring products of (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials). Let F be a field of characteris-
tic zero or larger than 2d. There is a deterministic poly(n, dd , sd log ℓ , ℓd )-time algorithm which, given
                                  Q
blackbox access to a product f = ℓi=1 ϕi , where ϕ1 , . . . , ϕℓ ∈ P(n, s, d) are all (not necessarily different)
irreducible, returns the ϕi -s. Moreover, when the assumption on the field is removed, there is an algorithm
                                                      3
that solves this problem in poly(n, (d2 )!, sd log ℓ+d , ℓd )-time.

Proof. By Theorem 1.11 we can find in deterministic poly(n, dd , sd log ℓ , ℓd )-time all the s-sparse
divisors of f of bounded individual degree d. Applying Theorem 1.16, we can determine, for
any two candidates ϕ and ψ, whether ψ | ϕ. Since every irreducible factor of f is s-sparse with
individual degree at most d, it follows that the irreducible factors are precisely those candidates
ϕ that are not divisible by any other candidate ψ. To compute the multiplicity of each obtained
irreducible factor as a factor of f, just invoke Lemma 4.19.
    As for the ”moreover” part, use the ”moreover” part of Theorem 1.11 to get all the (n, s, d)-
                                           3
sparse divisors of f in poly(n, (d2 )!, sd , ℓd )-time. Replace Theorem 1.16 by its ”moreover” part (or
by the divisibility test of [Vol17]) to check for every two candidates if one divides the other, and
replace the use of Lemma 4.19 by the ”moreover” part of Lemma 4.13 to compute multiplicities.


9    Factoring (n, s, d)-Sparse Polynomials
In this section we apply our methods to obtain factorization results for (n, s, d)-sparse polynomials,
without any extra assumptions on the sparsity of their factors. For that, we rely on the sparsity
upper bound of Theorem 2.14.
    As discussed in Section 1.4.4, we give two algorithms: one for factoring a single (n, s, d)-sparse
polynomial, and one for factoring a product of such polynomials. The first algorithm runs in time
poly(n, S) (where S is the bound of Theorem 2.14), while the second runs in poly(n, d!, Sd )-time. As
we shall shortly see, the main reason for this difference is that it is easy to check if a given S-sparse
polynomial divides the input polynomial in case it is s-sparse, since in this case the quotient should

                                                       40
be S-sparse as well and therefore can be interpolated and reconstructed, but this is no longer the
case for divisors of products of s-sparse polynomials.

9.1   Factorization of Sparse Polynomials
In this subsection we prove the following theorem, which is an improvement to the algorithm of
Theorem 2.15.
                                                   2
Theorem 1.12. There is a deterministic poly(n, sd log n )-time algorithm which, given an s-sparse polyno-
mial of bounded individual degree d on n-variables, returns its factorization into irreducible factors.

    Observe that, given only the bound in Theorem 2.14, this is the best one can hope for. Further-
more, as can be easily seen from the proof, an improvement to Theorem 2.14 automatically implies
an improvement to the running time of our algorithm: if the bound in Theorem 2.14 is improved
to a smaller bound M, then the running time of our algorithm will become poly(n, M, sd ).

Proof. The proof follows the lines of the proof of Theorem 1.9, with some small modifications that
we shall explain. The algorithm is the same for any field F, regardless of the characteristic.
   Denote by S an explicit sparsity bound that follows from Theorem 2.14 for (n + 1, s, d)-sparse
                            2
polynomials, S = poly(n, sd log n ).

Preprocessing step: We perform the same preprocessing step as in the proof of Theorem 1.9,
where we define f̂ with respect to the generator G = G(m) for m = (2ndS)2 .

Recursive call: Since f0 is an (n, s, d)-sparse polynomial, a recursive call to the algorithm will
return a list F ′ (f0 ) containing its irreducible factors. Note that these factors may have sparsity S. By
Theorem 1.8 the list has size at most d log s, including multiplicities, when removing the variables
it might contain (that is, we consider F ′ (f0 ) \ {xi }1⩽i⩽n instead of F ′ (f0 )). Therefore, f0 has at
most sd divisors not divisible by a monomial, that can be enumerated, and interpolated, in time
sd poly(S), by going over all subsets of irreducible divisors (taking multiplicities into account). We
denote the list of all divisors not divisible by a monomial of f0 by F(f0 ).

Generating, and pruning, a list of candidate solutions: Generating the list of candidates is done
as in the proof of Theorem 1.9. Indeed, F(f0 ) contains all the divisors (not divisible by a monomial)
of f0 , so we can proceed in exactly the same way to find a list of candidates for divisors of f
(not divisible by a monomial). Regarding pruning, we note that in order to decide if a candidate
polynomial g is a divisor of f, we don’t need to use Theorem 1.16. Indeed, if g | f, then f/g is
S-sparse. Therefore, we can interpolate f(G)/g(G) as an S-sparse polynomial h and check whether
g · h = f.
    This shows how to find all the divisors of f not divisible by a monomial. To conclude the
proof, we need to show how to use this information to get the factorization of f into irreducible
polynomials. We first show how to identify the irreducible factors among the divisors that we
have found. Observe that if a divisor g is reducible, then its factors are also divisors of f. We can
therefore check whether there exists a pair of divisors h1 , h2 such that g = h1 · h2 , and return that
g is irreducible if no such h1 , h2 were found.




                                                    41
Computing the multiplicities: So far, we have the list of irreducible factors of f that are not
monomials. Since the largest monomial dividing f was computed in the preprocessing step, we
are left with the problem of computing the multiplicity of each of the irreducible factors of f. This
can be done as in the previous step. Going over all values of k ⩾ 0 one by one we check whether
there exists a divisor h of f such that h · gk = f. We stop at the first k where such a divisor does
not exist and return that the multiplicity of g is k − 1. Since, for i < k, all gi are divisors of f, their
sparsities are all poly(S), hence this algorithm runs in poly(S)-time.

Running time: It is clear that the running time is polynomial in the sparsity S, the number of
variables n, and the size of the lists which is upper bounded by sd .

9.2   Factorization of Products of Sparse Polynomials
We now prove the following theorem. Note that this theorem is different than Theorem 1.11;
while Theorem 1.11 finds only the s-sparse divisors of a product of polynomials in PFactors (n, s, d),
Theorem 1.13 computes the factorization of such products into irreducible factors, even if these are
not s-sparse.

Theorem 1.13. Let F be a field with char(F) = 0 or char(F) > 2d. There is a deterministic
             3
poly(n, sd log n , (dℓ)d )-time algorithm which, given blackbox access to a product f of ℓ polynomials in
PFactors (n, s, d) over F, returns its factorization into irreducible factors. Moreover, there is an algorithm that
                                                                           5
works over arbitrary fields, whose running time is poly(n, (d2 )!, sd log n , ℓd ).
                                2
Proof. Denote by S = sO(d log(n+1)) the sparsity bound given by Theorem 2.14 for (n + 1, s, d)-
sparse polynomials.
   We follow the lines of the proof of Theorem 1.14, but combine it the sparsity bound of Theo-
rem 2.14.

Preprocessing: This is the same as in the proof of Theorem 1.14, where f̂ is defined as f̂ = f̃(y, G),
where G = G(m) . Here, m is as given by Theorem 5.2 for (n, S, d)-sparse polynomials (that is,
                                     3
m = poly(n, d!, Sd ) = poly(n, d!, sd log n )). By Claim 2.3, f̂ has at most ℓd irreducible factors (as
polynomials in y), and hence at most O((ℓd)d ) divisors of degree at most d in y.

Recursive call: By Lemma 6.2, f0 is a product of ℓ elements of PFactors (n, s, d). Thus, by making
one recursive call, we obtain its factorization into irreducible polynomials. Denote by F(f0 ) the set
of irreducible factors of f0 .

Generating, and pruning, a list of candidate solutions: Since we have all the irreducible factors
of f0 , we can proceed as in the proof of Theorem 1.14 and obtain a list of (n, S, d)-sparse divisors
of f, using Theorem 5.2 and Theorem 1.16.

Pruning the list: We now have a set of candidates, all of which are S-sparse divisors of f. Note
that if g is such a divisor that is not irreducible, then every irreducible factor of g must also be
in the list. Therefore, to identify the irreducible factors, we invoke Theorem 1.16 (for S-sparse
polynomials) to each pair of candidates ϕ, ψ and check if ψ|ϕ. The candidates ϕ for which there
are no other candidates that divide them are the desired irreducible factors.




                                                        42
Computing the multiplicities:       We compute the multiplicities of the irreducible factors using
Lemma 4.19.

Arbitrary fields: To obtain the result we replace the use of Theorem 5.2 and Theorem 1.16 by
their respective “moreover” parts. We also use Lemma 4.13 instead of Lemma 4.19.

Running time: First consider fields of zero or large characteristic. The running time is deter-
mined by the number of divisors of F̂, and the application of Theorem 5.2, Theorem 1.16, and
Lemma 4.19 for (n + 1, S, d)-sparse polynomials. This yields the claimed poly(n, d!, Sd , (dℓ)d ) =
          3
poly(n, sd log n , (dℓ)d ) running time.
   For arbitrary fields, the ”moreover” parts of Theorem 5.2 and Theorem 1.16 and Lemma 4.13
                                          3                              5
imply a running time of poly(n, (d2 )!, Sd , (dℓ)d ) = poly(n, (d2 )!, sd log n , ℓd )

Remark 9.1. In Theorem 1.10 we gave a poly(n, dd , sd log ℓ , ℓd )-time algorithm for this problem, with
the extra assumption that the irreducible factors of f are in fact in P(n, s, d). Hence, Theorem 1.13
                                               3
is more general, and in fact gives a poly(n, sd log n , (dℓ)d ) algorithm for Theorem 1.10. That is, we
have two algorithms for solving Question 1.4: one is quasi-polynomial in the length of the product
and polynomial in the number of variables, and the other is quasi-polynomial in the number of
variables and polynomial in the number of terms in the product.


10    Future Work and Open Problems
We conclude with a discussion of possible directions for future research.
    First, it is somewhat disappointing that our main technical lemma, Lemma 4.15, is only valid
over fields of zero or sufficiently large characteristic. It would be interesting to extend this result to
arbitrary fields. As discussed in Section 4, some results are known in this direction; the remaining
challenge is to eliminate the need for the additional non-degeneracy condition required in small
characteristic.
    Next, it would be extremely interesting to identify the irreducible factors in Theorem 1.9. In
other words, one would like an efficient algorithm that, given an (n, s, d)-sparse polynomial f,
decides whether f is irreducible in time poly(n, sd ). The techniques developed in this paper appear
insufficient for addressing this problem, as they only provide information about the coprimality of
ϕ(G(m,i) ) and ψ(G(m,i) ) for ϕ, ψ ∈ PFactors (n, s, d), and do not yield information about the number
of irreducible factors.
    It would also be interesting to generalize our rational interpolation theorem. For instance,
even the seemingly basic problem of deterministically interpolating a quotient of coprime sparse
polynomials in polynomial time remains wide open.
    Obtaining a polynomial-time algorithm for Question 1.4, thereby improving Theorem 1.10, also
appears to require new ideas. As observed throughout the paper, the main difficulty is that c0 may
contain non-sparse irreducible factors, forcing the recursive call on f0 to enumerate all possibili-
ties and leading to a quasi-polynomial running time. By contrast, the polynomial-time algorithm
of Theorem 1.14 relies on the fact that c0 (or b in that setting) factors only into sparse polynomi-
als, due to Lemma 2.13. This structure, together with the ability to determine multiplicities via
Corollary 4.12, suffices to obtain a polynomial-time algorithm.
    Finally, any improvement to the bound in Theorem 2.14 would directly strengthen the results
of Section 9, and would be of significant interest.



                                                   43
Bibliography
[BKR+ 25] Somnath Bhattacharjee, Mrinal Kumar, Shanthanu S Rai, Varun Ramanathan, Ram-
          prasad Saptharishi, and Shubhangi Saraf. Closure under factorization from a result of
          Furstenberg. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.23214, 2025. 1

  [BOT88] Michael Ben-Or and Prasoon Tiwari. A deterministic algorithm for sparse multivari-
          ate polynomial interpolation. In Proceedings of the twentieth annual ACM symposium on
          Theory of computing, pages 301–309, 1988. 1

    [BS25] Pranav Bisht and Nitin Saxena. Derandomization via symmetric polytopes: Poly-time
           factorization of certain sparse polynomials. ACM Transactions on Computation Theory,
           17(2):1–20, 2025. 5

  [BSV20] Vishwas Bhargava, Shubhangi Saraf, and Ilya Volkovich. Deterministic factorization
          of sparse polynomials with bounded individual degree. Journal of the ACM (JACM),
          67(2):1–28, 2020. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, 39

   [BV25] Pranav Bisht and Ilya Volkovich. On solving sparse polynomial factorization related
          problems. Computational Complexity, 34(1):7, 2025. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 19, 21, 23, 25,
          28

[CDGK91] Michael Clausen, Andreas Dress, Johannes Grabmeier, and Marek Karpinski. On zero-
         testing and interpolation of k-sparse multivariate polynomials over finite fields. Theo-
         retical Computer Science, 84(2):151–164, 1991. 1

   [CL11] Annie Cuyt and Wen-shin Lee. Sparse interpolation of multivariate rational functions.
          Theoretical Computer Science, 412(16):1445–1456, 2011. 5

   [DG24] Pranjal Dutta and Sumanta Ghosh. Sigact news complexity theory column 121.
          SIGACT News, 55(2):53–88, June 2024. 1

  [DST24] Pranjal Dutta, Amit Sinhababu, and Thomas Thierauf. Derandomizing multivariate
          polynomial factoring for low degree factors. In Amit Kumar and Noga Ron-Zewi, edi-
          tors, Approximation, Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Tech-
          niques, APPROX/RANDOM 2024, London School of Economics, London, UK, August 28-30,
          2024, volume 317 of LIPIcs, pages 75:1–75:20. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
          Informatik, 2024. 1, 2, 5, 35, 39

   [For15] Michael A Forbes. Deterministic divisibility testing via shifted partial derivatives. In
           2015 IEEE 56th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 451–465.
           IEEE, 2015. 5, 6

    [FS15] Michael A Forbes and Amir Shpilka. Complexity theory column 88: Challenges in
           polynomial factorization1. ACM SIGACT News, 46(4):32–49, 2015. 2

   [GK87] Dima Yu Grigoriev and Marek Karpinski. The matching problem for bipartite graphs
          with polynomially bounded permanents is in nc. In 28th Annual Symposium on Founda-
          tions of Computer Science (sfcs 1987), pages 166–172. IEEE, 1987. 1

 [GKL12] Ankit Gupta, Neeraj Kayal, and Satyanarayana V. Lokam. Reconstruction of depth-4
         multilinear circuits with top fan-in 2. In Howard J. Karloff and Toniann Pitassi, editors,


                                                  44
          Proceedings of the 44th Symposium on Theory of Computing Conference, STOC 2012, New
          York, NY, USA, May 19 - 22, 2012, pages 625–642. ACM, 2012. 14

 [GKS90] Dima Grigoriev, Marek Karpinski, and Michael F. Singer. Fast parallel algorithms
         for sparse multivariate polynomial interpolation over finite fields. SIAM J. Comput.,
         19(6):1059–1063, 1990. 1

 [GKS94] Dima Grigoriev, Marek Karpinski, and Michael F Singer. Computational complexity of
         sparse rational interpolation. SIAM Journal on Computing, 23(1):1–11, 1994. 2, 5

 [GKZ08] Israel M Gelfand, Mikhail M Kapranov, and Andrei V Zelevinsky. Discriminants, re-
         sultants and multidimensional determinants. Modern Birkhäuser Classics. Birkhäuser
         Boston, Inc., Boston, MA, 2008. Reprint of the 1994 edition. 15

 [Kal85a] Erich Kaltofen. Computing with polynomials given by straight-line programs I: great-
          est common divisors. In Proceedings of the seventeenth annual ACM symposium on Theory
          of computing, pages 131–142, 1985. 1

 [Kal85b] Erich Kaltofen. Polynomial-time reductions from multivariate to bi- and univariate
          integral polynomial factorization. SIAM J. Comput., 14(2):469–489, 1985. 14

 [KRS24] Mrinal Kumar, Varun Ramanathan, and Ramprasad Saptharishi. Deterministic algo-
         rithms for low degree factors of constant depth circuits. In Proceedings of the 2024 Annual
         ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 3901–3918. SIAM, 2024. 5

   [KS01] Adam R. Klivans and Daniel Spielman. Randomness efficient identity testing of mul-
          tivariate polynomials. STOC ’01, page 216–223, New York, NY, USA, 2001. Association
          for Computing Machinery. 1, 7, 17

  [Len85] Arjen Klaas Lenstra. Factoring multivariate polynomials over finite fields. J. Comput.
          System Sci., 30(2):235–248, 1985. 14

 [LLL82] Arjen K. Lenstra, Hendrik W. jr. Lenstra, and László Lovász. Factoring polynomials
         with rational coefficients. Mathematische Annalen, 261:515–534, 1982. 13

  [Sax09] Nitin Saxena. Progress on polynomial identity testing. Bull. EATCS, 99:49–79, 2009. 1

  [Sax14] Nitin Saxena. Progress on polynomial identity testing-ii. In Perspectives in Computa-
          tional Complexity: The Somenath Biswas Anniversary Volume, pages 131–146. Springer,
          2014. 1

   [SV09] Amir Shpilka and Ilya Volkovich. Improved polynomial identity testing for read-once
          formulas. In International Workshop on Approximation Algorithms for Combinatorial Opti-
          mization, pages 700–713. Springer, 2009. 17

   [SY10] Amir Shpilka and Amir Yehudayoff. Arithmetic circuits: A survey of recent results and
          open questions. Foundations and Trends® in Theoretical Computer Science, 5(3–4):207–388,
          2010. 1

[vdHL21] Joris van der Hoeven and Grégoire Lecerf. On sparse interpolation of rational functions
         and gcds. ACM Commun. Comput. Algebra, 55(1):1–12, 2021. 5




                                                45
    [Vol15] Ilya Volkovich. Deterministically factoring sparse polynomials into multilinear factors
            and sums of univariate polynomials. In Approximation, Randomization, and Combinato-
            rial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques (APPROX/RANDOM 2015), pages 943–958.
            Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2015. 1, 2, 4, 5, 39
    [Vol17] Ilya Volkovich. On some computations on sparse polynomials. In Approxima-
            tion, Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques (AP-
            PROX/RANDOM 2017), pages 48–1. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Infor-
            matik, 2017. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 14, 16, 25, 38, 39, 40
[VZGK85] Joachim Von Zur Gathen and Erich Kaltofen. Factoring sparse multivariate polynomi-
         als. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 31(2):265–287, 1985. 1, 2
 [vzGS92] Joachim von zur Gathen and Victor Shoup. Computing Frobenius maps and factoring
          polynomials. Comput. Complexity, 2(3):187–224, 1992. 13


A     An Alternative Proof of a Result from Section 4
In this section we describe an alternative proof of Corollary 4.12. While this lemma is valid over
arbitrary fields, the proof presented here works only for zero characteristic fields or when the
characteristic is larger than the individual degree. Thus, both Corollary 4.12 and Lemma 4.15 are
stronger than what we present here. However, the proof method is slightly different, and we
include it here for the possibility it would be useful for other applications.
    While the proofs of Corollary 4.12 and Lemma 4.15 use the rank of the Sylvester matrix to
study the factorization of a polynomial, our proof here uses an operator we call ∆k . The well
known discriminant ∆ of a polynomial (defined in Definition 2.19) is an operator that can be used
to detect the existence of irreducible factors of multiplicity greater than one. Its generalization ∆k ,
that we soon define, is an operator that detects irreducible factors of multiplicity at least k + 1, for
small values of k. The second important property of ∆k is that, like the discriminant, it does not
blow-up the sparsity of its input by too much.
    We now give the definition of ∆k .
Definition A.1. Let f ∈ F[x] be a non-constant polynomial. Define

                       ∆k (f)(λ1 , . . . , λk ) = res(f, λ1 f(1) + . . . + λk f(k) ) ∈ F[λ1 , . . . , λk ]             (19)

where f(i) is the i-th derivative of f.
   For f ∈ F[x0 , x1 , . . . , xn ], ∆k,x0 (f) ∈ F[x1 , . . . , xn , λ1 , . . . , λk ] is just ∆k (f) when one views f as an
element of F(x1 , . . . , xn )[x0 ].
Example A.2. For k = 1, one sees that ∆1 = λ1 ∆. Thus, for example, ∆1 (f) = 0 if and only if ∆(f) = 0.
    As discussed, one should think of ∆k as some generalization of ∆ that captures the existence of
factors of multiplicity at least k + 1, the same way ∆ captures the existence of factors of multiplicity
at least two. The example justifies this statement for k = 1; the general statement is given by the
following lemma.
Lemma A.3. Let f ∈ F[x] be a non-constant polynomial of at most degree d, and suppose that char(F) is
zero or larger than d. Then f has an irreducible factor of multiplicity at least k+1 if and only if ∆k (f) = 0. In
particular, if f ∈ F[x0 , x1 , . . . , xn ] is such that x0 ∈ var(f) and degx0 (f) ⩽ d, under the same assumption on
F, then f has an irreducible factor of multiplicity at least k+1 that depends on x0 if and only if ∆k,x0 (f) = 0.

                                                              46
Proof. Note that as char(F) ∈ {0} ∪ [d + 1, ∞), and deg f ⩽ d, every irreducible factor ϕ of f is
separable, that is, it factors to a product of different linear polynomials over F. One way to see it
is to note that ϕ ′ ̸= 0 (because of the assumption on F), and therefore ϕ ′ must be coprime to ϕ, so
by Lemma 2.20 we must have that ∆(ϕ) = res(ϕ, ϕ ′ ) ̸= 0, and hence (again by Lemma 2.20) ϕ is
square-free.
    Therefore, f has an irreducible factors of multiplicity at least k + 1 if and only if it has a root of
multiplicity at least k + 1 over F.
    Suppose, without loss of generality, that f is monic. In this case, by Lemma 2.20, we know that:
                                                           Y                                     
             ∆k (f) = res(f, λ1 f(1) + . . . + λk f(k) ) =      λ1 f(1) (α) + . . . + λk f(k) (α)     (20)
                                                         α:f(α)=0


That is, ∆k (f) is a product of linear functionals in F[λ1 , . . . , λk ], and therefore vanishes if and only
if one of these functionals vanishes.
    To this end, note that for a root α of f, a functional λ1 f(1) (α) + . . . + λk f(k) (α) vanishes if and
only if f(i) (α) = 0 for 0 ⩽ i ⩽ k, that is, if and only if α is a root of multiplicity at least k + 1 of f.
This proves the lemma.
    As for the ”in particular” part, note that by Gauss’ lemma (Lemma 2.1), irreducible factors
of f ∈ F[x0 , x1 , . . . , xn ] that depend on x0 correspond to irreducible factors of f as an element of
F(x1 , . . . , xn )[x0 ]. Therefore, the last statement of the lemma follows easily from the first by work-
ing over F(x1 , . . . , xn ), noting that its characteristic is the characteristic of F.

Remark A.4. The condition on deg(f) and char(F) is necessary. For example, consider the polyno-
mial f(x, y) = xp − y ∈ Fp [x, y] for a prime p. f is clearly irreducible, but ∆x (f) = 0, as f is a square
(and, in fact, a p-th power) as an element of Fp (y)[x].
    The lemma above provides one manner in which ∆k generalizes ∆. For our purpose, we need
to study another manner in which such a generalization holds - action on sparse polynomials.

Lemma A.5. Let f ∈ F[x0 , x1 , . . . , xn ] be an s-sparse polynomial with bounded individual degree d. Then,
∆k f ∈ F[x1 , . . . , xn , λ1 , . . . , λk ] is a (2d)!(ks)2d -sparse polynomial of individual degree at most 2d2 .

Proof. The lemma follows immediately by the Lemma 2.20, by noting that λ1 f(1) (α)+. . .+λk f(k) (α)
is a polynomial of sparsity ks and bounded individual degree d.

   We now show how to use ∆k to obtain a similar result to Corollary 4.12. To do that, we start
with the following lemma.

Lemma A.6. Suppose F is a field for which char(F) ∈ {0} ∪ [d + 1, ∞). Let f be an (n, s, d)-sparse
polynomial defined over F, and fix some coordinate i. Suppose that f does not have an irreducible factor of
multiplicity at least k + 1 as a polynomial in xi . Then there exists an explicit m = poly(n, d!, (ks)d ) for
which f(G(m,i) ) also does not have an irreducible factor of multiplicity at least k + 1 as a polynomial in u.

Proof. By Lemma A.3, as f does not have an irreducible factor of multiplicity at least k + 1 as a
polynomial in xi , we have that ∆k,xi (f) ̸= 0. By Lemma A.5, ∆k,xi (f) is a poly(d!(ks)d )-sparse
polynomial of bounded individual degree 2d2 on n + d − 1 variables. Therefore, by Lemma 3.4, for
m = ((n + d)(d!(ks)d )(2d2 ))2 = poly(n, d!, (ks)d ), we know that ∆k,xi (f)(G(m,i) ) ̸= 0, where we
substitute every coordinate xj for j ̸= i according to G(m,i) (leaving λ1 , . . . , λk alive). It is easy to
see that ∆k,u (f(G(m,i) )) = ∆k,xi (f)(G(m,i) ), so it follows that ∆k,u (f(G(m,i) )) ̸= 0. The claim then
follows from the other direction of Lemma A.3.


                                                        47
   We now apply the last lemma to prove the following weaker version of Corollary 4.12.

Lemma A.7. Suppose F is a field for which char(F) ∈ {0} ∪ [d + 1, ∞). Let ϕ be an irreducible s-sparse
polynomial of bounded individual degree d, and let ψ be an irreducible factor of some s-sparse polynomial
g of bounded individual degree d, different than ϕ, both defined over F. Fix some i for which xi ∈ var(ϕ).
                                                 2    3
Then, for some explicit value of m = poly(n, dd , sd ), we have that ϕ(G(m,i) ) is coprime to ψ(G(m,i) ),
                                                                                                2
when viewed as polynomials in u. Moreover, if ϕ is multiquadratic, taking m = poly(n, dd , sd ) actually
suffices.
                 Q
Proof. Let g =      ψ · ϕk , each ψ is irreducible not associate to ϕ. From now on we view these
polynomials as polynomials in xi .
    Consider the polynomial g̃ = ϕd+1 g. Its sparsity is at most sd+2 , its degree is at most O(d2 ),
and ϕ divides it exactly k + d + 1 times. As degxi (g) ⩽ d, every other irreducible factor of g̃ is of
multiplicity at most d−k < d+1, so ϕ must be the factor of largest multiplicity of g̃. That is, g̃ has no
                                                                                                               d2
factors of multiplicity more than k + d + 1. By Lemma A.6, if m = poly(n, (d2 )!, ((k + d)sd+2 ) ) =
            2   3
poly(n, dd , sd ) the same is true for g̃(G(m,i) ) (as a polynomial in u). Thus, it must be the case that
ψ(G(m,i) ) is prime to ϕ(G(m,i) ) - otherwise we would have had a factor of ϕ(G(m,i) ) that appears
at least k + d + 2 times in the factorization of g̃(G(m,i) ) (k + d + 1 times that come from the ϕ factors
of g̃, and one extra coming from the ψ factor).
    As for the ”moreover” part, note that if ϕ is multiquadratic then g̃ is of degree O(d), so taking
                                 d                   3
m = poly(n, d!, ((k + d)sd+2 ) ) = poly(n, dd , sd ) is enough.

Remark A.8. In fact, the proof implies that ϕ(G(m,i) ) is square free, since the generator G preserves
the non-vanishing of the discriminant ∆(ϕ).




                                                                             ECCC                          ISSN 1433-8092
                                                   48
                                                                             https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il
