                                            The power of unentanglement without destructive interference
                                                                                   Yupan Liu∗1 and Pei Wu†2
                                             1
                                               School of Computer and Communication Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de
                                                                                Lausanne
                                            2
                                              Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University




                                                                                              Abstract
                                                        Stoquasticity, originating in physical systems free of the so-called sign problem and avoid-
                                                    ing destructive interference from sign cancellations, gives rise to StoqMA, introduced by
                                                    Bravyi, Bessen, and Terhal (2006), a quantum-inspired intermediate class between MA and
arXiv:2604.27886v2 [quant-ph] 12 Jul 2026




                                                    AM. Unentanglement similarly gives rise to QMA(2), introduced by Kobayashi, Matsumoto,
                                                    and Yamakami (CJTCS 2009), which generalizes QMA to two unentangled proofs and still
                                                    has only the trivial NEXP upper bound.
                                                        In this work, we initiate a systematic study of the power of unentanglement without
                                                    destructive interference via StoqMA(2), the class of unentangled stoquastic Merlin–Arthur
                                                    proof systems. Beyond its complexity-theoretic interest, StoqMA(2) is closely connected to
                                                    the optimality of non-negative tensor optimization algorithms. We highlight:
                                                       1. NP ⊆ StoqMA(2) with O(   e √n)-qubit proofs and completeness error 2−polylog(n) , paral-
                                                          leling the best known QMA(2) lower bounds except for perfect completeness. Mean-
                                                          while, the Sum-of-Squares algorithm of Barak, Kelner, and Steurer (STOC 2014) gives
                                                          an exponential-time upper bound for StoqMA(2). Our tightened analysis shows the
                                                          essential optimality of the parameters in both our protocol and the BKS algorithm
                                                          under the Exponential-Time Hypothesis (ETH).
                                                      2. Under nearly perfect completeness, StoqMA(2) admits sharper deterministic upper
                                                         bounds: for StoqMA(2)1 , the parameter dependence in the general ETH-optimal time
                                                         bound can be exponentially improved, or the bound achieved simultaneously with
                                                         polynomial space.
                                                      3. For logarithmic-size proofs, NP ⊆ StoqMA(2)log with completeness error O(n−2 ) and
                                                         implicitly vanishing gap. Meanwhile, StoqMA(2)log ⊆ MA, and consequently quantum-
                                                         inspired randomness enables exponentially shorter unentangled proofs even under the
                                                         standard derandomization assumption MA = NP.
                                                      4. PreciseStoqMA(2), a variant of StoqMA(2) with exponentially small promise gap, can-
                                                         not achieve perfect completeness unless EXP = NEXP. In contrast, PreciseStoqMA
                                                         achieves perfect completeness, since PSPACE ⊆ PreciseStoqMA1 .
                                                        Our lower bounds are obtained by stoquastizing the short-proof QMA(2) protocols using
                                                    distribution testing techniques. Our upper bounds for the nearly perfect completeness case
                                                    are proved via our rectangular closure testing framework, a new combinatorial technique
                                                    tailored to StoqMA(2)1 .




                                             ∗
                                                  Email: yupan.liu@epfl.ch
                                              †
                                                  Email: pei.wu@psu.edu
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                      1
  1.1 Main results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    4
  1.2 Proof techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      6
  1.3 Discussion and open problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       11
  1.4 Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     11

2 Preliminaries                                                                                12
  2.1 Information-theoretic measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
  2.2 (Stoquastic) separable values of square Hermitian matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
  2.3 Stoquastic algorithmic toolkit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

3 Parallel repetition in stoquastic Merlin–Arthur proof systems                             15
  3.1 The multiplicativity of the stoquastic separable values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
  3.2 Two StoqMA(k )-complete problems from the class definition . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
      3.2.1 Separable Stoquastic Close Image to Uniform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
      3.2.2 Separable Reversible Circuit Distinguishability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
  3.3 StoqMA(k ) is closed under direct product . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

4 Robustness of StoqMA(2)                                                                    23
  4.1 StoqMA(k ) vs. StoqMA(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
      4.1.1 The stoquastic product test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
      4.1.2 Prover compression for StoqMA(k ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
  4.2 SymStoqMA(k ) vs. StoqMA(k ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
      4.2.1 StoqMA(k ) ⊆ SymStoqMA(k ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
      4.2.2 The stoquastic equality test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
      4.2.3 SymStoqMA(k ) ⊆ StoqMA(k ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

5 The power of StoqMA(2) via distribution testing                                            35
                     √
  5.1 A SymStoqMA( n) protocol for (1, η)-GapCG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
      5.1.1 Analysis of Protocol 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
  5.2 A StoqMAlog (2) protocol with inverse-polynomial gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42

6 Upper bounds for StoqMA(k ) with logarithmic-size proofs                                   44
  6.1 StoqMAlog ⊆ BPP and general rETH-optimal BPTIME upper bound . . . . . . . 44
      6.1.1 Proof of Theorem 6.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
  6.2 StoqMA(k )log ⊆ MA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
      6.2.1 A warm-up: StoqMA(2)log ⊆ MA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
      6.2.2 Proof of Theorem 6.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49

7 Upper bounds for StoqMA(k ) with nearly perfect completeness                                52
  7.1 Rectangular structure of non-negative product states . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
  7.2 Rectangular closure testing and its consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
      7.2.1 Complexity-theoretic consequences of Theorem 7.7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
  7.3 Analysis of Algorithm 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55

8 A deterministic exponential-time upper bound for StoqMA(k )                                      59

A PSPACE ⊆ PreciseStoqMA1                                                                      70
  A.1 Constructing the stoquastic verification circuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
  A.2 Analysis of Protocol 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72



                                                 ii
B The Barak-Kelner-Steurer algorithm and a refined analysis                                  74
  B.1 SoS algorithm and rounding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75

C Omitted proofs                                                                              78
  C.1 Omitted proofs in Section 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
  C.2 Omitted proof of the generalized birthday paradox . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
  C.3 Omitted proofs of rETH-optimality of the BPTIME upper bound for StoqMA . . 81
1       Introduction
The notion of stoquasticity, a blend of stochastic and quantum, was first introduced in [BDOT08]
to describe Hamiltonians whose off-diagonal matrix elements are real and non-positive, a con-
dition that naturally connects the model to stochastic processes such as Markov chains and
random walks. Motivated by this connection, Bravyi, Bessen, and Terhal [BBT06] introduced
the complexity class StoqMA, for which the stoquastic local Hamiltonian problem is complete.
    A useful way to understand StoqMA is to compare it directly with MA [Bab85], the class of
Merlin–Arthur proof systems and the standard randomized generalization of NP. Indeed, MA
admits a natural “quantum” formulation [BDOT08]: the verifier uses classical reversible circuits
built from Toffoli, CNOT, and X gates, together with the usual |0⟩ ancillary qubits and |+⟩
ancillary qubits that provide randomness, and then measures a designated output qubit in the
computational basis. Allowing the witness to be quantum does not increase the power of this
model, as quantum witnesses offer no advantage over classical ones.
    By contrast, in StoqMA the only formal difference is that the designated output qubit is
measured in the Hadamard basis instead. Consequently, StoqMA naturally contains MA.1 This
apparently minor syntactic change has important structural consequences. By the Perron–
Frobenius theorem in linear algebra, the acceptance probability of a StoqMA verifier is always
maximized by a witness state whose amplitudes are non-negative in the computational basis,2
and this structural property makes the underlying optimization substantially easier than in
QMA, the fully quantum analogue of NP.
    Whereas the local Hamiltonian problem, which asks one to approximate the minimum eigen-
value of an underlying Hermitian matrix, is complete for QMA, and QMA is thus at least con-
tained in PSPACE [Kit99, KSV02], the stoquastic local Hamiltonian problem can be reformulated
as the problem of estimating the trace of a power of an entrywise non-negative matrix with effi-
ciently computable local contributions. Using the techniques in [BGM06, GS89], this places Sto-
qMA at least inside AM [BBT06], and hence inside the polynomial-time hierarchy (PH) [Bab85].
In this sense, StoqMA is a semi-quantum class: it is quantum enough to go beyond MA, yet still
structured enough to admit unexpectedly classical upper bounds, unlike BQP, for which even
proving containment in PH is technically difficult in light of oracle separations [RT22].

Further perspectives on StoqMA. Beyond serving as a natural quantum-inspired interme-
diate class between MA and AM, StoqMA admits several further perspectives:
Physical perspective Traditionally, StoqMA corresponds to Hamiltonians without the sign prob-
lem: a regime with no destructive interference from sign cancellations, where random-walk-based
Monte Carlo simulations become applicable. A standard example is stoquastic k-SAT, which
is both complete for the perfect-completeness version of StoqMA (StoqMA1 ) and contained in
MA [BBT06, BT10]. More recently, this containment was extended slightly to StoqMA with
negligible completeness error [AGL25].3 Beyond being a formal model, StoqMA also captures
physically meaningful Hamiltonians, such as the transverse-field Ising model whose associated
Hamiltonian problem is StoqMA-complete [BH17] and is closely related to adiabatic quantum
computation [AL18].
Complexity-theoretic perspective. From a more modern viewpoint, StoqMA occupies a distin-
    1
      As in [BBT06, Appendix A.4], let the MA verifier be in the state |0⟩|R0 ⟩ + |1⟩|R1 ⟩ before its final mea-
surement. After appending |+⟩|0⟩ and applying√ one Toffoli gate, the resulting StoqMA verifier has the state
(|000⟩|R0 ⟩ + |100⟩|R0 ⟩ + |001⟩|R1 ⟩ + |111⟩|R1 ⟩)/ 2 before the final measurement. Hence, the acceptance proba-
bility p becomes (1 + p)/2: the accepting branch interferes constructively, while the rejecting branch is split into
orthogonal labels.
    2
      In this work, we refer to such states as non-negative states.
    3
      This improvement is achieved via a careful analysis of the underlying random walk for yes instances in [AG19,
Section 5], together with a probabilistic argument for the lazy random walk, such as [ST13, Proposition 2.5].



                                                         1
guished place in the classification of local Hamiltonian problems. In the qubit 2-local setting,
every problem falls into one of four categories: in P, NP-complete, StoqMA-complete, or QMA-
complete [CM16], yielding a quantum analogue of Schaefer’s dichotomy theorem [Sch78].4 Under
derandomization assumptions implying AM = NP [KvM02, MV05], the intermediate StoqMA-
complete level would disappear. Likewise, under the standard derandomization assumption that
MA = NP, proving StoqMA = MA would eliminate the same level.
Distribution-testing perspective. More recently, an intrinsic connection between distribution
testing and the final Hadamard-basis measurement in a StoqMA verifier has been identified
in [Liu21]. Roughly speaking, the verifier’s final measurement computes a Hellinger-affinity-
type quantity between two induced distributions that are determined jointly by the verification
circuit and the witness. This perspective also yields another non-trivial subclass eStoqMA of
StoqMA that is contained in MA via distribution-testing techniques [CR14], as well as parallel
repetition for StoqMA [Liu21], which immediately implies error reduction for StoqMA with
negligible completeness error.

Unentangled Merlin–Arthur proof systems and their motivations. Parallel to the
development of stoquastic Merlin-Arthur proof systems, the notion of unentanglement gives rise
to the class QMA(2) introduced by Kobayashi, Matsumoto, and Yamakami [KMY09], in which
the verifier has full quantum power but receives two unentangled quantum proofs, or equivalently
the witness is required to be a separable state across two registers.5 This viewpoint was then
substantially clarified by Harrow and Montanaro [HM13], who showed that QMA(k ), for up
to polynomially many provers, collapses to QMA(2). Their work established error reduction
for QMA(2), showing the class is robust under the usual choice of constant completeness and
soundness parameters.
    On the upper-bound side, however, QMA(2) is notoriously difficult. The underlying opti-
mization is over separable states and is therefore more subtle than that over arbitrary quantum
states, which obstructs many of the techniques available for QMA. For the general class, the triv-
ial upper bound of NEXP remains the best known. Nevertheless, several restricted settings are
better understood. For example, when the verifier’s induced measurements are restricted to Bell
or one-way LOCC, the corresponding subclasses are contained in QMA [BCY11, BH13, LS15].
Several further perspectives on QMA(2) are as follows:
Power of short unentangled proofs. QMA(k ) with short proofs already captures NP in strik-
ing ways. Blier and Tapp [BT12] first established that NP admits two O(log n)-qubit quantum
proofs, with a vanishing gap. A scaled-up version of this idea later implied that PreciseQMA(2) =
NEXP [Per12], and the soundness analysis was subsequently improved in [Bei10, CF13, LNN12].
Later work focused on obtaining a constant gap, a goal first realized in [ABD+ 09], and later
refined to use two O(e √n)-qubit quantum proofs by combining PCP machinery with prover-
elimination techniques from [HM13]. This line of work also yields conditional hardness of
QMA(2) under the Exponential-Time Hypothesis (ETH). Moreover, the measurement under-
lying this QMA(2) protocol can be relaxed further, even to Bell measurements [CD10], with
subsequent improvements in [CF13, NZ23]. More recently, imposing a non-negative promise
on both yes and no instances of QMA(2), thereby defining QMA+ (2), further strengthens the
power of unentanglement, yielding QMA+ (2) = NEXP [JW23], with subsequent developments
in [JW24, BFM24, BFL+ 24].
Optimization over separable states. A central way to understand QMA(2) is as tensor opti-
   4
     Other examples include local Hamiltonian problems with symmetric 2-local interactions and no 1-local terms,
which are either QMA-complete or in StoqMA [PM17], as well as a recent classification of EPR Hamiltoni-
ans [MS26], whose levels are QMA-complete, StoqMA-complete, NP-complete, and reducible to the EPR∗ problem
conjectured to be in BPP.
   5
     See also [JLW26] for a comprehensive survey about QMA(2).


                                                       2
mization in disguise: the verifier’s maximum acceptance probability is obtained by optimiz-
ing over the separable states, rather than by estimating a top eigenvalue. This connects
QMA(2) to a broader landscape of tensor optimization and hardness of approximation, includ-
ing themes around the Unique Games Conjecture [BBH+ 12]. This viewpoint has led to sev-
eral distinct algorithmic approaches. One sophisticated line of developments uses semidefinite-
programming hierarchies based on relaxations of separable states, such as PPT and extendibil-
ity [DPS04, NOP09, HNW17, FF21]. The convergence rate of the corresponding SDP hierarchies
is often guaranteed by quantum information-theoretic or de Finetti type arguments asserting that
symmetric states must be close to separable. In restricted measurement regimes such as one-way
LOCC, this SDP hierarchy yields quasipolynomial-time algorithms [BCY11, BH13, LS15]. An-
other line of attacks includes smarter search algorithms exploring the set of quantum states such
as epsilon-net methods [SW15, BH15], and Sum-of-Squares-based algorithms [BKS14, BKS17].
More recently, algebraic-geometric based approaches have been explored [HNW17, KR26]. Al-
together, this optimization perspective places QMA(2) at the interface of separability testing,
convex optimization, and classical hardness of approximation.
Physical and information-theoretic perspective. One canonical QMA(2)-complete problem is
Separable Sparse Hamiltonian [CS12]. By contrast, Separable Local Hamiltonian,
though once conjectured to be QMA(2)-complete, is in fact in QMA, and the hardness techniques
of [CS12] apply only in the sparse setting. Another natural QMA(2)-complete problem is Pure
Product Isometry Output (PIPO), which asks whether a given isometry U maps some
pure state |ψ⟩ to a state close to a pure product state [GHMW15]. Interestingly, PIPO also
serves as a starting point for proving that Low Entropy Low Energy State, namely the
intersection of the local Hamiltonian problem and the task of deciding whether a state has low
bipartite entropy, is QMA(2)-hard via a new channel-to-Hamiltonian simulation that yields a
local Hamiltonian [GK25].

From stoquastic to unentangled stoquastic. Since stoquasticity originates from sign-
problem-free physical systems, which avoid destructive interference from sign cancellations, our
model StoqMA(2) naturally combines the two themes above and captures the power of unentan-
glement without destructive interference. Algebraically, this absence of destructive interference
is reflected by non-negativity. This interaction leads to the following two questions:
      (a) Can unentanglement remain computationally powerful even without destructive
          interference? More concretely, can StoqMA(2) recover some known QMA(2)-
          type lower bounds?
    Prior work suggests that the ability to perform distribution-testing-type tasks makes StoqMA
appear more powerful than MA, with this extra power closely tied to non-negativity [Liu21];
moreover, non-negativity can dramatically strengthen unentanglement [JW23]. Together, these
results support the intuition behind Question (a).

      (b) Can stoquasticity impose new computational limitations on unentangled proof
          systems? More precisely, does StoqMA(2) admit (algorithmic) upper bounds
          beyond NEXP, still out of reach for general QMA(2)?

   Question (b) reflects the viewpoint that the intrinsic non-negativity of StoqMA makes its
convex structure easier to exploit and therefore imposes extra structure, as supported by the best
known upper bounds: QMA ⊆ SBQP [Vya03, MW05, Kup15], whereas StoqMA ⊆ SBP [BBT06],
where SBQP and SBP are variants of BQP and BPP, respectively, with a completeness-to-
soundness ratio at least 2. In the general polynomial optimization literature, a similar sign-free
phenomenon has been exploited [BGG+ 17], admitting faster approximation algorithms.
   We provide surprisingly sharp answers to these questions.

                                                3
1.1    Main results
We now present and explain our main results from both the proof-system and algorithmic per-
spectives. These two perspectives are closely connected and together establish ETH-based op-
timality for both short stoquastic unentangled proofs for NP, mirroring [ABD+ 09, CF13], and
the Barak–Kelner–Steurer algorithm [BKS14] for non-negative tensor optimization problems.

The proof-system perspective. We begin by stating our first main result concerning Sto-
qMA(2) with short proofs, given in Theorem 1.1. For convenience, we write StoqMAℓ Jk, c, ∆K
for the class of StoqMA(k ) proof systems in which each proof has length ℓ(n), completeness
c(n), and promise gap ∆(n) := c(n) − s(n), where s(n) denotes the soundness parameter. For
simplicity, we may omit the subscript ℓ when ℓ(n) is polynomially bounded.
Theorem 1.1 (The power of StoqMA(2) with short proofs, informal version of Theorems 5.4
and 5.5). The following inclusions hold:6
                         r                            z
                                   − polylog(n)
 (1) NP ⊆ StoqMAO(  e √n) 2, 1 − 2              , Ω(1) ⊆ MA.

  (2) NP ⊆ StoqMAO(log n) 2, 1 − O n−2 , Ω n−2 ⊆ MA.
                         q                   y

    Surprisingly, Theorem 1.1(1) matches the prior constant-gap QMA(2) protocols with
sublinear-size proofs [ABD+ 09, CD10], apart from the loss of perfect completeness. A similar
short-proof phenomenon is unlikely to hold even for QMA, since otherwise it would violate
the Quantum Exponential-Time Hypothesis [CCZZ22]. Likewise, this phenomenon appears
unlikely for MA(2), which trivially collapses to MA and would therefore violate randomized ETH
(rETH) [DHM+ 14]. Therefore, since StoqMA naturally contains MA, this argument suggests
that collapsing StoqMA(2) to StoqMA, referred to as a multi-to-single witness reduction, would
incur at least a quadratic blow-up in the proof length. It turns out that this quadratic loss in
the multi-to-single witness reduction (e.g., [GJ26]) is unavoidable, assuming rETH.7
    Similarly, Theorem 1.1(2) matches the prior inverse-polynomial-gap QMA(2) protocols with
logarithmic-size proofs [BT12, Bei10, CF13, LNN12], except for the loss of perfect completeness.
Together with a sufficiently structured PCP for NEXP, such as [JW23, Theorem 7.4], we obtain
the following scaling-up version of Theorem 1.1(2):
Corollary 1.2. NEXP ⊆ StoqMA 2, 1 − 2− poly(n) , Ω 2− poly(n) ⊆ PreciseStoqMA(2).
                                   q                            y

   Here, “precise” means that the promise gap of the class variant is exponentially small. As a
consequence of Corollary 1.2 and the equivalence NEXP = PreciseQMA(2) established in [Per12],
we obtain the following equivalence:
Corollary 1.3. PreciseStoqMA(2) = NEXP = PreciseQMA(2).
    As we will discuss later in the algorithmic perspective, the protocol underlying Theo-
rem 1.1(1) is optimal under the Exponential-Time Hypothesis (ETH), when combined with
the Sum-of-Squares algorithm of [BKS14] for non-negative tensor optimization problems. In-
terestingly, our results (Theorems 1.1 and 1.8), achieving ETH-based optimality, use the class
StoqMA(2) in regimes that collapse to MA. Here, the MA upper bound in Theorem 1.1(1) is
obtained by combining [GJ26, AGL25], while the one in Theorem 1.1(2) follows from our new
upper bound for StoqMA(k )log , where the subscript log denotes logarithmic-size proofs:8
   6
     The notation O(·)
                   e suppresses poly-logarithmic factors; see the beginning of Section 2 for the formal definition.
   7
     This conditional optimality result follows by combining Theorem 1.1(1) with SAT ∈ StoqMAℓ J1, 1, 1/2K (see
Appendix C.3), where ℓ(n) = n and n denotes the number of variables in the SAT formula. Consequently,
applying a multi-to-single witness reduction to Theorem 1.1(1) without incurring a quadratic blow-up would
refute rETH.
   8
     Notably, the inclusion StoqMAlog ⊆ BPP in Theorem 1.4 can be extended to a bounded-error randomized
algorithm for StoqMAℓ with time complexity singly exponential in the proof length ℓ, and this dependence is
optimal under randomized ETH, up to poly-logarithmic factors.


                                                        4
Theorem 1.4 (Upper bounds for StoqMA(k ) with logarithmic-size proofs, informal version
of Theorems 6.1 and 6.3). For every integer-valued function k(n), it holds that
                            StoqMA(k )log ⊆ MA         while    StoqMAlog = BPP.

    Since the proof-length advantages in stoquastic short unentangled proofs remain even as-
suming the standard derandomization assumption MA = NP, our first result and its corollaries
give a positive answer to Question (a):

             Even assuming MA = NP, quantum-inspired randomness enables sublinear
                unentangled proofs and (at least) quadratic proof-length advantages.


The algorithmic perspective. Next, we turn to our second main result:

Theorem 1.5 (Upper bounds for StoqMA(k ) with perfect completeness, informal version of The-
orems 7.1 and 7.2). For all integer-valued functions ℓ(n), k(n), m0 (n), and m+ (n), and every
∆(n) ∈ (0, 1/2], where m0 (n) and m+ (n) denote the numbers of |0⟩ and |+⟩ ancillary qubits in
the underlying stoquastic verification circuit, the following inclusion holds:9
                                        kℓ                    kℓ                    
     StoqMAℓ Jk, 1, ∆K ⊆ DTISP exp O     e       max{kℓ, m+ } , O        max{kℓ, m0 , m+ }
                                            ∆2                        ∆2
                                        h                       i
                            ∩ DTIME exp O(max{kℓ,
                                               e           m+ }) .

   Here, DTISP[t, s] denotes the class of problems decidable simultaneously in deterministic
time t and space s. Taken together, Corollary 1.3 and the deterministic time bound in Theo-
rem 1.5 imply the following separation under the standard assumption EXP ̸= NEXP:

Corollary 1.6. PreciseStoqMA(2)1 ⊊ PreciseStoqMA(2) unless EXP = NEXP.

    Here, the subscript 1 indicates perfect completeness. Notably, the failure of perfect-
completeness closure for PreciseStoqMA(2), as provided in Corollary 1.6, contrasts with the
closure under perfect completeness for the general quantum classes: specifically, PreciseQMA =
PreciseQMA1 [FL16, FL18] and PreciseQMA(2) = PreciseQMA(2)1 [Per12]. Nevertheless,
this failure does not extend to the single-prover precise stoquastic setting: our inclusion
PSPACE ⊆ PreciseStoqMA1 , established in Appendix A, together with [FL16, FL18], also
implies that PreciseStoqMA is closed under perfect completeness:10

Theorem 1.7. PreciseStoqMA = PreciseStoqMA1 = PSPACE = PreciseQMA.

   Furthermore, Corollaries 1.3 and 1.6 and Theorem 1.7 together reveal a subtle distinction
among precise stoquastic proof systems: although the precise stoquastic complexity classes
match their quantum counterparts in both the single-prover and two-prover settings without
perfect completeness, this strength does not persist under perfect completeness once unentan-
glement is present.

       Our third main result records a general upper bound for StoqMA(k ):11
   9
     The simultaneous exponential-time and polynomial-space upper bound in Theorem 7.1 directly extends to
the regime where the completeness error is doubly exponentially small, while the singly exponential-time upper
bound in Theorem 7.2 directly extends to the regime where the completeness error is triply exponentially small.
  10
     Theorem 1.7 follows from Theorem A.1, and we refer the reader to Appendix A for details.
  11
     It is important to note that, as in Theorem 1.5, the time bound in Theorem 1.8 also has an implicit exponential
dependence on m+ of the form 2O(m+ ) , arising from deterministically transforming a stoquastic verification circuit
into an entrywise non-negative matrix of dimension 2kℓ . See Remark 8.3 for details.




                                                         5
Theorem 1.8 (Informal version of Theorem 8.2). For every integer-valued ℓ(n) and k(n), and
for all functions c(n) ∈ (1/2, 1] and ∆(n) ∈ (0, 1/2] such that c(n) − ∆(n) ≥ 1/2, it holds that
                                                           2 2 
                         StoqMAℓ Jk, c, ∆K ⊆ DTIME exp O    e k ℓ       .
                                                                ∆2
    Theorem 1.8 follows from the Sum-of-Squares algorithm of Barak, Kelner, and Steurer [BKS14],
as stated in Theorem 8.1. Remarkably, together with Theorem 1.1(1), our refined analysis
implies that the BKS algorithm is essentially optimal under ETH: any improvement over the
stated dependence, up to poly-logarithmic factors, on the tensor order t, corresponding to the
number of provers k, or on the dimension d = 2ℓ , corresponding to the witness length, would
yield an algorithm for SAT that runs faster than ETH permits. This ETH-based optimality also
explains an interesting subtlety concerning the loss of perfect completeness in Theorem 1.1: it
occurs precisely in the regime in which the dependence on both k and ℓ in the time complexity
in Theorem 1.5 is exponentially improved over that of the general algorithm in Theorem 1.8.
    Finally, Theorems 1.5 and 1.8 together establish non-trivial algorithmic upper bounds for
StoqMA(2). These results contrast with the trivial NEXP upper bound for QMA(2), which
remains the state of the art more than two decades after the introduction of QMA(2) [KMY09].
Consequently, our upper bounds give a positive answer to Question (b) and indicate that

            Stoquasticity imposes exploitable structure in unentangled proof systems,
                         yielding upper bounds much better than NEXP.


A stoquastic complexity zoo. For readability, Figure 1 summarizes the relationships among
the complexity classes discussed in this subsection: the classes introduced in this work are shown
in purple shaded boxes with dashed borders, while previously known classes are shown in gray
shaded boxes with solid borders. New inclusions are indicated by bold purple lines, and new
equivalences appear in purple shaded boxes with bold borders. In addition, the new results
proved in the follow-up work [GJ26] are shown in blue shaded boxes with dashed borders.




      Figure 1: Relationships among StoqMA(2), its variants, and other complexity classes.


1.2    Proof techniques
To explain our main results in Section 1.1, we first present basic properties of StoqMA(k ) and its
symmetric variant, which lead to the robustness of StoqMA(2). Equipped with these properties,
we then explain how our lower and upper bounds are achieved.

                                                6
Basic properties of StoqMA(k ). We start with a consequence of parallel repetition for Sto-
qMA(k ) (Theorem 3.3), where the subscript “1 − negl” denotes negligible completeness error:

Theorem 1.9 (Error reduction for StoqMA(k )1−negl , informal version of Theorem 3.3 and Corol-
lary 3.4). Let ε(n) be a negligible function, and let ∆(n) ≥ 1/
                                                              l poly(n) denotemthe promise gap.
                                                                           1
                                                                            
Then, for every polynomially bounded r(n) satisfying r(n) ≥ n log2 1−ε−∆       , it holds that

                       StoqMAℓ Jk, 1 − ε, ∆K ⊆ StoqMArℓ k, 1 − ε′ , Ω(1) .
                                                         q              y

Here, ε′ (n) is also a negligible function.

    It is noteworthy that Theorem 1.9 mirrors parallel repetition for StoqMA [Liu21, Section 5],
but with parameter loss. The main obstacle to extending the approach of [Liu21, Section 5] to
StoqMA(2) is that its soundness analysis relies crucially on the eigenvalue properties of stoquastic
Hermitian matrices,12 whereas the analogous argument fails for separable values of stoquastic
Hermitian matrices in general;13 see Remark 3.5. Instead, we work directly with separable values
of stoquastic positive semi-definite (PSD) matrices, thereby showing that separable values are
multiplicative for stoquastic PSD matrices (Lemma 3.8). Interestingly, for general QMA(2), such
a multiplicative property holds only for separable Hermitian matrices; cf. [HM13, Lemma 10].

    However, unlike QMA(2), which admits error reduction [KMY09, ABD+ 09, HM13], general
error reduction for StoqMA remains open and would collapse StoqMA to MA [AGL25]. Nev-
ertheless, two basic properties for QMA(2), namely prover compression [HM13] and witness
symmetrization [ABD+ 09], still admit stoquastic analogues with only a quadratic gap loss:

Theorem 1.10 (Robustness of StoqMA(2), informal version of Theorems 4.1 and 4.4). Let ε(n)
be the completeness error, and let ∆(n) be the promise gap. Then the following inclusions hold:

  (1) Prover compression. For every polynomially bounded integer-valued k(n) > 2,
                  StoqMAℓ Jk, 1 − ε, ∆K ⊆ StoqMAkℓ 2, 1 − O(ε∆), Ω(∆2 ) .
                                                   q                    y


  (2) Witness symmetrization. For every polynomially bounded integer-valued k(n) ≥ 2,
                 StoqMAℓ Jk, 1 − ε, ∆K ⊆ SymStoqMAO(ℓ log k) Jk, 1 − ε − O(∆), Ω(∆)K,                               (1.1a)
              SymStoqMAℓ Jk, 1 − ε, ∆K ⊆ StoqMAℓ k, 1 − O(ε∆), Ω(∆2 ) .                                             (1.1b)
                                                q                       y


    When the completeness error is negligible, by combining Theorems 1.9 and 1.10(1), we obtain
StoqMA(k )1−negl = StoqMA(2)1−negl for every polynomially bounded k ≥ 2.14 The proof of
Theorem 1.10(1) adopts the construction underlying Theorem 1.9 and the improved analysis
of [SW22] to implement the product test (cf. [HM13, Protocol 1]). Without error reduction,
the quadratic gap loss is obtained via optimizing the branch occurrence probability in [HM13,
Protocol 2], rather than using the original value 1/2. To prove Theorem 1.10(2), the inclusion
in Equation (1.1b) is obtained similarly by refining the construction in [ABD+ 09, Lemma 4.8].
The most interesting direction is the inclusion in Equation (1.1a), which improves the witness
length from kℓ in [ABD+ 09, Lemma 4.8] to O(ℓ log k) while preserving an Ω(∆) promise gap.
    The main idea behind Equation (1.1a) is a coupon-collector-type branch argument: instead
of asking the prover to send k identical copies of the k-tuple witness state |ψ1 ⟩|ψ2 ⟩ · · · |ψk ⟩, the
                                                                                      ⊗r
verifier asks for k bundles of coherent labeled states, of the form √1k j∈[k] |j⟩|ψj ⟩ . Each bun-
                                                                       P

dle contains r = O(log k) independent labeled basis branches, so in the branch-weight analysis
  12
     For convenience, we refer to entrywise non-negative matrices as stoquastic matrices.
  13
     Roughly speaking, for any StoqMA(2) verification circuit Vx , the maximum acceptance probability of Vx
corresponds to the separable value of the matrix ⟨0̄|⟨+̄|Vx† |+⟩⟨+|out Vx |0̄⟩|+̄⟩. See Section 2.2 for a formal definition.
  14
     As stated in Theorem 4.1, without error reduction for StoqMA(k ), which is unknown in general, our current
prover-compression technique would introduce a quadratic gap loss.


                                                             7
the verifier encounters many labels from [k]. By the coupon-collector intuition, a constant total
branch weight is supported on configurations in which these labels contain enough information
to select one branch labeled 1, one branch labeled 2, and so on, using distinct bundles. When
this event occurs, the verifier routes the chosen registers to the original StoqMA(k ) verifier; oth-
erwise, it applies a fixed dummy behavior. This construction preserves soundness and loses only
a constant fraction of the original promise gap.

Lower bounds via distribution testing. The connection between distribution testing and
StoqMA was originally revealed in [Liu21]. More precisely, any stoquastic verification circuit can
be viewed as a reversible branch-overlap test, implicitly in [Liu21, Theorem 22]: given a pair of
reversible circuits (R0 , R1 ) and a non-negative witness state |Ψ⟩, the corresponding stoquastic
verification circuit accepts with probability
               1 + ⟨R0 (Ψ)|R1 (Ψ)⟩
                                   , where |Rb (Ψ)⟩ := Rb |Ψ⟩|0̄⟩|+̄⟩, ∀b ∈ {0, 1}.         (1.2)
                         2
    We extend this viewpoint to the symmetric unentangled setting SymStoqMA(k ), where the
witness state is constrained to have the form |Ψ⟩ := |ψ⟩⊗K .15 This variant is equivalent to
StoqMA(k ) up to a quadratic gap loss (Theorem 1.10(2)). Instead of using one witness to
induce one distributional object, the symmetric tensor-power witness creates many coherent
factor branches whose squared amplitudes behave as a product distribution.
    Consequently, our lower-bound constructions can be viewed as coherent analogues of dis-
tribution testing. In a classical distribution-testing algorithm, one draws independent samples
from an unknown distribution. In SymStoqMA(k ), however, no such intermediate measurement
is performed. Let G = (V, E) be the constraint graph, where V contains n vertices. Instead, the
verifier receives the witness |Ψ⟩, where a computational-basis branch is labeled by a tuple
                                       ((v1 , a1 ), . . . , (vK , aK )) ∈ (V × Σ)K .
We call (vi , ai ) the vertex-label branch in the i-th tensor factor of |Ψ⟩, and the full tuple a
K-vertex-label branch. The squared amplitude of this K-vertex-label branch is
                K
                Y                                                                      X
                      p(vi , ai ),   where p(vi , ai ) := αv2i ,ai and |ψ⟩ =                 αv,a |v, a⟩.
                i=1                                                             (v,a)∈V ×Σ

    Therefore the coherent branch weights are governed by the product distribution p⊗K . This
product-distribution interpretation is used only in the analysis: it describes the total squared
amplitude of accepting or rejecting branches, not outcomes of actual measurements. This dis-
tinction is important, since actual polynomially many classical samples would suggest an MA
containment, as in [Liu21, Section 3.1].

    We first explain Theorem 1.1(2) as a warm-up, which can be viewed as a stoquastic analogue
of [BT12, Bei10, CF13, LNN12]. Our starting point is the Gap Constraint Graph Problem
(GapCG) used in Dinur’s PCP theorem [Din07]. For a satisfying labeling ι : V → Σ, where
(ι(u), ι(v)) ∈ Ruv for each (u, v) ∈ E, the honest one-copy witness is:
                                              1 X
                                     |ϕL ⟩ = p         |v, ι(v)⟩.
                                              |V | v∈V
The verifier receives the witness state |Φ⟩ := |ϕL ⟩ ⊗ |ϕL ⟩. A cheating witness may try to
concentrate branch weight on a small region of the graph, making an unsatisfying labeling appear
satisfying. This observation motivates the following simple branch-local protocol Abranch for a
fixed 2-vertex-label branch ((u, a), (v, b)). The protocol chooses the uniformity or consistency
test with probability 1/2 each and accepts if the chosen test accepts:
 15
      Although K = k, we use K here to emphasize K identical copies of |ψ⟩, rather than the number of provers.


                                                            8
   • Uniformity test: Reject if u = v;

   • Consistency test: Reject if u = v and a ̸= b; or (u, v) ∈ E and (a, b) ∈
                                                                            / Ruv .

    Since only two vertex-label branches are present, a direct calculation shows that the relevant
collision and edge-detection probabilities are of order 1/ poly(n). To implement Abranch as a
stoquastic verification circuit, we express the two acceptance conditions corresponding to the
above tests, as predicates Aunif and Acons , implement them by classical reversible circuits Γunif
and Γcons , and combine these circuits using an additional |+⟩ ancillary qubit to obtain a reversible
circuit Γbranch for the uniform mixture of the two tests. The actual stoquastic verifier is then
obtained by applying the branch-overlap test to the circuit pair (Γbranch , I) on the input state
|+⟩|Ψ⟩|0̄⟩, where |Ψ⟩ equals |Φ⟩ for yes instances.

    We next explain Theorem 1.1(1), a stoquastic analogue of [ABD+ 09, CD10]. We use the same
starting point, GapCG from [Din07], and the same one-copy witness |ϕL ⟩. To achieve a constant
promise gap, the short-proof protocols of [CD10] use O(      e √n) identical copies of |ϕL ⟩, which can
be compressed into two O(     e √n)-qubit proofs using the prover-compression technique [HM13].
Their perfect completeness relies on (at least) Bell-type measurements, while constant soundness
follows from a birthday-paradox analysis.
    To stoquastize these protocols, the main technical challenge is that the uniformity test is
typically implemented using the quantum Fourier transform [ABD+ 09, CD10], and hence is
not stoquastic. One might instead use the two-branch uniformity test from Abranch , but this
gives only a 1/ poly(n) promise gap. To recover a constant gap, we use Paninski’s coincidence-
based uniformity-testing idea [Pan08]: in distribution testing, deviations from uniformity can
                                                                                                     √
be detected from the collision pattern among very sparse samples, with the optimal Θ( n)
behavior for constant-distance testing. Paninski’s test is particularly useful because it separates
marginal uniformity from label consistency, making the soundness analysis modular and leading
to a predicate Abunif . With a refined soundness analysis, a similar birthday-paradox mechanism
applies to coherent K-vertex-label branches. We thus obtain a branch-local protocol Abbranch for
         e √n)-vertex-label branch: the protocol accepts if both tests A
a fixed O(                                                                       bunif and Acons accept.
The actual stoquastic verifier is then obtained as before by applying the branch-overlap test to
the circuit pair Γb branch , I , where Γ
                                       b branch is the classical reversible circuit for A
                                                                                        bunif ∧ Acons .

Upper bounds via rectangular closure testing. To derive upper bounds for StoqMA(2)1 , a
natural starting point is to extend the known random-walk approach used to prove StoqMA1 ⊆
MA to the unentangled setting, which relies crucially on the local optimality phenomenon of
stoquastic k-SAT. This approach [BBT06, BT10] uses this structure dynamically: perfect com-
pleteness can be interpreted as the existence of a clean connected component in the configuration
graph of a stoquastic k-SAT instance, and a random walk from a single seed string suffices to
test this component.
    However, this local structure does not directly extend to StoqMA(2). Given a pair of re-
versible circuits (R0 , R1 ), Equation (1.2) allows us equivalently to consider the circuit pair (Γ, I),
where Γ = R0† R1 . Consequently, for any 2ℓ-qubit non-negative witness state |ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ |ψ2 ⟩, perfect
completeness yields the following identity, with r = m+ in the notation of Theorem 1.5:
                          Γ(|ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ |ψ2 ⟩)|0̄⟩|+⟩⊗r = (|ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ |ψ2 ⟩)|0̄⟩|+⟩⊗r .                  (1.3)
Since Γ is a bijective permutation, Equation (1.3) implies support invariance. More precisely,
if |ψ1 ⟩ and |ψ2 ⟩ have supports S and T , respectively, then the joint support is the rectangle
S × T ; moreover, one may take the corresponding product       subset state |S⟩ ⊗ |T ⟩, where the
subset state of S ⊆ {0, 1} is denoted by |S⟩ =
                            ℓ                      √ 1 P
                                                           j∈S |j⟩. This rectangular structure is
                                                          |S|
global and therefore breaks the direct local optimality analogy with StoqMA1 : a clean connected
component may be highly non-rectangular and hence may not support any product witness.

                                                    9
    Nevertheless, our combinatorial approach recovers a global analogue of local random-walk
exploration by testing a property we call rectangular closure. The key observation from Equa-
tion (1.3) is that, whenever (s, t, u) satisfies s ∈ S, t ∈ T , and u ∈ U := {0, 1}r , every transition
of Γ from (s, t, 0̄, u) to (s′ , t′ , a0 , u′ ) must satisfy a0 = 0̄ and (s′ , t′ , u′ ) ∈ S×T ×U . In other words,
a closed rectangle never sends a valid configuration outside the zero-ancilla sector. Our rectan-
gular closure testing algorithm T formalizes this idea: starting from every seed pair (s0 , t0 ), it
repeatedly closes the current rectangle under all transitions of Γ, adding every pair (s′ , t′ ) forced
by the transition relation underlying Γ. This deterministic process tests not only pairs reached
by an ordinary walk, but also all crossed pairs required by separability.
    The resulting algorithm is therefore global rather than local. For yes instances, Equation (1.3)
guarantees that a seed inside a closed rectangle never changes the zero-ancilla register. For no
instances, the soundness promise implies that every non-closed rectangle has noticeable escaping
mass; by reversibility, this escaping mass forces multiplicative growth of the rectangular closure.
If γ denotes the rejection probability for no instances, which is comparable to the promise gap
∆, then it suffices to run L = Θ(ℓ/γ) closure rounds so that every seed encounters a nonzero
ancilla transition. Implementing our L-round rectangular closure testing algorithm recursively
yields an upper bound that is simultaneously exponential-time and polynomial-space for inverse-
polynomial gaps, while an explicit-table implementation yields a singly exponential-time upper
bound for exponentially small gaps.
    Finally, by replacing exact invariance (Equation (1.3)) with an approximate version, one
can extend our upper bounds to the nearly perfect-completeness regime. Combining our upper
bounds with our prover-compression technique (Corollary 4.2) establishes Theorem 1.5.

A general upper bound via Sum-of-Squares. The upper bound of StoqMA(k ) ⊆ EXP is
a corollary of the Sum-of-Squares algorithm of Barak, Kelner, and Steurer [BKS14].
    After passing to the symmetric form of the protocol, the acceptance probability can be
written as a tensor optimization over the unit sphere
                                              max Tr M (xxT )⊗t ,
                                             ∥x∥=1

where M acting on (Cd )⊗t is the entrywise non-negative matrix induced by the stoquastic verifier,
t is the tensor order corresponding to the number of provers, and d = 2ℓ is the dimension of each
proof. The BKS algorithm relaxes this optimization q to a bounded-degree pseudoexpectation
and rounds it using the non-negative vector x∗ = E[x  e 2 ]. The role of non-negativity is crucial
                                                       i           i
here: it allows the rounded vector to be compared directly with the pseudoexpectation without
cancellations from signs or phases.
    At a high level, the analysis views the pseudoexpectation as defining a joint exchangeable
distribution on random variables A1 , . . . , At . If these variables are close to independent, then the
above direct rounding already gives a good approximation. If they are noticeably correlated, the
BKS conditioning step reweights the pseudo-distribution by a square monomial, which decreases
an entropy potential. Since the entropy is bounded by log d, only finitely many conditioning
steps are possible before rounding succeeds. BKS’s analysis yields a degree-O(t3 log d) SoS upper
bound, which corresponds to an SDP of size exp(O(t3 log2 d)).
    We slightly tighten BKS’s analysis, exploiting the symmetry in the entropy argument, avoid-
ing a wasteful triangle inequality, yielding an improved degree-O(t2 log d) SoS upper bound.
Although the improvement looks quantitatively modest, it makes the parameter dependence
tight. Combined with Theorem 1.1, the degree-O(t2 log d) SoS gives rise to a SAT algorithm
which matches the ETH barrier up to logarithmic and gap-dependent factors: an improvement
to exp((t log d)2−Ω(1) ) time of the SoS algorithm, or any improvement of our protocols Theo-
rem 1.1 with shorter proofs or smaller number of provers would yield a subexponential-time
algorithm for SAT.


                                                        10
1.3      Discussion and open problems
Our results in Theorem 1.1 stoquastize known short unentangled quantum proofs for NP, with
either constant gap [ABD+ 09, CD10, NZ23] or vanishing gap [BT12, Bei10, CF13, LNN12],
and push the upper bound down to MA, which is the best possible target under the standard
derandomization assumption MA = NP. This short-proof picture raises a natural question of
whether short unentangled quantum proofs can yield lower bounds beyond NP.
    An intriguing target is QCMA. One possible starting point is the Ground State Connec-
tivity Problem (GSCON): as established in [CNS18], GSCON ∈ QMAO(n)       e  J2, 1, 1/ poly(n)K,
which suggests the following question:

  (i) Can this protocol be made substantially shorter, or have constant promise gap (assuming
      PCP for QCMA)? More broadly, can one identify a natural QCMA-complete or QMA-
      complete problem that admits a genuinely short QMA(2) proof system?

   From the algorithmic perspective, our upper bounds leave open the possibility of better
time-space trade-off algorithms for StoqMA(2) and, more generally, for non-negative tensor op-
timization problems. The Barak–Kelner–Steurer algorithm [BKS14], with a refined analysis
in Theorem 1.8, achieves near-optimal exponential-time dependence under ETH, but its space
usage is not obviously polynomial. In parameter regimes where the ETH-based optimality bound
does not apply, Theorem 1.5 matches the dependence on the parameters k and ℓ of the upper
bound that is ETH-optimal in the applicable regimes, while using only polynomial space. By
contrast, our fastest algorithm in Theorem 1.5 achieves an exponential improvement over the
ETH-optimal bound in the parameters k and ℓ. A natural open problem is therefore:

 (ii) Is there a randomized or deterministic algorithm for StoqMA(2) with proof length ℓ and
      constant gap that runs in time exp(O(ℓ))
                                          e     and uses only poly(n, ℓ) space? More generally,
      can algorithms for non-negative tensor optimization avoid explicitly storing exponentially
      large matrices or high-degree SDP objects while preserving their time complexity?

1.4      Related work
Most prior work connecting to StoqMA concerns stoquastic Hamiltonians. A line of work start-
ing from [Bra15, Liu21] studies restricted variants of stoquastic local Hamiltonian problems,
especially under additional promises on the ground state or its approximation that lead to MA
containments. This perspective has proved useful beyond the stoquastic setting: analogous MA
containments extend to general local Hamiltonians either with constant precision [GL23, Le 25]
or when the ground state admits a succinct representation [Jia25], with improved hardness results
in [WL25].16 A common formulation of the former includes a guiding state as part of the input,
and its stoquastic counterpart was recently studied from several perspectives [Wai25, HBS26].
    Further work on stoquastic Hamiltonians has studied the distinction between global and
termwise stoquasticity [IPM+ 20], the complexity of curing the sign problem [KT19, KMP+ 20],
oracle separations between stoquastic adiabatic and classical computation [Has21, GHV21], the
equivalence of logarithmically many adaptive queries and polynomially many parallel queries to
a StoqMA oracle [GPY20], and the StoqMA-hardness of geometrically local stoquastic Hamil-
tonians [REG26, WB26]. In addition, a stoquastic version of the Consistency of Local Density
Matrices Problem was proposed in [Liu07], although its StoqMA-completeness remains open.
Very recently, a homology-related MA-complete problem was identified in [HGRD25].
    For QMA(2), alternative proofs of parallel repetition for SepQMA(2) appear in [GSU13,
LW17]. Quantum upper bounds for QMA(2) were given in [GSS+ 22, GR26a] in terms of certain
low levels of different quantum analogues of the polynomial-time hierarchy. In addition, a recent
work identifies a natural QMA(2)-complete problem related to quantum channel testing [CM25].
 16
      In addition, a related constant-precision setting with an NP containment was studied in [WFC24].


                                                       11
Finally, another recent work [BHW25] shows that QMA(2) collapses to QMA assuming a certain
non-standard version of the quantum PCP conjecture.

Concurrent and follow-up work. The concurrent work of [GR26b], which appeared two
days after ours, establishes a complete stoquastic counterpart of [CS12] with respect to spar-
sity: Stoquastic Sparse Hamiltonians Problem is StoqMA-complete, while its separable
version is StoqMA(2)-complete. That work also considers a stoquastic version of prover com-
pression [HM13, SW22], similar in spirit to Theorem 4.7 of our work. Their result obtains a
quadratic loss in the promise gap under the additional assumption that the completeness error is
negligible, whereas our corresponding result achieves the same gap loss without this assumption.
    The follow-up work of [GJ26], which was released fifteen days after our work, establishes a
multi-to-single witness reduction for stoquastic Merlin–Arthur proof systems, thereby collapsing
StoqMA(k ) to StoqMA for every polynomially bounded k ≥ 2. While our algorithmic upper-
bound results (Theorems 1.5 and 1.8) remain state of the art, the complexity-theoretic upper
bound for StoqMA(k ) was significantly improved in [GJ26]. It is important to note, however,
that multi-to-single witness reduction and prover compression are different phenomena. More
precisely, the latter is more efficient than the former with respect to the proof length ℓ:
    • Applying the multi-to-single witness reduction in [GJ26] to StoqMA(k ) with proof length
      ℓ results in StoqMA with proof length O(k 4 ℓ2 /∆3 ).17

    • Applying prover compression in Theorem 1.10(1) to the same class results in StoqMA(2)
      with proof length kℓ.
This comparison aligns with the rETH-based quadratic lower bound with respect to the proof
length ℓ for multi-to-single witness reductions, as sketched immediately after Theorem 1.1.


2     Preliminaries
We assume that the reader has basic familiarity with quantum computation and quantum in-
formation theory. For background, the textbooks [NC10] and [dW19] provide useful starting
points. We adopt the following notation throughout the paper:
    • For every positive integer n, we write [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n} and JnK := {0, 1, . . . , n − 1}.

    • The notation O(f
                   e ) stands for O(f polylog(f )).

    • The notations ln and log denote the natural logarithm and the logarithm to the base 2,
      respectively.

    • A function µ : N → R≥0 is negligible if, for every integer c ≥ 1, there exists an integer
      nc > 0 such that µ(n) < n−c for all n ≥ nc .

    • The notation poly(·) denotes an unspecified polynomial, and polylog(·) denotes an unspec-
      ified polylogarithmic factor. We also write negl for an unspecified negligible function.

    • We adopt I[·] to denote the indicator function of an event or predicate.
    In addition, we denote a promise problem by a pair I = (Iyes , Ino ) of disjoint subsets of
{0, 1}∗ . Inputs in Iyes are called yes instances, and inputs in Ino are called no instances.
Whenever convenient, we write x ∈ I to mean that x ∈ Iyes ∪ Ino . No condition is imposed on
inputs outside Iyes ∪ Ino .
   17
                                                    the original StoqMA(k ) protocol has length ℓ, the positive de
      More specifically, assuming that each proof in
Finetti theorem of [GJ26] uses R = O k2 · kℓ/∆3 copies in its separately symmetric extension, and the resulting
single proof has length O(R · kℓ) = O(k4 ℓ2 /∆3 ).


                                                        12
Linear algebra conventions. We use |0̄⟩ and |+̄⟩ as shorthand for |0⟩⊗a and |+⟩⊗a , respec-
tively, whenever a > 1 and is clear from the context. We also adopt the notation ∥|ψ⟩∥22 := ⟨ψ|ψ⟩
for the Euclidean norm of a vector |ψ⟩ in Dirac notation.
Non-negative states and matrices. A d-dimensional quantum state |ψ⟩, viewed as a unit vector,
is called non-negative if ⟨x|ψ⟩ ≥ 0 for all x ∈ [d]. For any non-negative state |ψ⟩, the support of
|ψ⟩ is denoted by supp(|ψ⟩) := {s ∈ [d] | ⟨s|ψ⟩ > 0}, which consists of the basis indices (typically
binary strings) corresponding to nonzero amplitudes. For any nonempty set S ⊆ {0, 1}n with
d = 2n , the corresponding   subset state, a notion first considered in [Wat00, Section 3], is defined
by |S⟩ := √1                In addition, a d1 × d2 matrix M is called entrywise non-negative if
                 P
                   i∈S |i⟩.
              |S|
⟨x|M |y⟩ ≥ 0 for all x ∈ [d1 ] and y ∈ [d2 ].
Matrices and matrix norms. A square matrix A is Hermitian if A = A† . A Hermitian matrix
A is positive semi-definite, written A ⪰ 0 or 0 ⪯ A, if ⟨ψ|A|ψ⟩ ≥ 0 for every vector |ψ⟩.
Moreover, we say that a positive semi-definite matrix A is a density matrix if Tr(A) = 1. For
Hermitian matrices A and B of the same dimension, we write A ⪯ B if B − A is positive semi-
definite. pIn addition, we denote the trace norm by ∥A∥1 := Tr(|A|), the Frobenius norm by
∥A∥2 := Tr(A† A), and the operator norm by ∥A∥∞ := σmax (A), where σmax (A) denotes the
largest singular value of A. For simplicity, we also write ∥A∥ = ∥A∥∞ .
State spaces. Let S(d) be the set of d-dimensional unit vectors, and let S+ (d) be the set of
d-dimensional non-negative unit vectors. Similarly, let D(d) be the set of d-dimensional density
matrices, and let D+ (d) be the set of d-dimensional entrywise non-negative density matrices.

2.1    Information-theoretic measures
We first list several useful information-theoretic measures for quantum states, together with
their basic properties.

Definition 2.1 (Trace distance). Let ρ0 and ρ1 be quantum states in D(N ). The trace distance
between ρ0 and ρ1 is defined by
                                              1
                                T(ρ0 , ρ1 ) := Tr(|ρ0 − ρ1 |).
                                              2
Definition 2.2 (Fidelity). Let ρ0 and ρ1 be quantum states in D(N ). The (Uhlmann) fidelity
and the squared fidelity between ρ0 and ρ1 are defined by
                            √ √            √      √
                                          q
          F(ρ0 , ρ1 ) := Tr| ρ0 ρ1 | = Tr    ρ0 ρ1 ρ0 and F2 (ρ0 , ρ1 ) := F(ρ0 , ρ1 )2 .

   When one of the states is pure, say ρ0 = |ψ⟩⟨ψ| and ρ1 = ρ, it is easy to verify that
                                       F2 (|ψ⟩⟨ψ|, ρ) = ⟨ψ|ρ|ψ⟩.                                (2.1)
When both states are pure, the following identity holds; see, e.g., [NC10, Section 9.2.3]:
                                                                                                (2.2)
                                                p
                     T(|ψ0 ⟩⟨ψ0 |, |ψ1 ⟩⟨ψ1 |) = 1 − F2 (|ψ0 ⟩⟨ψ0 |, |ψ1 ⟩⟨ψ1 |).
By the data-processing inequality for the trace distance, e.g., [NC10, Theorem 9.2], we obtain:

Lemma 2.3 (Measurement bound for trace distance). Let ρ0 and ρ1 be quantum states in D(N ).
For every two-outcome measurement {Π, I − Π} with 0 ⪯ Π ⪯ I, it holds that
                                  |Tr(Πρ0 ) − Tr(Πρ1 )| ≤ T(ρ0 , ρ1 ).


   Next, we list several information-theoretic measures for probability distributions, together
with their basic properties.


                                                  13
Definition 2.4 (Total variation distance). Let p0 and p1 be probability distributions over [N ].
The total variation distance between p0 and p1 is defined by
                                              1 X
                              TV(p0 , p1 ) :=      |p0 (x) − p1 (x)|.
                                              2
                                                               x∈[N ]

Definition 2.5 (Hellinger distance). Let p0 and p1 be probability distributions over [N ]. The
squared Hellinger distance and Hellinger distance between p0 and p1 are defined by
                                  X p                                 q
              2
             dH (p0 , p1 ) := 1 −    p0 (x)p1 (x) and dH (p0 , p1 ) := d2H (p0 , p1 ).
                                        x∈[N ]

Definition 2.6 (Kullback–Leibler divergence). Let p0 and p1 be probability distributions over
[N ]. The Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between p0 and p1 is defined by
                                            X                p0 (x)
                            KL(p0 ∥p1 ) :=        p0 (x) log        .
                                                             p1 (x)
                                                          x : p0 (x)>0

Lemma 2.7 (Adapted from [Rei89, Equation (3.3.9)]). Let p0 and p1 be probability distributions
over [N ]. Then the following inequality holds:
                                                 2d2H (p0 , p1 ) ≤ KL(p0 ∥p1 ).
Definition 2.8 (Shannon entropy). Let p be a probability distribution over [N ]. The Shannon
entropy of p is defined by               X
                             H(p) := −       p(x) log(p(x)),
                                                           x∈[N ]

with the convention that 0 log(0) = 0.
Equivalently, if X is a random variable taking values in Ω, then the law, or distribution, of X
is the probability distribution pX over Ω denoted by pX (x), and we write
                              H(X) := H(pX ),               where pX (x) := Pr[X = x].
Definition 2.9 (Conditional entropy and mutual information). For jointly distributed random
variables X and Y , the law of (X, Y ) is the joint distribution pX,Y , and we define the joint
entropy and the conditional entropy of X given Y by
                      H(X, Y ) := H(pX,Y )              and      H(X | Y ) := H(X, Y ) − H(Y ).
The mutual information between X and Y is defined by
                                       I(X; Y ) := H(X) + H(Y ) − H(X, Y ).

2.2   (Stoquastic) separable values of square Hermitian matrices
Let M be a square Hermitian matrix of dimension d1 d2 · · · dk . Let Sep(d1 , · · · , dk ) and
Sep+ (d1 , · · · , dk ) denote, Q
                                respectively, the set of separable states and the set of separable
non-negative states on D j∈[k] dj :
                                        

       Sep(d1 , · · · , dk ) := conv{|ψ1 ⟩⟨ψ1 |⊗· · ·⊗|ψk ⟩⟨ψk | | |ψj ⟩ ∈ S(dj ) for every j ∈ [k]},
      Sep+ (d1 , · · · , dk ) := conv{|ψ1 ⟩⟨ψ1 |⊗· · ·⊗|ψk ⟩⟨ψk | | |ψj ⟩ ∈ S+ (dj ) for every j ∈ [k]},
where conv(S) denotes the convex hull of a set S.
   Following [HM13, Equation (5)], we define the corresponding support functions, called the
separable value and the stoquastic separable value, by
        hSep(d1 ,··· ,dk ) (M ) :=                max                 Tr(M (|ψ1 ⟩⟨ψ1 |⊗· · ·⊗|ψk ⟩⟨ψk |)),       (2.3a)
                                     |ψ1 ⟩∈S(d1 ),··· ,|ψk ⟩∈S(dk )

      hSep+ (d1 ,··· ,dk ) (M ) :=                 max                    Tr(M (|ψ1 ⟩⟨ψ1 |⊗· · ·⊗|ψk ⟩⟨ψk |)).   (2.3b)
                                     |ψ1 ⟩∈S+ (d1 ),··· ,|ψk ⟩∈S+ (dk )



                                                                14
    By definition, it follows that hSep+ (d1 ,··· ,dk ) (M ) ≤ hSep(d1 ,··· ,dk ) (M ). When all proofs have
the same dimension, namely d1 = · · · = dk = d, we adopt the notation
             hSep[k;d] (M ) := hSep(d,··· ,d) (M ) and hSep+ [k;d] (M ) := hSep+ (d,··· ,d) (M )
for convenience. From Equation (2.3), it is straightforward to see the following identity, which
also immediately applies to hSep+ (d1 ,··· ,dk ) :

Proposition 2.10. For all real numbers a, b ≥ 0, it holds that
                          hSep(d1 ,··· ,dk ) (aM + bI) = a · hSep(d1 ,··· ,dk ) (M ) + b.

2.3    Stoquastic algorithmic toolkit
The following definition is implicitly given in [BBT06, Definition 4]:

Definition 2.11 (Stoquastic verification circuit). We say that an n-qubit quantum circuit Q is a
stoquastic verification circuit if Q acts on the registers W, A0 , and A+ , uses only Toffoli, CNOT,
and X gates before the final measurement, and then measures the designated output qubit in the
register O in the Hadamard basis. The circuit Q accepts if and only if the final measurement yields
the outcome +. The witness register W contains an mw -qubit state, and the ancillary registers
A0 and A+ are initialized to |0⟩⊗m0 and |+⟩⊗m+ , respectively, where n = mw + m0 + m+ . The
remaining qubits are contained in the register R, which has n − 1 qubits.

    The SWAP test was originally proposed for pure states in [BCWdW01] and was later shown
to extend to mixed states [KMY09]:

Lemma 2.12 (SWAP test for mixed states, adapted from [KMY09, Proposition 9]). Let ρ0
and ρ1 be two m-qubit quantum states, which may in general be mixed. Then there exists an
explicit (2m + 1)-qubit stoquastic circuit that accepts with probability (1 + Tr(ρ0 ρ1 ))/2. This
circuit implementation uses a single copy of each ρ0 and ρ1 , together with m Toffoli gates and
2m CNOT gates.18

   We also need the reversible branch-overlap test, which we refer to simply as the branch-
overlap test, as stated in Lemma 2.13. This test is implicit in [Liu21, Theorem 22], with an
explicit circuit implementation given in [Liu21, Figure 1], and was originally inspired by the
SWAP test [BCWdW01].

Lemma 2.13 (Reversible branch-overlap test, adapted from [Liu21, Theorem 22]). Let R0 and
R1 be polynomial-size classical reversible circuits consisting only of Toffoli, CNOT, and X gates.
Assume that both R0 and R1 act on the same m(n)-qubit full input state
                                     |Ψfull ⟩ := |Ψ⟩ ⊗ |0⟩⊗m0 ⊗ |+⟩⊗r ,
where |Ψ⟩ is the non-negative input state, and m0 (n) and r(n) are polynomially bounded integer-
valued functions. For b ∈ {0, 1}, define |Rb (Ψ)⟩ := Rb |Ψfull ⟩. Then there exists an explicit
(m + 1)-qubit stoquastic circuit that accepts with probability (1 + ⟨R0 (Ψ)|R1 (Ψ)⟩)/2. This circuit
implementation uses a single query to each of R0 and R1 , together with one additional |+⟩
ancillary qubit and a single X gate.


3     Parallel repetition in stoquastic Merlin–Arthur proof systems
We begin by defining StoqMA(k ) via stoquastic verification circuits (Definition 2.11), which
naturally extends [BBT06, Definition 4] to the setting of unentangled witness states:
  18
     A Fredkin gate, namely, a controlled-swap gate on two qubits, can be implemented exactly using two CNOT
gates and a Toffoli gate; see, e.g., [NC10, Exercise 4.25].


                                                        15
Definition 3.1 (StoqMA(k )). A promise problem I = (Iyes , Ino ) is in StoqMAℓ (k, c, s) if there
exists a stoquastic verifier VI such that for every input x ∈ I, the verifier is specified by an
n-qubit stoquastic verification circuit VI (x) that acts on the kℓ-qubit witness register W together
with the ancillary registers A0 and A+ , which are initialized to |0⟩⊗m0 and |+⟩⊗m+ , respectively,
where n = kℓ + m0 + m+ , and produces a Hadamard-basis measurement outcome on the single-
qubit register O together with the remaining qubits in the register R, such that the following hold
for efficiently computable functions c(n), s(n), and ℓ(n):

Completeness. If x ∈ Iyes , then there exists a collection of unentangled states |ψ1 ⟩, · · · , |ψk ⟩,
   each on at most ℓ(n) qubits and with non-negative amplitudes such that
                                   Pr[VI (x) accepts |ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ · · · ⊗ |ψk ⟩] ≥ c(n).

Soundness. If x ∈ Ino , then for every collection of unentangled states |ψ1 ⟩, · · · , |ψk ⟩, each on
    at most ℓ(n) qubits and with non-negative amplitudes, we have
                                   Pr[VI (x) accepts |ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ · · · ⊗ |ψk ⟩] ≤ s(n).

Furthermore, c(n) and s(n) satisfy 1/2 ≤ s(n) < c(n) ≤ 1 and c(n) − s(n) ≥ 1/ poly(n). For
convenience, we write StoqMAℓ Jk, c, ∆K to emphasize the promise gap ∆(n) := c(n)−s(n), abbre-
viate the stoquastic verification circuit VI (x) as Vx , and use the subscript 1 − ε in StoqMA(k )1−ε
to denote the case of completeness error at most ε.

Remark 3.2 (Optimal witness of any StoqMA(k ) verifier is non-negative). It is worth noting that
the restriction in Definition 3.1 to non-negative witness states does not change the computational
power of the class, because optimal stoquastic separable values can be attained by non-negative
states (Proposition 3.7). Although this phenomenon appears similar to that in the StoqMA
case, the underlying reason is different: in the StoqMA case, the conclusion follows from the
Perron-Frobenius theorem (e.g., [Liu21, Remark 2.2]).

Parallel repetition for StoqMA(k ). The main result of this section is that StoqMA(k ) admits
parallel-repetition-type phenomenon:

Theorem 3.3 (Parallel repetition for StoqMA(k )). For any efficiently computable functions
a(n) and b(n) with 0 ≤ b(n) < a(n) ≤ 1, and any efficiently computable positive integer-valued
functions k(n) and r(n) bounded by poly(n), the following inclusion holds:
                                                       1 (1 + a)r 1 (1 + b)r
                                                                              
                       1 a 1 b
           StoqMAℓ k, + , +           ⊆ StoqMArℓ k, +               , +           .
                       2 2 2 2                         2     2r+1 2        2r+1
    It is noteworthy that the proof technique underlying Theorem 3.3 extends to the more general
setting in which the parallel repetitions are associated with distinct StoqMA(k ) verifiers, and
hence with different promise problems. More specifically, given two promise problems I (1) :=
   (1)   (1)              (2)   (2) 
 Iyes , Ino and I (2) := Iyes , Ino , their direct product is defined by:
           (Iyes , Ino ) := I (1) × I (2) ,   where Iyes := Iyes
                                                             (1)    (2)
                                                                 × Iyes and Ino := Ino
                                                                                    (1)    (2)
                                                                                        × Ino  .
    Furthermore, we refer to the corresponding closure property of StoqMA(k ) in the parameter
regime of Theorem 3.3 as direct product with parameter loss, as stated in Theorem 3.14. Despite
the parameter loss, a direct calculation yields the following error-reduction consequence for
StoqMA(k ) when the completeness error is negligible:

Corollary 3.4 (Error reduction for StoqMA(k )1−negl ). Let δ(n) and b(n) be efficiently com-
putable non-negative functions with 0 ≤ b(n) < 1 − 1/poly(n) and b(n) < 1 − δ(n), and suppose
that δ(n) is negligible, and let k(n) and r(n) be efficiently computable positive integer-valued



                                                       16
functions that are polynomially bounded, where r(n) is chosen as the number of repetitions.
Then parallel repetition gives the following inclusion:
                                                            1 1 − δ ′ 1 δ ′′
                                                                          
                           1 1−δ 1 b
             StoqMAℓ k, +            , +       ⊆ StoqMArℓ k, +       , +      .
                           2      2    2 2                  2    2    2  2
Here, the resulting threshold parameters are
                                   δ(n) r(n)
                                                                                            r(n)
                   ′                                               ′′               1 + b(n)
                  δ (n) := 1 − 1 −                         and    δ (n) :=                             .
                                     2                                                 2
Furthermore, δ ′ (n) is negligible for every polynomially bounded r(n), while δ ′′ (n) is negligible
whenever r(n) is chosen sufficiently large. In particular, to guarantee the soundness error bound
δ ′′ (n) ≤ 2−n , it suffices to take
                                                               
                                                      n
                                     r(n) ≥                      .
                                              log(2/(1 + b(n)))
Remark 3.5 (Parameter loss in parallel repetition for StoqMA(k )). There is parameter loss in the
regime underlying Theorem 3.3, whereas some subclasses of StoqMA(k ) admit direct product
without parameter loss, as is already implicit in [Liu21, Section 5]. This closure property holds
for the subclass of StoqMA(k ) that we call ProdStoqMA(k ). The definition of ProdStoqMA(k )
is identical to that of Definition 3.1, except that for a ProdStoqMA(k ) verifier Vx , themaximum
acceptance probability ω(Vx ) has the product form ω(Vx ) = 1 + hSep+ (2ℓ ,··· ,2ℓ ) (Mx ) /2, where
Mx = ⟨0̄|⟨+̄|Vx† XO Vx |0̄⟩|+̄⟩ and Mx =
                                                     (j)                       (j)
                                              j∈[k] Mx . Here, each factor Mx is Hermitian and
                                           N
entrywise non-negative and corresponds to the j-th component of the witness state for j ∈ [k].
Consequently, ProdStoqMA(k ) admits parallel repetition without parameter loss. The detailed
statement and proof can be found in an earlier version of our work [LW26, Section 3.4].

Stoquastic separable values are multiplicative. To prove the soundness parts of Theo-
rem 3.3, we establish the following multiplicative property of stoquastic separable values under
tensor products, whose two cases follow by straightforward induction from Lemma 3.8 and
Lemma 3.9, respectively:

Theorem 3.6 (Tensor-product multiplicativity of stoquastic separable values). For any en-
                                                                                           Q     (1)
trywise non-negative Hermitian square matrices M1 , · · · , Mr of dimensions i∈[k] di , · · · ,
         (r)
  i∈[k] di , respectively, the stoquastic separable value is multiplicative under tensor products,
Q
                                                              Y
              hSep+ Q      (i)
                           d ,··· ,
                                    Q
                                      d
                                        (j) (M1 ⊗· · ·⊗Mr ) =
                                                                hSep+ d(j) ,··· ,d(j)  (Mj ),     (3.1)
                      i∈[r]   1          j∈[r]   k                                      1       k
                                                                        j∈[r]

provided that one of the following conditions holds:

 (1) All matrices M1 , · · · , Mr are positive semi-definite.
                                                                                       (j)             (j)
 (2) For each j ∈ [r], there exist Hermitian square matrices M1 , · · · , Mk of dimensions
      (j)          (j)
     d1 , · · · , dk , respectively, such that Mj admits the product decompositions
                                                            (j)           (j)
                                                     Mj = M1 ⊗· · ·⊗Mk ,
                                  (j)
      where each factor Mi              is Hermitian and entrywise non-negative for all i ∈ [k] and j ∈ [r].


    In the remainder of this section, we first present the multiplicativity of stoquastic separable
values in Section 3.1, and then provide two StoqMA(k )-complete problems arising from the class
definition in Section 3.2. Lastly, we establish the closure property underlying Theorem 3.3 in
Section 3.3.

                                                           17
3.1    The multiplicativity of the stoquastic separable values
We begin by showing that the separable value and the stoquastic separable value, both defined
in Equation (2.3), coincide when M is an entrywise non-negative matrix:

Proposition 3.7 (Optimal stoquastic separable value achieved by non-negative
                                                                   Q            states). For
every entrywise non-negative square Hermitian matrix M of dimension j∈[k] dj , it holds that
                                 hSep(d1 ,...,dk ) (M ) = hSep+ (d1 ,··· ,dk ) (M ).

Proof. For simplicity, we present the proof only for the case k = 2, and the argument extends
straightforwardly to general k. Let
                                    X                       X
                          |ψ1⋆ ⟩ :=    ai |i⟩ and |ψ2⋆ ⟩ :=     bj |j⟩
                                        i∈[d1 ]                                     j∈[d2 ]

be two pure states that achieve the optimum stoquastic separable value. Accordingly, define the
corresponding non-negative states
                                  X                        X
                           ψ1+ :=     |ai ||i⟩ and ψ2+ :=     |bj ||j⟩.
                                          i                                             j

Since M is entrywise non-negative and hSep(d1 ,d2 ) (M ) is non-negative, we obtain:
                         hSep(d1 ,d2 ) (M ) = ⟨ψ1⋆ |⟨ψ2⋆ |M |ψ1⋆ ⟩|ψ2⋆ ⟩                                  (3.2a)
                                               X
                                                      Re a∗i b∗j ai′ bj ′ ⟨i|⟨j|M i′ j ′                  (3.2b)
                                                                         
                                            =
                                                  i,j,i′ ,j ′
                                                    X
                                              ≤                  a∗i b∗j ai′ bj ′ ⟨i|⟨j|M i′ j ′          (3.2c)
                                                  i,j,i′ ,j ′
                                                    X
                                              ≤                 |a∗i ||b∗j ||ai′ ||bj ′ |⟨i|⟨j|M i′ j ′   (3.2d)
                                               i,j,i′ ,j ′

                                              = ψ1+ ψ2+ M ψ1+                     ψ2+                     (3.2e)
                                              ≤ hSep+ (d1 ,d2 ) (M ) ≤ hSep(d1 ,d2 ) (M ).                (3.2f)
Here, the fourth line follows from the triangle inequality. Therefore, the non-negative states
ψ1+ and ψ2+ also achieve the desired optimum stoquastic separable value.

Stoquastic separable values of positive semi-definite matrices. We next establish the
main technical lemma of this subsection:

Lemma 3.8 (Stoquastic separable values of positive semi-definite matrices are multiplicative).
For any entrywise non-negative positive semi-definite matrices M and M ′ of dimensions i∈[k] di
                                                                                                           Q

and j∈[k] d′j , respectively, the stoquastic separable value is multiplicative under tensor products:
    Q

              hSep+ (d1 d′ ,··· ,dk d′ ) M ⊗M ′ = hSep+ (d1 ,··· ,dk ) (M ) · hSep+ (d′ ,··· ,d′ ) (M ′ ).
                                               
                         1           k                                                1        k


Proof. For simplicity, we prove only the case where k = 2, and the same argument directly
extends to general k. Let the operator M act on quantum registers A and B, and let the operator
M ′ act on quantum registers A′ and B′ . Following Proposition 3.7, it suffices to consider only
non-negative quantum states.
    The lower bound is straightforward. This is because there exist non-negative states |ψ1 ⟩ ∈
S+ (d1 ), |ψ2 ⟩ ∈ S+ (d2 ), |ψ1′ ⟩ ∈ S+ (d′1 ), and |ψ2′ ⟩ ∈ S+ (d′2 ) such that the following holds:
                          Tr(MAB (|ψ1 ⟩⟨ψ1 |A ⊗|ψ2 ⟩⟨ψ2 |B )) = hSep(d1 ,d2 ) (M ),
                       Tr MA′ ′ B′ ψ1′ ψ1′ A′ ⊗ ψ2′ ψ2′ B′ = hSep(d′ ,d′ ) (M ′ ).
                                                          
                                                                      1 2




                                                                  18
    Then, there exist non-negative states |ϕ1 ⟩AA′ := |ψ1 ⟩A ⊗ |ψ1′ ⟩A′ ∈ S+ (d1 d′1 ) and |ϕ2 ⟩BB′ :=
|ψ2 ⟩B ⊗|ψ2′ ⟩B′ ∈ S+ (d2 d′2 ), which imply the desired lower bound:
              hSep+ (d1 d′ ,d2 d′ ) (M ⊗M ′ ) ≥ Tr MAB ⊗MA′ ′ B′ (|ϕ1 ⟩⟨ϕ1 |AA′ ⊗|ϕ2 ⟩⟨ϕ2 |BB′ )
                                                                                               
                         1      2

                                              = hSep+ (d1 ,d2 ) (M ) · hSep+ (d′ ,d′ ) (M ′ ).
                                                                                             1   2

   To establish the upper bound, let |ϕ1 ⟩AA′ ∈ S+ (d1 d′1 ) and |ϕ2 ⟩BB′ ∈ S+ (d2 d′2 ) be non-
negative states that attain the maximum separable value of M ⊗M ′ . Decompose these states in
the computational basis of their first register, A and B, respectively:
                                      d1
                                      X                                                    d2
                                                                                           X
                       |ϕ1 ⟩AA′ =        |i⟩A ⊗|ηi ⟩A′               and |ϕ2 ⟩BB′ =           |j⟩B ⊗|ϑj ⟩B′ .            (3.3)
                                          i=1                                              j=1

A direct calculation implies the following normalization equalities:
                                          d1
                                          X                                     d2
                                                                                X
                                             ⟨ηi |ηi ⟩ = 1 and                     ⟨ϑj |ϑj ⟩ = 1.                        (3.4)
                                          i=1                                   j=1

   Now we expand hSep+ (d1 d′ ,d2 d′ )                    (M ⊗M ′ ) using the decompositions in Equation (3.3):
                                          1         2

   hSep+ (d1 d′ ,d2 d′ ) (M ⊗M ) = ⟨ϕ1 |AA′ ⟨ϕ2 |BB′ MAB ⊗MA′ ′ B′ |ϕ1 ⟩AA′ |ϕ2 ⟩BB′
                                ′
                                                                                                                        (3.5a)
                                                                   
              1      2
                                    X                                        E          E   E
                                 =      ⟨i|A⟨ηi |A′⟨j|B⟨ϑj |B′ MAB ⊗MA′ ′ B′ î ηî A′ ĵ ϑĵ ′                         (3.5b)
                                                                                                     A          B   B
                                              i,j,î,ĵ
                                              X                          E E                                     E
                                     ≤                    ⟨i|A⟨j|B MAB î ĵ · ⟨ηi |A′⟨ϑj |B′ MA′ ′ B′ ηî A′ ϑĵ ′ .   (3.5c)
                                                                            A     B                                 B
                                              i,j,î,ĵ

Here, the last line follows from the fact that M is entrywise non-negative.
    Note that the entrywise non-negativity of M ′ implies that all entries of M ′ are real. Since M ′
is positive semi-definite, it follows that M ′ is real symmetric. Consequently, M ′ can be viewed
as a Gram matrix, and we may therefore apply the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality to the positive
semi-definite bilinear form induced by M ′ . In particular, for every i ∈ [d1 ], j ∈ [d2 ], î ∈ [d1 ],
and ĵ ∈ [d2 ], the following holds:
                                                        E
                       ⟨ηi |A′⟨ϑj |B′MA′ ′ B′ ηî A′ ϑĵ ′                                        (3.6a)
                                                         B
                      q                                     r       D                         E
                   ≤ ⟨ηi |A′⟨ϑj |B′MA′ ′ B′|ηi ⟩A′|ϑj ⟩B′ ·   ηî A′ ϑĵ ′MA′ ′ B′ ηî A′ ϑĵ ′   (3.6b)
                                                                        B                       B
                                                          q         q            q
                   ≤ hSep(d′ ,d′ ) (M ′ ) · ⟨ηi |ηi ⟩ · ⟨ϑj |ϑj ⟩ · ⟨ηî |ηî ⟩ · ⟨ϑĵ |ϑĵ ⟩     (3.6c)
                                             p
                              1 2

Plugging Equation (3.6) into Equation (3.5), we obtain the desired upper bound:
      hSep+ (d1 d′ ,d2 d′ ) (M ⊗M ′ )
                 1      2
                               X                E E p            q           q             q
    ≤ hSep+ (d′ ,d′ ) (M ′ ) ·   ⟨i|A⟨j|B MAB î ĵ · ⟨ηi |ηi ⟩ · ⟨ϑj |ϑj ⟩ · ⟨ηî |ηî ⟩ · ⟨ϑĵ |ϑĵ ⟩
              1 2                                A B
                              i,j,î,ĵ
                          ′
    = hSep+ (d′ ,d′ ) (M ) · ⟨ξ|A ⟨ς|B MAB |ξ⟩A |ς⟩B
               1   2

   ≤ hSep+ (d′ ,d′ ) (M ′ ) · hSep+ (d1 ,d2 ) (M ).
              1 2


   Here, |ξ⟩ = di=1         ⟨ηi |ηi ⟩|i⟩ and |ς⟩ = dj=1 ⟨ϑj |ϑj ⟩|j⟩ are non-negative states, where the
                P1 p                                P2 p
normalization is ensured by Equation (3.4).

    However, this multiplicative property only holds for Hermitian matrices in product form, and
the proof is deferred to Appendix C.1:


                                                                       19
Lemma 3.9 (Stoquastic separable values of product Hermitian matrices are multiplicative).
Let M and M ′ be entrywise non-negative product Hermitian matrices of dimensions i∈[k] di
                                                                                        Q

and i∈[k] d′i , respectively, and suppose that these matrices admit the product decompositions
    Q

                                 M = M1 ⊗· · ·⊗Mk          and    M ′ = M1′ ⊗· · ·⊗Mk′ ,                        (3.7)
where each factor Mi and Mi′ is Hermitian and entrywise non-negative for i ∈ [k].                            Then the
stoquastic separable value is multiplicative under tensor products, namely
              hSep+ (d1 d′ ,··· ,dk d′ ) M ⊗M ′ = hSep+ (d1 ,··· ,dk ) (M ) · hSep+ (d′ ,··· ,d′ ) (M ′ ).
                                               
                         1           k                                                1        k



3.2     Two StoqMA(k )-complete problems from the class definition
We introduce two StoqMA(k )-complete problems that arise directly from the class definition,
and each admits an interpretation in terms of property testing over different objects. Our
second complete problem (SepRCDk ) is directly analogous to the StoqMA-complete problem
Reversible Circuit Distinguishability (RCD) introduced in [Liu21, Section 4].

3.2.1     Separable Stoquastic Close Image to Uniform
We start with an observation due to [Kob03, Theorem 9]: deciding whether Tr(ρ0 ρ1 ) is at least
2/3 or at most 1/3 for single-qubit states ρ0 and ρ1 , whose purifications can be prepared effi-
ciently, is BQP-complete. This observation suggests that the acceptance probability of quantum
computation can be interpreted as a closeness testing problem. Moreover, when neither ρ0 nor ρ1
admits such a measurement, we can instead implement the measurement induced by the SWAP
test for mixed states [BCWdW01, KMY09], which accepts with probability (1 + Tr(ρ0 ρ1 ))/2.
    Since the SWAP test can be viewed as a stoquastic verifier, as implicitly observed in [Liu21,
Section 4], we introduce our first StoqMA(k )-complete problem SepStoqCIUk : 19
Definition 3.10 (k-Separable Stoquastic Close Image to Uniform, SepStoqCIUk ).
Let R be a polynomial-size classical reversible circuit consisting only of Toffoli, CNOT, and X
gates. Suppose that R acts on an m(n)-qubit input state of the form
                                          |ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ · · · ⊗ |ψk ⟩ ⊗ |0⟩⊗m0 ⊗ |+⟩⊗m+ ,
where each |ψj ⟩ is an ℓ(n)-qubit non-negative state for every j ∈ [k], and kℓ + m0 + m+ = m.
Assume that R has r(n) designated output qubits, where 1 ≤ r(n) ≤ m(n) and r = r0 + r+ .
Let ΦR (·) denote the quantum channel obtained by applying R and then tracing out all non-
output qubits.20 The promise problem SepStoqCIUk [α(n), β(n)] is to decide whether one of the
following holds:
                                N                                              
                                                                   ⊗r0        ⊗r+
    • Yes:        max       F2 ΦR      j∈[k] |ψj ⟩⟨ψ j |   , |0⟩⟨0|    ⊗|+⟩⟨+|      ≥ α(n).
              |ψ1 ⟩,··· ,|ψk ⟩∈S+ (2ℓ )
                                            N                                       
                                                                        ⊗r0        ⊗r+
    • No:             max                F2 ΦR      |ψ
                                               j∈[k] j ⟩⟨ψ j |  , |0⟩⟨0|    ⊗|+⟩⟨+|      ≤ β(n).
             |ψ1 ⟩,··· ,|ψk ⟩∈S+ (2ℓ )

When k = 2, we simply write this problem as SepStoqCIU[α(n), β(n)].
    We then establish our first StoqMA(k )-complete problem:
Lemma 3.11 (SepStoqCIUk is StoqMA(k )-complete). For all efficiently computable functions
α(n) and β(n), and every efficiently computable positive integer-valued function k(n) ≤ poly(n),
such that 0 ≤ β(n) < α(n) ≤ 1 and α(n) − β(n) ≥ 1/poly(n), the following holds:
  19
     This StoqMA-complete variant, Stoquastic Close Image to Uniform (StoqCIU), is obtained by re-
moving the tensor-product promise; that is, in the promise, replacing the maximization over |ψ1 ⟩, |ψ2 ⟩ ∈ S+ 2ℓ
with the maximization over |ψ⟩ ∈ S+ 22ℓ .
                                        
  20
     Notably, the underlying quantum channel belongs to a subclass of completely positive trace-preserving maps
introduced and studied in [JS22], which preserve non-negative amplitudes in both input and output states.


                                                             20
                                                 
                                              1+β
 (1) SepStoqCIUk [α, β] is in StoqMA k, 1+α
                                         2  ,  2    .

 (2) SepStoqCIUk [α, β] is StoqMA(k, α, β)-hard.
Proof. We prove only the case where k = 2 for simplicity, and the same argument directly
extends to general k. To establish Item (1), we simply consider the SWAP test [BCWdW01]
with two quantum states
                ρ0 := ΦR (|ψ1 ⟩⟨ψ1 | ⊗ |ψ2 ⟩⟨ψ2 |) and ρ1 := |0⟩⟨0|⊗r0 ⊗ |+⟩⟨+|⊗r+ ,
which directly constitutes a StoqMA(2) verifier given the witness state |ψ1 ⟩⊗|ψ2 ⟩. Noting that ρ1
is a pure state, it follows that F2 (ρ0 , ρ1 ) = Tr(ρ0 ρ1 ). Consequently, the acceptance probability
of the SWAP test for mixed states [KMY09, Proposition 9] implies the desired threshold bound.
    To prove Item (2), we begin with a stoquastic verifier VI corresponding to the promise
problem I ∈ StoqMAℓ (2). For any x ∈ I, we fix the stoquastic verifier to be Vx := VI (x). For
any non-negative product state witness |ψ1 ⟩⊗|ψ2 ⟩, the acceptance probability of Vx is
                  Pr[Vx accepts|ψ1 ⟩⊗|ψ2 ⟩] = ∥|+⟩⟨+|O Vx (|ψ1 ⟩|ψ2 ⟩|+̄⟩|0̄⟩)∥22
                                             = Tr(|+⟩⟨+|O ΦR (|ψ1 ⟩⟨ψ1 |⊗|ψ2 ⟩⟨ψ2 |))
                                             = F2 (|+⟩⟨+|, ΦR (|ψ1 ⟩⟨ψ1 |⊗|ψ2 ⟩⟨ψ2 |)).
Here, the third line follows from the identity in Equation (2.1). Therefore, we complete the
proof by taking ΦR to be the channel defined by
                   ∀ρ ∈ D+ 22ℓ , ΦR (ρ) := TrO R(ρ ⊗ |0̄⟩⟨0̄| ⊗ |+̄⟩⟨+̄|)R† ,
                                                                          

where R = Vx is the required classical reversible circuit.

3.2.2   Separable Reversible Circuit Distinguishability
Next, we present our second StoqMA(k )-complete problem SepRCDk , which is a direct gener-
alization of [Liu21, Section 4]:
Definition 3.12 (k-Separable Reversible Circuit Distinguishability, SepRCDk ). Let
R0 and R1 be polynomial-size classical reversible circuits consisting only of Toffoli, CNOT, and
X gates. Suppose that both R0 and R1 act on an m(n)-qubit input state of the form |ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ · · · ⊗
|ψk ⟩ ⊗ |0⟩⊗m0 ⊗ |+⟩⊗r , where each |ψj ⟩ is an ℓ(n)-qubit non-negative state for every j ∈ [k]
and kℓ + m0 + r = m. With a slight abuse of notation, let |Rb ⟩ denote the resulting state,
defined by |Rb ⟩ := Rb (|ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ · · · ⊗ |ψk ⟩ ⊗ |0̄⟩ ⊗ |+̄⟩), for each b ∈ {0, 1}. The promise problem
SepRCDk [α(n), β(n)] is to decide whether one of the following holds:
   • Yes: There exists a non-negative state |ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ · · · ⊗ |ψk ⟩ such that ⟨R0 |R1 ⟩ ≥ α(n).
   • No: For all non-negative states |ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ · · · ⊗ |ψk ⟩, we have ⟨R0 |R1 ⟩ ≤ β(n).
When k = 2, we simply write this problem as SepRCD[α(n), β(n)], and we denote the version
with detailed input-size parameters by SepRCDα,β (ℓ, m0 , r).
   It is worth noting that, when k = 1, the promise problem SepRCD1 coincides with the
StoqMA-complete problem RCD introduced in [Liu21, Section 4.1].
Lemma 3.13 (SepRCDk is StoqMA(k )-complete). For all efficiently computable functions α(n)
and β(n), and every efficiently computable positive integer-valued function k(n) ≤ poly(n), such
that 0 ≤ β(n) < α(n) ≤ 1 and α(n) − β(n) ≥ 1/poly(n), we have
                                                                
                                                    1+α 1+β
                   SepRCDk [α, β] is StoqMA k,            ,        -complete.
                                                      2      2
In particular, for any stoquastic verification circuit Vx , the hard instance is given by the reversible
circuit pair R0 = Vx† XO Vx := Γx and R1 = I.

                                                   21
    The proof follows the same strategy as the proof of [Liu21, Theorem 4.1], and the details are
given in Appendix C.1.

3.3    StoqMA(k ) is closed under direct product
Theorem 3.14 (StoqMA(k ) is closed under direct product). Let I (j) j∈[r] be a collection of
                                                                         
                                                        a      b 
promise problems such that I (j) ∈ StoqMAℓ k, 12 + 2j , 12 + 2j , and let V (j) denote the correspond-
ing stoquastic verifier. Then there exists an explicit stoquastic verifier V ′ for I ′ := I (1) ×· · ·×I (r) ,
constructed from V (1) , · · · , V (r) , such that
                                                                                       
                ′                        1     1   Y           1    1     Y
               I ∈ StoqMArℓ k, + r+1 ·               (1 + aj ), + r+1 ·        (1 + bj ) .
                                         2 2                   2 2
                                                              j∈[r]            j∈[r]
                                                          
                                                 1+a 1+b                           (j)
Proof. For each promise problem I (j) ∈ StoqMA k, 2 j , 2 j , where j ∈ [r], let Vxj be
a corresponding stoquastic verifier with xj ∈ I (j) . Following the proof that SepStoqCIUk ∈
StoqMA(k ) (Lemma 3.11(1)), we construct a new stoquastic verifier Vx′′ , where x′ := (x1 , · · · , xr ),
for the direct product of the StoqMA(k ) promise problems I (1) , · · · , I (r) , as illustrated in Figure 2
for the case k = 2 and r = 3. More precisely, for each j ∈ [r], we execute the verification
          (j)                        (j)   (j)               (j)             (j)                        (j)
circuit Vxj on the registers W(j) , A0 , A+ , where W(j) , A0 , and A+ contain kℓ qubits, m0
                      (j)
qubits, and m+ qubits, respectively, in parallel and without performing the final Hadamard-
basis measurement, and then apply a SWAP test between the designated output qubits of these
verification circuits and the state |+⟩⊗r , taking the output qubit of the SWAP test as the output
qubit of Vx′′ .

                                      |+⟩                                                         |+⟩
                                                    3                                        3
                              |+⟩⊗3
                  E            E
            (1)             (1)              2ℓ
          ψ1          ⊗ ψ2
                                      W(1)    (1)
                                             m0                             SWAP
                              |0̄⟩A(1)                    (1)
                                                        Vx1
                                       0      (1)
                                             m+
                             |+̄⟩A(1)
                                       +

                                                                           (1)
            (2)
                  E
                            (2)
                                  E
                                             2ℓ                          m0 +2ℓ−1
          ψ1          ⊗ ψ2
                                      W(2)    (2)
                                             m0                          m+
                                                                           (1)
                              |0̄⟩A(2)                    (2)
                                                        Vx2
                                       0      (2)                          (2)
                                             m+                          m0 +2ℓ−1
                             |+̄⟩A(2)
                                       +

                                                                           (2)
            (3)
                  E
                            (3)
                                  E
                                             2ℓ                          m+
          ψ1          ⊗ ψ2
                                      W(3)    (3)
                                             m0
                                                                           (3)
                                                                         m0 +2ℓ−1
                              |0̄⟩A(3)                    (3)
                                                        Vx3
                                       0      (3)                          (3)
                                             m+                          m+
                             |+̄⟩A(3)
                                       +



                                                                         (1)     (2)        (3)
               Figure 2: Weak conjunction of stoquastic verifiers Vx1 , Vx2 , and Vx3 .

    We now analyze the maximum acceptance probability of Vx′′ :

   • For yes instances, the witness state has an additional tensor-product structure:
                                                       E                E
                                                   (1)              (r)
                              ∀i ∈ [k], ψi′ = ψi         ⊗ · · · ⊗ ψi .                                 (3.8)


                                                                 22
      Consequently, by the same argument as in the proof of Lemma 3.11(1), we obtain
                                          1 1 Y h (j)                 (j)
                                                                           E
                                                                                   (j)
                                                                                       Ei
         Pr Vx′′ accepts ψ1′ ⊗· · ·⊗ ψk′ = +           Pr Vxj accepts ψ1 ⊗· · ·⊗ ψk
           
                                           2 2
                                                 j∈[r]
                                                               
                                           1 1 Y 1 aj
                                          ≥ + ·             +    .
                                           2 2            2   2
                                                                     j∈[r]

    • For no instances, the quantum states |ψ1′ ⟩, · · · , |ψk′ ⟩ may be highly entangled. We therefore
      complete the soundness analysis using the multiplicative property of stoquastic separable
      values (Lemma 3.8). To this end, for each j ∈ [r], we define the positive semi-definite
                (j)                                                  (j)
      matrix Mxj corresponding to the verification circuit Vxj :
                                                                 †
                         Mx(j)
                            j
                               := ⟨0̄|A(j) ⟨+̄|A(j) Vx(j)
                                                       j
                                                          |+⟩⟨+|O(j) Vx(j)
                                                                        j
                                                                           |0̄⟩A(j) |+̄⟩A(j) .
                                          0          +                               0       +


      Let ω(Vx ) denote the maximum acceptance probability of a StoqMA(k ) verifier Vx , namely,
                           ω(Vx ) :=       max            Pr[Vx accepts |ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ · · · ⊗ |ψk ⟩].
                                       |ψ1 ⟩,··· ,|ψk ⟩

      Then, the maximum acceptance probability of Vx′′ can be expressed as:
                             1 1                                                
                      ω Vx′′ = + hSep+ (2rℓ ,··· ,2rℓ ) Mx(1)  1
                                                                 ⊗  · · · ⊗ Mx
                                                                              (r)
                                                                               r
                               2 2
                               1 1 Y                               
                             ≤ +         hSep+ (2ℓ ,··· ,2ℓ ) Mx(j)
                                                                  j
                               2 2
                                                  j∈[r]
                                    1 1 Y
                                              ω Vx(j)
                                                      
                                   = +             j
                                    2 2
                                        j∈[r]
                                                        
                                    1 1 Y 1 bj
                                   ≤ + ·           +      .
                                    2 2          2     2
                                                    j∈[r]

This completes the proof, where the second line follows from Lemma 3.8.


4    Robustness of StoqMA(2)
In this section, we study the robustness of the definition of StoqMA(2) by establishing two
basic properties analogous to those of QMA(2), particularly prover compression [HM13] and
witness symmetrization [ABD+ 09]. Notably, while StoqMA(2) admits only parallel repetition
(Theorem 3.3), rather than full error reduction as in QMA(2), our results imply that StoqMA(2)
is well-defined with respect to these properties, up to a quadratic gap loss.

   When there are more than two provers, we establish prover compression for StoqMA(k )
by stoquastizing the well-known product test. This technique allows one to “compress” any
StoqMA(k ) protocol to a StoqMA(2) protocol while preserving the constant gap:

Theorem 4.1 (Prover compression for StoqMA(k ) up to a quadratic gap loss, informal version
of Theorem 4.7). Let k(n) be a polynomially bounded integer-valued function satisfying that
k(n) > 2. Let ε(n) and ∆(n) be functions such that 0 ≤ ε(n) < 1/2 and ∆(n) > 0. Then the
following inclusion holds:
                    StoqMAℓ Jk, 1 − ε, ∆K ⊆ StoqMAkℓ 2, 1 − O(ε∆), Ω(∆2 )
                                                    q                    y

    When the completeness error ε(n) is negligible, combining prover compression with parallel



                                                            23
repetition for StoqMA(2) (Theorem 3.3, more specifically Corollary 3.4) yields prover compres-
sion without any gap loss, and thus achieves a promise gap exponentially close to 1/2:21
Corollary 4.2 (Prover compression for StoqMA(k )1−negl ). Let k(n) be a polynomially bounded
integer-valued function satisfying k(n) > 2. Let ε(n) be a negligible non-negative function, and
let ∆(n) be a positive function that is at least 1/ poly(n). Then the following bounds hold:
 (1) There exist polynomially bounded integer-valued functions r(n) and q(n) such that
                                                        s                  {
                                                                 ′ 1    −q
                      StoqMAℓ Jk, 1 − ε, ∆K ⊆ StoqMArkℓ 2, 1 − ε , − 2       .                           (4.1)
                                                                   2
      Here, ε′ (n) is also a negligible non-negative function. In particular, by setting r⋆ = ⌈1/∆⌉,
      letting ε⋆ ≤ ε/(2∆) and ℓ⋆ (n) = O(kℓ/∆), it holds that
                             StoqMAℓ Jk, 1 − ε, ∆K ⊆ StoqMAℓ⋆ J2, 1 − ε⋆ , Ω(∆)K.                        (4.2)

 (2) Without further parallel repetition, it holds that
                           StoqMAℓ Jk, 1 − ε, ∆K ⊆ StoqMAkℓ 2, 1 − ε/2, Ω(∆2 ) .                         (4.3)
                                                           q                  y

Proof. For simplicity, we only establish Equations (4.2) and (4.3), while Equation (4.1) follows
from similar reasoning. To this end, apply prover compression (Theorem 4.7) with the exactly
dyadic choice λ = 1/2, which increases the proof length from ℓ to kℓ. Writing c = 1−ε, s = c−∆,
and γ = cprod /4 = 1/12, both cases of Equation (4.6) are minimized at x = 1 − s = ε + ∆,
giving the compressed verifier completeness and soundness thresholds
                                ε                  γ
                       ĉ = 1 −     and ŝ = 1 − (ε + ∆)2 ≥ 1 − 2γ∆2 ,
                                2                  2
which yields the promise gap ∆  ˆ = ĉ − ŝ = γ(ε + ∆)2 − ε /2. Since ε is negligible and ∆ ≥
                                                              

1/ poly(n), we obtain ∆ˆ ≥ γ∆2 /4 for all sufficiently large n. Without parallel repetition, using
ε = o(∆ ), we have ∆
        2            ˆ = γ + o(1) ∆2 = Θ(∆2 ), which proves Equation (4.3).
                                   
                           2
    Now applying parallel repetition for StoqMA(k ) (Theorem 3.3) with r⋆ = ⌈1/∆⌉, which
increases the proof length further to ℓ⋆ = r⋆ kℓ, we obtain the resulting gap
                       ĉr⋆ − ŝr⋆   ˆ
                                     ∆                  γ∆2 1                  11∆
                  ∆⋆ =             ≥   · r⋆ · ŝr⋆ −1 ≥    · · (1 − 2γ∆) ≥          .
                            2        2                   8  ∆                  1152
Here, the first inequality follows from xk − y k = (x − y) k−1      k−1−j y j for all integers k ≥ 2,
                                                            P
                                                              j=0 x
and the second inequality uses Bernoulli’s inequality, (1 − a)r ≥ 1 − ra for all a ∈ [0, 1]. Finally,
the resulting completeness error ε⋆ = (1 − ĉr⋆ )/2 ≤ r⋆ ε/4 ≤ ε/(2∆).


    In addition to prover compression, we also prove witness symmetrization for StoqMA(k ),
which can be viewed as a closure property under symmetrization of the product witness states.
More specifically, we define a symmetrized version of StoqMA(k ), denoted by SymStoqMA(k ),
in which all k factors (“proofs”) of the witness state are promised to be identical, as stated
in Definition 4.3. This symmetric variant is analogous to the class SymQMA(k) introduced
in [ABD+ 09, Section 4.4].
Definition 4.3 (SymStoqMA(k )). A promise problem I = (Iyes , Ino ) ∈ SymStoqMAℓ (k, c, s) if
there exists a stoquastic verifier VI such that for every input x ∈ I, the verifier is specified by
an n-qubit stoquastic verification circuit VI (x), as in Definition 3.1, such that the following hold
for efficiently computable functions c(n), s(n), and ℓ(n):
  21
     One subtlety behind Theorem 4.1 concerns the dyadic truncation error, as explained in Footnote 23, which
may prevent perfect completeness being preserved in the resulting StoqMA(2) verification circuit. Nevertheless,
together with parallel repetition for StoqMA(2) (Theorem 3.3), we can simply choose λ = 1/2, carry out the
remaining construction, and amplify the promise gap later.


                                                      24
Completeness.       If x ∈ Iyes , then there exists an ℓ(n)-qubit non-negative state |ψ⟩ such that
                                        h                     i
                                      Pr VI (x) accepts |ψ⟩⊗k ≥ c(n).

Soundness.      If x ∈ Ino , then for every ℓ(n)-qubit non-negative state |ψ⟩, we have
                                        h                   i
                                     Pr VI (x) accepts |ψ⟩⊗k ≤ s(n).

Furthermore, c(n) and s(n) satisfy 1/2 ≤ s(n) < c(n) ≤ 1 and c(n) − s(n) ≥ 1/ poly(n). For
convenience, we write the stoquastic verification circuit VI (x) as Vx .

    To establish the equivalence between StoqMA(k ) and SymStoqMA(k ) up to a quadratic gap
loss, we first show that SymStoqMA(k ) can simulate StoqMA(k ) using a new length-efficient
symmetrization, and then prove that StoqMA(k ) can simulate SymStoqMA(k ) by stoquastizing
the projector onto the symmetric subspace:

Theorem 4.4 (Witness symmetrization for StoqMA(k ) up to quadratic gap loss). Let k(n) be
a polynomially bounded integer-valued function satisfying that k(n) ≥ 2. Let ε(n) and ∆(n) be
functions such that 0 ≤ ε(n) < 1/2 and ∆(n) > 0. Then the following inclusions hold:

 (1) StoqMAℓ Jk, 1 − ε, ∆K ⊆ SymStoqMAO(ℓ log k+log2 k) Jk, 1 − ε − ∆/2, ∆/2K.

 (2) SymStoqMAℓ Jk, 1 − ε, ∆K ⊆ StoqMAℓ k, 1 − O(ε∆), Ω(∆2 ) .
                                       q                          y


    In the remainder of this section, we establish Theorem 4.1 in Section 4.1: we introduce
the stoquastic product test in Section 4.1.1, and then use it to prove prover compression for
StoqMA(k ) in Section 4.1.2. Next, we prove Theorem 4.4 in Section 4.2: we first present our
length-efficient symmetrization of StoqMA(k ) by SymStoqMA(k ) in Section 4.2.1, then introduce
the stoquastic equality test in Section 4.2.2, finally use it to show that StoqMA(k ) can simulate
SymStoqMA(k ) in Section 4.2.3.

4.1     StoqMA(k ) vs. StoqMA(2)
We begin by establishing a stoquastic version of the product test (Theorem 4.6), and then use
this procedure as a key ingredient in proving prover compression for StoqMA(k ).

4.1.1    The stoquastic product test
Lemma 4.5 (Stoquastic implementation of the product test). For every pair of pure states
              ℓ
|ρ⟩, |σ⟩ ∈ (C2 )⊗k , there is a stoquastic verification circuit that takes the state |ρ⟩ ⊗ |σ⟩ as input
and accepts with probability
                     1 1                                          1 X
                       + Pprod (ρ, σ), where Pprod (ρ, σ) := k           Tr(ρS σS ).               (4.4)
                     2 2                                         2
                                                                    S⊆[k]

In particular, if |ρ⟩ = |σ⟩ is a product state across the k tensor factors, then the circuit accepts
with probability 1.

Proof. Let ρ, σ be states over A = A1 · · · Ak and B = B1 · · · Bk , respectively, where each Ai and
Bi is an ℓ-qubit register. For every subset S ⊆ [k], let
                                              Y
                                       FS :=     SWAPAi Bi ,
                                               i∈S




                                                     25
where the factors commute because they act on disjoint register pairs. By the Harrow–Montanaro
product test identity, as stated in the proof of [HM13, Lemma 2],
                    1 X                        1 X
                                                                                          (4.5)
                                           
                            Tr  (ρ ⊗ σ)F S   =       Tr(ρS σS ) = Pprod (ρ, σ),
                    2k                         2k
                        S⊆[k]                           S⊆[k]

Pprod (ρ, σ) is the probability that the standard product test accepts ρ and σ.

 Protocol 1: Stoquastic implementation of the product test.
   Registers      : J: the k-qubit branch-index register, initialized to |+⟩⊗k .
                    A, B: two kℓ-qubit witness registers.
                    Z: the ancillary register, initialized to |0̄⟩.
   1. For every s ∈ {0, 1}k , let S(s) := {i ∈ [k]
                                               Q | si = 1}, where si denotes the i-th bit of s.
    Define the reversible permutation Fs := i∈S(s) SWAPAi ,Bi .
   2. For every i ∈ [k] and every qubit position t ∈ [ℓ], apply a controlled-SWAP between
    the t-th qubit of Ai and the t-th qubit of Bi , controlled on the branch bit Ji .
    Equivalently, one can construct a reversible circuit Γ on (J, A, B, Z) satisfying22

                                Γ|s⟩J |x⟩A |y⟩B |0̄⟩Z = |s⟩J Fs (|x⟩A |y⟩B )|0̄⟩Z .

       3. Apply the branch-overlap test (Lemma 2.13) to the reversible circuit pair (Γ, I) on
       the initialized input state |+⟩⊗k
                                      J |ρ⟩A |σ⟩B |0̄⟩Z .


    Next, we construct a stoquastic verification circuit that accepts with probability 12 +
2 Pprod (ρ, σ), as presented in Protocol 1. By Lemma 2.13, for each branch S, the corresponding
1

acceptance probability is given by
                           1 1                      1 1                  
                             + ⟨ρ|⟨σ|FS |ρ⟩|σ⟩ = + Tr (ρ ⊗ σ)FS .
                           2 2                      2 2
Consequently,N averaging uniformly over S yields (4.4).
   If |ρ⟩ = ki=1 |ρi ⟩ is product and |σ⟩ = |ρ⟩, then every reduced density matrix ρS is pure, so
Tr(ρ2S ) = 1 for all S. Hence Pprod (ρ, ρ) = 1, and the circuit accepts with probability 1.

Theorem 4.6 (Stoquastic product test). There exists an absolute constant cprod > 0 such that
for every pure k-partite state |ρ⟩, if
                                       n                                   ℓ
                                                                             o
                       1 − η(ρ) := max |⟨ρ|ρ1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ρk ⟩|2 : |ρi ⟩ ∈ C2 .
then
                                                                    cprod
                  Pprod (ρ, ρ) ≤ 1 − cprod η(ρ)      and     Pprod (ρ, σ) ≤ 1 −
                                                                          η(ρ).
                                                                      2
Consequently, the stoquastic product test from Lemma 4.5 accepts with probability at most
                                                     cprod η(ρ)
                                               1−               .
                                                         4
In addition, one may take cprod = 1/3.

Proof. Soleimanifar–Wright’s analysis of the product test [SW22, Theorem 8] gives
                                          (
                                            1 − η + η2,         η ≤ 21 ,
                           Pprod (ρ, ρ) ≤
                                            1 − 32 η + 13 η 2 , η ≥ 12 ,
which implies the uniform bound
                                                                1
                                         Pprod (ρ, ρ) ≤ 1 −       η(ρ).
                                                                3

                                                       26
Thus any fixed cprod ∈ (0, 1/3] is admissible, and in particular one may take cprod = 1/3.
    By the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality and the AM-GM inequality, it follows that
                                                              Tr(ρ2S ) + Tr(σS2 )
                                     q          q
                       Tr(ρS σS ) ≤ Tr(ρ2S ) Tr(σS2 ) ≤
                                                                       2
for every S ⊆ [k]. Consequently, averaging over S gives
                                  1                                     cprod
                   Pprod (ρ, σ) ≤    Pprod (ρ, ρ) + Pprod (σ, σ) ≤ 1 −           η(ρ),
                                  2                                         2
using the trivial bound Pprod (σ, σ) ≤ 1. The final claim follows from the acceptance formula in
Lemma 4.5.

4.1.2   Prover compression for StoqMA(k )
An immediate consequence of the stoquastic product test (Theorem 4.6) is prover compression
for StoqMA(k ), which reduces the number of provers from k to two:

Theorem 4.7 (Prover compression for StoqMA(k ) up to a quadratic gap loss). Let k(n) be a
polynomially bounded integer-valued function satisfying k(n) > 2. Let the completeness error
ε(n) and the promise gap ∆(n) be functions such that 0 ≤ ε(n) < 1/2 and ∆(n) > 0. Then the
following inclusion holds:
                                                                  γ∆2
                                                       s              {
                      StoqMAℓ Jk, 1 − ε, ∆K ⊆ StoqMAkℓ 2, 1 − λε,      .
                                                                   2
Here, γ := cprod /4, λ := γ∆, and cprod is the constant from Theorem 4.6, which may be taken
as 1/3. In particular, the resulting gap shows that our construction preserves a constant gap ∆.

   To establish the soundness, we also need the following simple proposition:

Proposition 4.8 (Product-state approximation preserves non-negativity). Let |ξ⟩ ∈ S+ (d1 · · · dk )
be a non-negative state, and let |Φ⟩ = |ϕ1 ⟩ ⊗ · · · ⊗ |ϕk ⟩ be a product state. For each i ∈ [k],
let ϕ+i  be obtained from |ϕi ⟩ by replacing every computational-basis amplitude by its absolute
value, and set |Φ+ ⟩ := ϕ+             +
                         1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ϕk . Then

                                     T(|ξ⟩, Φ+ ) ≤ T(|ξ⟩, |Φ⟩).
In particular, if |Φ⟩ = |ψ⟩⊗k , then |Φ+ ⟩ = (|ψ + ⟩)⊗k .

Proof. Write |ξ⟩ = z ξz |z⟩ with ξz ≥ 0, and write |Φ⟩ = z Φz |z⟩. Then
                     P                                    P

                                        X               X
                            |⟨ξ|Φ⟩| =        ξz Φ z ≤       ξz |Φz | = ⟨ξ|Φ+ ⟩,
                                         z              z

which implies the desired bound by Equation (2.2).

   We then continue to prove Theorem 4.7:

Proof of Theorem 4.7. Let V be the given StoqMAℓ Jk, 1 − ε, ∆K verifier acting on witness regis-
ters A1 , . . . , Ak . Let c(n) := 1 − ε(n) and s(n) := c(n) − ∆(n) be the completeness and soundness
parameters of V , respectively. We now construct a new stoquastic verification circuit W with
witness registers A = A1 · · · Ak and B = B1 · · · Bk . The witness state has the form |Υ1 ⟩A ⊗ |Υ2 ⟩B ,
where |Υ1 ⟩ and |Υ2 ⟩ are called the first and second proof states, respectively, and each consists
of kℓ qubits. The verification circuit W proceeds as follows:

   • With probability 1 − λ, run the product-test branch from Protocol 1 on the two registers
     A and B.



                                                   27
   • With probability λ, ignore B and run the original verification circuit V on the k blocks
     A1 , . . . , Ak of the first proof state.
Since our protocol is a convex combination (1 − λ, λ) of two stoquastic verification circuits, the
resulting verification circuit remains stoquastic.23

Completeness. For yes instances, there exist pure states |ψ1 ⟩, . . . , |ψk ⟩ such that V accepts
|ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ · · · ⊗ |ψk ⟩ with probability at least c. Let
                                        |Ψ⟩ := |ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ · · · ⊗ |ψk ⟩.
   The honest two-proof witness for W is |Ψ⟩A ⊗ |Ψ⟩B . The product-test branch accepts it
with probability 1, and the branch running V accepts with probability at least c. Hence the
completeness of W is c′ := 1 − λ(1 − c).

Soundness. Fix
            p an arbitrary product witness |ρ⟩A ⊗ |σ⟩B . Let η(ρ) be defined as in Theorem 4.6,
and set x := η(ρ). Then there exists a product state
                                         |Φ⟩ = |ϕ1 ⟩ ⊗ · · · ⊗ |ϕk ⟩
such that T(|ρ⟩, |Φ⟩) ≤ x. By Proposition 3.7 and Proposition 4.8, it suffices to consider a non-
negative product witness |ρ⟩A ⊗ |σ⟩B , and the product state |Φ⟩ satisfying T(|ρ⟩, |Φ⟩) ≤ x may
also be chosen non-negative. By the soundness s of V , the branch running V accepts |Φ⟩ with
probability at most s. By the measurement bound for trace distance (Lemma 2.3), together with
T(|ρ⟩, |Φ⟩) ≤ x, the same branch accepts |ρ⟩ with probability at most s + x. Combining this
reasoning with the trivial upper bound 1, its acceptance probability is at most min{1, s + x}.
By Theorem 4.6, the product-test branch accepts |ρ⟩A ⊗ |σ⟩B with probability at most 1 − γx2 .
Therefore,
                   Pr[W accepts |ρ⟩|σ⟩] ≤ (1 − λ)(1 − γx2 ) + λ min{1, s + x}.
Subtracting this from c′ yields
                  c′ − Pr[W accepts |ρ⟩|σ⟩] ≥ λ c − min{1, s + x} + (1 − λ)γx2 .                       (4.6)
                                                                 

It remains to simplify the lower bound in Equation (4.6):
   • If s + x ≤ 1, then Equation (4.6) gives
                       c′ − Pr[W accepts |ρ⟩|σ⟩] ≥ λ∆ − λx + (1 − λ)γx2 =: f (x).
      This is a convex quadratic whose unique minimizer is
                                                     λ          ∆
                                         x∗ :=             =          .
                                                 2(1 − λ)γ   2(1 − λ)
      Because λ = γ∆ ≤ γ < 1/2, we have x∗ ≤ ∆ ≤ 1 − s, so the minimizer lies within the
      regime s + x ≤ 1. Therefore, it follows that
                                              λ2                          γ∆2
                                                                     
                                                        2        1
                  f (x) ≥ f (x∗ ) = λ∆ −            = γ∆ 1 −            ≥     .
                                          4(1 − λ)γ          4(1 − λ)      2
   • If s + x ≥ 1, then Equation (4.6) yields
                       c′ − Pr[W accepts |ρ⟩|σ⟩] ≥ −λ(1 − c) + (1 − λ)γx2 =: g(x).
      The function g is increasing for x ≥ 0, and the boundary between the two regimes is
      x0 = 1 − s ≥ ∆ ≥ x∗ . Since g(x0 ) = f (x0 ), we obtain
                                                                         γ∆2
                                   g(x) ≥ g(x0 ) = f (x0 ) ≥ f (x∗ ) ≥       .
                                                                          2
  23
     The only subtlety is that the parameter λ ∈ (0, 1) should be a dyadic number representable with poly(n)
bits. We ignore the truncation error incurred by making λ dyadic, since this error is exponentially small and
does not significantly affect the completeness and soundness parameters.


                                                     28
                                                                           2
   Therefore, in all cases the acceptance probability is at most c′ − γ∆
                                                                       2 , finishing the proof.


4.2     SymStoqMA(k ) vs. StoqMA(k )
We now establish the equivalence between StoqMA(k ) and SymStoqMA(k ) up to a quadratic
gap loss. We first show that SymStoqMA(k ) can simulate StoqMA(k ) in Section 4.2.1, and then,
after introducing the stoquastic equality test in Section 4.2.2, prove that StoqMA(k ) can simulate
SymStoqMA(k ) in Section 4.2.3.

4.2.1    StoqMA(k ) ⊆ SymStoqMA(k )
To prove that StoqMA(k ) ⊆ SymStoqMA(k ), as stated in Theorem 4.4(1), the simple diagonal
selection trick in [ABD+ 09, Lemma 4.8] would suffice: each prover in SymStoqMA(k ) sends the
concatenation of the k witness states |ψ1 ⟩|ψ2 ⟩ · · · |ψk ⟩ in the StoqMA(k ) protocol. Then the
SymStoqMA(k ) verifier will simulate the StoqMA(k ) verifier by taking only the i-th witness from
the i-th prover of SymStoqMA(k ). It follows that
                             StoqMAℓ Jk, c, sK ⊆ SymStoqMAℓk Jk, c, sK.                          (4.7)
The downside of the above trick is that the proof length blows up by a factor of k.

A length-efficient symmetrization. We provide a new simulation that only blows up the
proof length by a multiplicative factor O(log k) and a new additive O(log2 k) factor. The new
idea is that each symmetric prover can send a bundle of r = O(log  P k) copies of the coherent
superposition of the k proofs from the StoqMA(k ) provers, √1k j∈[k] |j⟩|ψj ⟩, instead of the
wasteful concatenation of the k proofs. Then by a coupon collector principle, a typical branch of
the k symmetric proofs, now consisting of O(k log k) random proofs from the set of k proofs of
StoqMA(k ), contains all k different proofs with high probability. Therefore the SymStoqMA(k )
verifier will be able to simulate the old StoqMA(k ) verifier in a typical branch. We start by
formalizing our specific coupon collector lemma in the language of perfect matching.

Theorem 4.9 (Hall’s theorem [Hal35]). A bipartite graph with left side L and right side R has
a matching of size |L| if and only if
                                 |N (S)| ≥ |S|     for every S ⊆ L,
where N (S) ⊆ R denotes the neighborhood of S in R.

Lemma 4.10 (Random matching bound). Let BN,d be the random bipartite multi-graph with left
side L and right side R, where L = R = [N ] and each left vertex independently chooses d right
vertices uniformly at random, with replacement. If d = ⌈12 ln N ⌉, then BN,d has a matching
covering all left vertices with probability at least 3/4.

Proof. By Hall’s theorem (Theorem 4.9), it suffices to rule out a set S ⊆ L with |N (S)| < |S|.
Fix s = |S|. If Hall fails for this S, then there is a set T ⊆ R of size s − 1 such that all ds choices
made by vertices in S land inside T . Therefore
                                                                        s − 1 ds
                                                                         
                                                          N     N
                     Pr[∃S : |S| = s, |N (S)| < s] ≤                              .
                                                          s    s−1        N
Summing over s = 1, . . . , N and using d = ⌈12 ln N ⌉, this total is less than 1/4. Hence Hall’s
condition holds with probability at least 3/4.

   With the above matching bound at our disposal, we prove our promised length-efficient
upgrade to Equation (4.7):



                                                  29
Theorem 4.11 (Length-efficient symmetrization). Let k(n) be a polynomially bounded integer-
valued function satisfying that k(n) ≥ 2. Let ε(n) and ∆(n) be functions such that 0 ≤ ε(n) < 1/2
and ∆(n) > 0, and set c(n) := 1 − ε(n). Let r := ⌈12 ln k⌉ and m := r(ℓ + ⌈log k⌉), which are
polynomially bounded integer-valued functions. Then the following inclusion holds:
                       StoqMAℓ Jk, c, ∆K ⊆ SymStoqMAm Jk, c − ∆/2, ∆/2K.
Equivalently, the new verifier has completeness at least c − ∆/2 and soundness at most c − ∆.
Moreover, the new witness length is
                         m(n) = O((ℓ(n) + log k(n)) log k(n)) ≤ poly(n).

Proof. Fix an input x, and let V be the original k-witness verifier. For yes instances, there are
non-negative ℓ-qubit states |ψ1 ⟩, . . . , |ψk ⟩ such that
                                 Pr[V accepts |ψ1 ⟩⊗· · ·⊗|ψk ⟩] ≥ c.                            (4.8)
For no instances, every product of k non-negative ℓ-qubit states is accepted with probability at
most c − ∆.

Honest symmetric proof. One slot consists of a label register and an ℓ-qubit data register. The
honest one-copy symmetric proof is
                                                           ⊗r
                                          1 X
                                |Φ⟩ := √           |j⟩|ψj ⟩     .
                                           k j∈[k]

Merlin sends |Φ⟩⊗k . This is a valid non-negative symmetric witness of length m.

New verifier. For each copy i ∈ [k], let Li,h and Di,h be the h-th label register and data register,
respectively, of this copy. We expand |Φ⟩⊗k with respect to the registers L := (L1,1 , · · · , Lk,r ):
                                   1
                         |Φ⟩⊗k = kr/2
                                          X OO
                                                        |ji,h ⟩Li,h ψji,h D .                     (4.9)
                                 k           k×r
                                                                           i,h
                                        J∈[k]    i∈[k] h∈[r]

Since different index-label branches J = (ji,h )i∈[k],h∈[r] ∈ [k]k×r do not interfere before the
verifier’s final measurement, it suffices to analyze each index-label branch J separately. For a
fixed index-label branch, the verifier deterministically constructs, whenever possible, a mapping
scheme from the available labeled data registers to the roles of the original verifier.
    We now describe the construction for a fixed index-label J. Define a bipartite graph GJ =
(L ⊔ R, EJ ), where the left side L = [k] corresponds to the witness copies, and the right side
R = [k] corresponds to the roles of the original verifier. Place an edge between i ∈ L and a ∈ R
if and only if the i-th witness copy, namely (ji,h )h∈[r] , contains at least one slot labeled by a,
that is, ji,h⋆ = a for some h⋆ ∈ [r]. If GJ has a perfect matching, then the verifier chooses the
lexicographically first perfect matching as the mapping scheme and routes the corresponding
data registers to V . Otherwise, it runs a fixed dummy verifier that accepts with probability
c − ∆. The resulting stoquastic verification circuit for the length-efficient symmetrization is
given in Protocol 2.

Completeness. Under the honest proof, each of the k proof copies independently chooses r =
⌈12 ln k⌉ uniform labels from [k]. Therefore the matching bound (Lemma 4.10) gives over a
random index-label branch J,
                                                                3
                              Pr[GJ has a perfect matching] ≥ .                           (4.10)
                                                                4
On the matching branch, the routed tuple is exactly |ψ1 ⟩⊗· · ·⊗|ψk ⟩, so Equation (4.8) implies
acceptance probability at least c. On the no-matching branch, the dummy branch accepts with


                                                  30
 Protocol 2: Stoquastic length-efficient symmetrization.
  Parameters: r := ⌈12 ln k⌉ and m := r(ℓ + ⌈log k⌉).
  Registers : W1 , . . . , Wk : the k symmetric witness registers, where each Wi consists
                         of r label-data register pairs (Li,h , Di,h )h∈[r] .
                A0 : the ancillary register initialized to |0⟩⊗m0 .
                A+ : the ancillary register initialized to |+⟩⊗m+ .
                F: a single-qubit register initialized to |0⟩.
   1. Consider a fixed index-label branch J = (ji,h )i∈[k],h∈[r] . Define the bipartite graph
    GJ = (L ⊔ R, EJ ) as above. Let Pmatch be the predicate such that Pmatch (J) = 1 if and
    only if GJ admits a perfect matching. There is a reversible circuit Γmatch such that

                             Γmatch |J⟩L |0⟩F |0̄⟩A0 = |J⟩L |Pmatch (J)⟩F |0̄⟩A0 .

    2. If GJ has a perfect matching, or equivalently, Pmatch (J) = 1 :
       2.1 Write the lexicographically             first perfect matching as µJ : R → L. For each role
        a ∈ [k], let hJ (a) := min h ∈ [r] jµJ (a),h = a . Route the ordered data registers
                                          

        DµJ (1),hJ (1) , . . . , DµJ (k),hJ (k) to the k input registers of V , and let Γroute denote the
        corresponding reversible routing circuit.
       2.2 Apply the reversible circuit ΓV,J := Γ†route V † XO V Γroute , with O denoting the
        output qubit register of V .
   Else:
      Apply a fixed dummy reversible circuit Γdum such that the branch-overlap test
       (Lemma 2.13) applied to the circuit pair (Γdum , I) accepts with probability c − ∆.
   3. Combine the branch operations into one reversible circuit Γsim , and apply the
    branch-overlap test (Lemma 2.13) to the circuit pair (Γsim , I) on the initialized state of
    the witness registers together with A0 , A+ and F.


probability c − ∆. Hence, it follows that
              Pr[new verifier accepts] ≥ Pr[matching] c + Pr[no matching] (c − ∆)
                                    = c − Pr[no matching]∆
                                           ∆      ∆
                                    ≥c−       ≥c− .
                                           4       2
This proves the claimed completeness threshold.

Soundness. Assume x is a no instance, and let |Φ⟩ be any non-negative one-copy state used
by the symmetric prover. The full witness is |Φ⟩⊗k . Over any index-label branch J, if GJ
has no perfect matching, the verifier accepts with probability c − ∆ in Protocol 2. If it has a
perfect matching, the verifier selects one data block from each of k distinct proof copies. After
discarding unused registers, the old verifier receives a product state
                                              ρ1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ρk .
Here, each ρi is obtained by slicing a non-negative pure state h∈[r] ψji,h D over the discarded
                                                              N
                                                                            i,h
registers. Thus ρ1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ρk is a convex combination of non-negative product pure states.
Consequently, by convexity and Proposition 3.7, the original soundness bound also holds for
arbitrary non-negative product mixed states. Thus the matching branch accepts with probability
at most c − ∆. Every fixed index-label branch therefore contributes acceptance probability at
most c − ∆. Averaging over label tables preserves the same bound. The new soundness is at


                                                     31
most c − ∆.
   Combining completeness and soundness, the new promise gap is
                                  (c − ∆/2) − (c − ∆) = ∆/2,
as claimed.

4.2.2   The stoquastic equality test
Let H be the single-proof Hilbert space and let Uπ denote the unitary that permutes the k
witness registers according to π ∈ Sk . The projector onto the fully symmetric subspace satisfies
                                                1 X
                                        Πsym =         Uπ .
                                               k!
                                                      π∈Sk

    The only minor subtlety is that the ideal construction would use a uniform superposition
branch over the k! permutations, but such a state cannot generally be prepared exactly from
the allowed |0⟩ and |+⟩ ancillary qubits, since k! need not be dyadic. We avoid this issue by
introducing a q-qubit dyadic branch register, initialized to |+⟩⊗q , and mapping its 2q basis
branches to permutations as evenly as possible.

Lemma 4.12 (Stoquastic projector onto the symmetric subspace). Let b ≥ 0 be an integer, let
K := k!, set q := ⌈log K⌉ + b and N := 2q , and write r := N mod K. For every pure state
|Φ⟩ ∈ H⊗k , the stoquastic verification circuit Vq in Protocol 3 satisfies
                                                               
                                              1 1
                     Pr[Vq accepts |Φ⟩] −       + ⟨Φ|Πsym |Φ⟩ ≤ ζdyad (q).
                                              2 2
Here, the dyadic truncation error ζdyad (q) is bounded by
                                            r(K − r)   K
                             ζdyad (q) :=            ≤    ≤ 2−b−2 .
                                              KN       4N
Moreover, every tensor power |ψ⟩⊗k is accepted by Vq with probability 1.

Proof. Fix an ordering Sk = {π0 , . . . , πK−1 }. Let a := ⌊N/K⌋, so N = aK + r with 0 ≤ r < K.
Define the balanced map fq : {0, . . . , N − 1} → {0, . . . , K − 1} by
                              (
                               ⌊j/(a + 1)⌋,                    0 ≤ j < r(a + 1),
                    fq (j) :=                                                             (4.11)
                               r + ⌊(j − r(a + 1))/a⌋, r(a + 1) ≤ j < N.
Equivalently, the balanced map fq assigns exactly a + 1 dyadic branches to each of the first r
permutations and exactly a dyadic branches to each of the remaining K − r permutations. We
now implement this balanced map by the stoquastic verification circuit provided in Protocol 3.
   Let pt := fq−1 (t) /N . Following Proposition 3.7, without loss of generality, we can assume
that |Φ⟩ is a non-negative state. As a consequence of Lemma 2.13 and Protocol 3, the acceptance
probability of Vq is
                                       N −1                        K−1
                            1  1 X                  1 1 X
        Pr[Vq accepts |Φ⟩] = +     ⟨Φ|Uπfq (j) |Φ⟩ = +    pt ⟨Φ|Uπt |Φ⟩.                   (4.12)
                            2 2N                    2 2
                                       j=0                         t=0

   On the other hand, the ideal uniform average over permutations would give
                                                             K−1
                          1 1             1  1 X
                           + ⟨Φ|Πsym |Φ⟩ = +     ⟨Φ|Uπt |Φ⟩.                               (4.13)
                          2 2             2 2K
                                                             t=0
  The balanced map minimizes the total-variation distance from the uniform measure on Sk
among all maps from N dyadic branches to the K permutations. Consequently, combining



                                                 32
 Protocol 3: Stoquastic implementation of the symmetric-subspace projector.
  Parameters: Extra precision bits b, q = ⌈log(k!)⌉ + b, and N = 2q .
  Registers : A = A1 · · · Ak : witness register, storing |Φ⟩A .
                J: q-qubit branch register, initialized to |+⟩⊗q
                                                              J .
                Z: workspace for Γq , initialized to |0̄⟩Z .
   1. Define a reversible circuit Γq that, on dyadic branch j ∈ {0, . . . , 2q − 1}, computes
    t = fq (j) and applies the permutation πt to the registers A1 , . . . , Ak , uncomputing all
    workspace afterward. Equivalently, it holds that:
                                                                                    
                Γq |j⟩J |x1 ⟩A1 · · · |xk ⟩Ak |0̄⟩Z = |j⟩J xπ−1 (1)   · · · xπ−1 (k)   |0̄⟩Z .
                                                       fq (j)                     fq (j)
                                                                    A1                     Ak

     2. Apply the branch-overlap test (Lemma 2.13) to the circuit pair (Γq , I) on the
     initialized state |+⟩⊗q
                          J |Φ⟩A |0̄⟩Z .



Equations (4.12) and (4.13) yields the following dyadic truncation-error bound:
                                                        K−1         
                                1 1                     1 X          1
        Pr[Vq accepts |Φ⟩] −      + ⟨Φ|Πsym |Φ⟩ =               pt −     ⟨Φ|Uπt |Φ⟩
                                2 2                     2            K
                                                                     t=0
                                                                    K−1
                                                                1   X             1
                                                          ≤                pt −     ·1
                                                                2                 K
                                                                    t=0
                                                                                   
                                                        1     K −r               r
                                                     =     r·       + (K − r) ·
                                                        2     KN                KN
                                                        r(K − r)
                                                     =           =: ζdyad (q).
                                                           KN
Here, the second line uses the triangle inequality and the bound ⟨Φ|Uπt |Φ⟩ ≤ 1, and the third
line follows from Equation (4.11). Since r(K − r) ≤ K 2 /4 and N ≥ 2b K, we have
                                   ζdyad (q) ≤ K/(4N ) ≤ 2−b−2 .
    Finally, if |Φ⟩ = |ψ⟩⊗k , then Uπt |Φ⟩ = |Φ⟩ for every t, so the acceptance probability is exactly
1, as desired.

Lemma 4.13 (Stoquastic equality test). Let |Φ⟩ = |ϕ1 ⟩ ⊗ · · · ⊗ |ϕk ⟩ be a pure product state in
H⊗k . Then there exists a one-register pure state |ψ⟩ ∈ H such that
                                                q
                             T |Φ⟩, |ψ⟩⊗k ≤ 2 1 − ⟨Φ|Πsym |Φ⟩.
                                          

Proof. Let ssym := ⟨Φ|Πsym |Φ⟩. If ssym = 0, the conclusion is trivial. Assume henceforth that
ssym > 0 and set
                                              Πsym |Φ⟩
                                        |S⟩ := √       .
                                                 ssym
Then |S⟩ is a normalized symmetric state and |⟨S|Φ⟩|2 = ssym . Since |Φ⟩ is itself a product
                                                         √
state, the maximum product overlap of |S⟩ is at least ssym . For symmetric pure states, a
closest product state may be chosen symmetric [HKW+ 09, Lemma 1]; equivalently, there exists
                                            2
a one-register state |ψ⟩ such that S ψ ⊗k     ≥ ssym . Therefore, the identity in Equation (2.2)
yields
                                  T(|S⟩, |ψ⟩⊗k ) ≤ 1 − ssym .
                                                  p

Also,                                                 p
                                     T(|Φ⟩, |S⟩) =     1 − ssym .

                                                 33
The claim now follows from the triangle inequality:
                 T |Φ⟩, |ψ⟩⊗k ≤ T(|Φ⟩, |S⟩) + T(|S⟩, |ψ⟩⊗k ) ≤ 2 1 − ssym .
                                                               p


4.2.3      SymStoqMA(k ) ⊆ StoqMA(k )
A direct consequence of the stoquastic equality test (Lemma 4.12) is the other direction of
witness symmetrization, which establishes Theorem 4.4(2):

Theorem 4.14. Let k(n) be a polynomially bounded integer-valued function satisfying k(n) ≥ 2.
Let the completeness error ε(n) and the promise gap ∆(n) be functions such that 0 ≤ ε(n) < 1/2
and ∆(n) > 0. Then the following inclusion holds:
                                                                    ∆2
                                                         s              {
                     SymStoqMAℓ Jk, 1 − ε, ∆K ⊆ StoqMAℓ k, 1 − λε,        .
                                                                     16
Here, λ := ∆/8. In particular, the resulting gap shows that the construction preserves both
constant and inverse-polynomial gaps.

Proof. Let V be the given SymStoqMAℓ Jk, 1 − ε, ∆K verifier acting on witness registers
A1 , · · · , Ak . Let c(n) := 1 − ε(n) and s(n) := c(n) − ∆(n) be the completeness and soundness
parameters of V , respectively. We now construct a new stoquastic verification circuit W , using
the same witness registers A1 , · · · , Ak as follows:

      • With probability 1 − λ, run the symmetry branch from Protocol 3 with parameters b :=
         log 16/∆2 , q := ⌈log(k!) + b⌉, and ξ := ξdyad (q).
                   

      • With probability λ, run the original verification circuit V .

Since our protocol is a convex combination (1 − λ, λ) of two stoquastic verification circuits, the
resulting verification circuit remains stoquastic.24

Completeness. For yes instances, the honest witness is of the form |ψ⟩⊗k . The symmetry branch
accepts with probability 1, and the original branch accepts with probability at least c = 1 − ε.
Hence the completeness is c′ = 1 − λ(1 − c).

Soundness. Fix an arbitrary product witness
                                           |Φ⟩ = |ϕ1 ⟩ ⊗ · · · ⊗ |ϕk ⟩.
Let η := 1 − ⟨Φ|Πsym |Φ⟩. By Lemma 4.12, the symmetry branch accepts with probability at
most 1 − η/2 + ζ, the chosen parameters ensure that
                                             ξ ≤ 2−b−2 ≤ ∆2 /64.                           (4.14)
      By Lemma 4.13, there exists a one-register state |ψ⟩ such that
                                                         √
                                      T |Φ⟩, |ψ⟩⊗k ≤ 2 η.                                  (4.15)
                                                   

By Proposition 3.7 and Proposition 4.8, it suffices to consider a non-negative product witness
|Φ⟩, and the state |ψ⟩ in Equation (4.15) may also be chosen non-negative; hence the soundness
of V applies to |ψ⟩⊗k , and the measurement bound for trace distance (Lemma 2.3) implies that
                                           √
V accepts |Φ⟩ with probability at most s+2 η. Combining this reasoning with the trivial upper
                                                                  √
bound 1, its acceptance probability becomes at most min{1, s + 2 η}. Therefore,
                                                 η                      √
                 Pr[W accepts |Φ⟩] ≤ (1 − λ) 1 − + ζ + λ min{1, s + 2 η}.
                                                  2
 24
      For truncation errors caused by choosing λ, see Footnote 23.




                                                        34
Subtracting this from c′ gives
                                                          √      1−λ
          c′ − Pr[W accepts |Φ⟩] ≥ λ(c − min{1, s + 2 η}) +           η − (1 − λ)ζ.      (4.16)
                                                                   2
        √
Set x := η. Since x ∈ [0, 1], it remains to simplify the lower bound in Equation (4.16):

    • If s + 2x ≤ 1, then Equation (4.16) yields
                                                                 1−λ 2
                      c′ − Pr[W accepts |Φ⟩] ≥ λ∆ − 2λx +           x −(1 − λ)ζ.
                                               |       {z         2  }
                                                         :=f (x)

      This is a convex quadratic whose unique minimizer is
                                           2λ           ∆   1−s
                                   x∗ :=        ≤ 4λ =    ≤     .
                                          1−λ           2     2
      Here, the first inequality holds because λ = ∆/8 ≤ 1/8. Consequently, the minimizer lies
      within the regime s + 2x ≤ 1, and it follows that
                                                               2λ2
                                     f (x) ≥ f (x∗ ) = λ∆ −        .                       (4.17)
                                                              1−λ
      Plugging 1/(1 − λ) ≤ 8/7 and Equation (4.14) into Equation (4.17), we obtain
                                                   ∆2 ∆2 ∆2            33∆2   ∆2
                    f (x) − (1 − λ)ζ ≥ f (x) − ζ ≥     −     −     =        ≥    .
                                                    8     28    64      448   16
      Therefore, the first case gives c′ − Pr[W accepts |Φ⟩] ≥ ∆2 /16.

    • If s + 2x ≥ 1, then Equation (4.16) implies
                                                                 1−λ 2
                      c′ − Pr[W accepts |Φ⟩] ≥ −λ(1 − c) +          x −(1 − λ)ζ.
                                               |       {z         2  }
                                                          g(x)

      The function g is increasing for x ≥ 0, and the boundary between the two regimes is
      x0 = (1 − s)/2. Since x0 ≥ x∗ , g(x0 ) = f (x0 ), and (1 − λ)ζ ≤ ζ, we obtain
                                                                                  ∆2
                     g(x) − (1 − λ)ζ ≥ g(x0 ) − ζ = f (x0 ) − ζ ≥ f (x∗ ) − ζ ≥      .
                                                                                  16
                                                                   2
Hence, in all cases the acceptance probability is at most c′ − ∆
                                                               16 , finishing the proof.


5    The power of StoqMA(2) via distribution testing
In this section, we study the power of StoqMA(2) with short proofs. We first establish that,
        √
with O( n) unentangled proofs of length O(log n), a stoquastic verifier can certify NP languages,
with a constant promise gap:

Theorem 5.1. For any constant ε > 0, the following inclusion holds:
                                               √
                                          s                      {
                                                           1
                     NP ⊆ StoqMAO(log n) O( n), 1 − ε, − 2ε .
                                                           2
    In view of Theorems 3.3 and 4.14, it suffices to prove the following symmetric version:

Theorem 5.2. For any constant ε > 0, there exists a constant ∆ = Ω(1) for which the following
inclusion holds:                                q √              y
                      NP ⊆ SymStoqMAO(log n) O( n), 1 − ε, ∆ .



                                                35
                                                                                             √
     The symmetric protocol in Theorem 5.2 is, in spirit, analogous to the famous QMAlog ( n)
protocol of Aaronson, Beigi, Drucker, Fefferman, and Shor [ABD+ 09], as well as Chen–Drucker’s
improved protocol [CD10]. Those protocols, however, use non-stoquastic operations and there-
fore are not directly applicable here. We design a stoquastic protocol for Dinur’s PCP [Din07]
by leveraging Paninski’s uniformity test for probability distributions. One extra technical ben-
efit is that Paninski’s uniformity test is not intertwined with other tests, making our soundness
analysis more modular.
Remark 5.3 (Stoquastizing the uniformity test loses perfect completeness). Notably, there is
a tradeoff between the number of provers K and the completeness 1 − ε in Theorem 5.2: the
required value of K contains a multiplicative factor of log 1ε , which comes from the completeness
loss of the distributional uniformity test and is known to be necessary [DGPP18]. Consequently,
our stoquastic version of the uniformity test cannot achieve perfect completeness, but it can
achieve completeness as high as 1 − 2− polylog(n) , at the cost of slightly increasing the number of
                  √        e √n).
provers from O( n) to O(
   Following Theorem 4.7 and Remark 5.3, we obtain another corollary: for a stoquastic verifier,
                     e √n) suffice to certify NP languages. Applying parallel repetition for Sto-
two proofs of length O(
qMA(2) from Theorem 3.3, which gives error reduction when completeness error ε is negligible,
then yields

Theorem 5.4. For every ε(n) = Ω 2− polylog(n) , the following inclusion holds:
                                                
                                                 s                  {
                                                             1
                            NP ⊆ StoqMAO(     √
                                            e n)   2, 1 − ε,   − 2ε  .
                                                             2

    The same intuition from distribution testing also suggests a two-prover StoqMA(2) protocol
for NP languages with logarithmic-size witnesses and an inverse-polynomial gap. This result can
be viewed as a StoqMA(2) counterpart of the Blier–Tapp protocol [BT12]:
                                     s            {
                                                 1         1
Theorem 5.5. NP ⊆ StoqMAO(log n) 2, 1 − Θ 2 , Θ 2               .
                                                 n        n
    Scaling this up to polynomial-size proofs using a sufficiently structured PCP for NEXP, say
the one from [JW23, Theorem 7.4], one obtains that
                                          r                            z
                          NEXP ⊆ StoqMA 2, 1 − 2− poly(n) , 2− poly(n) .
   The reverse inclusion is straightforward. Following the standard convention, we call
StoqMA(2) with an exponentially small gap PreciseStoqMA(2). Therefore, together with the
easy inclusion PreciseQMA(2) ⊆ NEXP (see, e.g., [Per12]), we obtain:

Corollary 5.6. PreciseStoqMA(2) = NEXP.


   To establish the above theorems, we record Dinur’s PCP as our starting point.

Definition 5.7 (Dinur’s Gap Constraint Graph Problem, GapCG, adapted from [Din07, Defi-
nition 1.5]). Fix constants d ∈ N, Q ∈ N, and η > 0. An instance of (1, η)-GapCGd,Q consists
of a d-regular graph G = (V, E), an alphabet Σ of size Q, and for every undirected edge (u, v) ∈ E
a binary relation Ruv ⊆ Σ × Σ. The promise is that exactly one of the following holds:

   • Yes: There exists a labeling ι : V → Σ satisfying every edge constraint, i.e.
                                  (ι(u), ι(v)) ∈ Ruv ,    ∀(u, v) ∈ E;

   • No: Every labeling ι : V → Σ violates at least an η-fraction of the undirected edges.


                                                36
Theorem 5.8 (Dinur’s PCP Theorem, adapted from [Din07, Theorem 1.7]). There exist absolute
constants d, Q ∈ N and η > 0, together with a O(m)-time
                                              e         reduction from SAT instances of size
m to (1, η)-GapCGd,Q instances whose underlying constraint graph G = (V, E) has size O(m),
                                                                                     e
meaning that |V | = O(m)
                    e    and |E| = O(m).
                                     e

                                                                        √
   In the remainder of this section, we first give a SymStoqMAO(log n) ( n) protocol for (1, η)-
GapCG in Section 5.1, which proves Theorem 5.2. We then apply the same intuition to obtain
a more direct StoqMAO(log n) (2) protocol with an inverse-polynomial promise gap in Section 5.2,
which proves Theorem 5.5.
                  √
5.1   A SymStoqMA( n) protocol for (1, η)-GapCG
                                    √
We begin by designing a SymStoqMA(O( n)) protocol that certifies NP languages with a con-
stant promise gap:

Theorem 5.2 (restated). For any constant ε > 0, there exists a constant ∆ = Ω(1) for which
the following inclusion holds:
                                                q √              y
                          NP ⊆ SymStoqMAO(log n) O( n), 1 − ε, ∆ .

    We will need the following classical theorem of Paninski [Pan08], in the clean formulation
recorded in [Can20, Theorem 5.1], to analyze the product weights induced by the witnesses:

Theorem 5.9 (Uniformity test for distributions, adapted from [Can20, Theorem 5.1]). Given
sample access to an unknown distribution q over a finite set Ω of size n. For every fixed δ > 0
and ε > 0, there is an efficiently computable predicate T on
                                              √          
                                                  n     1
                                       K=O          log
                                                 δ2     ε
i.i.d. samples from q, such that

   • If q is the uniform distribution, T accepts w.p. at least 1 − ε;
   • If q is δ-far from uniform in total variation distance, T accepts w.p. at most ε.

Furthermore, T depends only on the collision pattern among the samples.

    Given a GapCG instance I, we identify V × Σ with a subset of the computational basis on
⌈log |V |⌉ + ⌈log |Σ|⌉ = O(log |V |) qubits. Suppose the input is a yes instance with a satisfying
labeling ι : V → Σ, and let |V | = n. The honest one-copy witness is the subset state
                                               1 X
                                      |ϕL ⟩ = p         |v, ι(v)⟩.
                                               |V | v∈V
                                                                   √
Fix a constant C > 0, to be specified later, and let K := ⌈C n⌉. We ask for K copies of this
state, namely |Φ⟩ := |ϕL ⟩⊗K , so that the witnesses encode the satisfying labeling.

Branch-local protocol for vertex-label branches. Let Wi be the register containing the
i-th witness factor, and let W := (W1 , · · · , WK ). An arbitrary non-negative one-copy state |ψ⟩
can be expressed as
               X                                                              X
     |ψ⟩ =            αv,a |v, a⟩, where αv,a ≥ 0, ∀(v, a) ∈ V × Σ and                2
                                                                                    αv,a = 1.
           (v,a)∈V ×Σ                                                           (v,a)∈V ×Σ

Thus, a computational-basis branch of the symmetric witness |Ψ⟩ := |ψ⟩⊗K is labeled by
                            x = ((v1 , a1 ), . . . , (vK , aK )) ∈ (V × Σ)K .


                                                   37
    We refer to (vi , ai ) as the vertex-label factor branch in the i-th tensor factor, or simply as the
vertex-label branch when the tensor-product structure is clear. The full tuple x is a K-vertex-
label branch. These branch labels are not observed outcomes: the actual stoquastic verifier
never measures W1 , · · · , WK before the final Hadamard-basis measurement. The terminology
serves only to identify the computational-basis branches on which the classical reversible circuit
is coherently evaluated.
    One can verify directly that the branch weight of the K-vertex-label branch x is
           Y                    2       Y                        Y
                      αvi ,ai       =               αv2i ,ai =               p(vi , ai ),   where p(v, a) := αv,a
                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                  .   (5.1)
              i∈[K]                         i∈[K]                    i∈[K]

Here, p(v, a) denotes the one-copy squared-amplitude distribution. Following Equation (5.1),
the squared-amplitude weights on K-vertex-label branches are exactly the product weights p⊗K .
This product-weight identity is the only sense in which distribution testing enters the proof.
We also define the probability distribution q over V as the vertex marginal of the one-copy
distribution p, equivalently as the distribution that would be obtained by measuring |ψ⟩ in the
computational basis and retaining only the vertex register:
                                                      X
                                    ∀v ∈ V, q(v) :=        2
                                                         αv,a .                           (5.2)
                                                                             a∈Σ

   We are now ready to state the branch-local protocol, presented in Protocol 4, which describes
the behavior of the SymStoqMA(K) verifier within a fixed K-vertex-label branch, including
branch-local versions of the uniformity and consistency tests.

 Protocol 4: Branch-local protocol for NP on a fixed K-vertex-label branch
   1. Consider a K-vertex-label branch of |Ψ⟩ = |ψ⟩⊗K , denoted by

                                        ((v1 , a1 ), . . . , (vK , aK )) ∈ (V × Σ)K .

   2. Apply both the uniformity and consistency test :
       2.1 Uniformity test: Let T be the predicate from Paninski’s uniformity tester
        in Theorem 5.9, distinguishing the uniform distribution µV over V from
        distributions q such that TV(q, µV ) ≥ δ, for some fixed distance parameter δ > 0
        with error parameter ε. Apply the deterministic collision-based predicate T to the
        vertex components v1 , . . . , vK .
       2.2 Consistency test: Accept if neither of the following occurs
         (i) Exist i ̸= j such that vi = vj but ai ̸= aj ;
        (ii) Exist i ̸= j such that (vi , vj ) ∈ E and (ai , aj ) ∈
                                                                  / Rvi vj .

   3. Accept if and only if both tests accept.



Implementing the branch-local protocol. To implement Protocol 4 as a stoquastic veri-
fication circuit, we consider the predicate Aunif underlying Paninski’s uniformity tester (Theo-
rem 5.9) and write the acceptance condition of the consistency test as the predicate Acons . Since
both predicates are deterministic, we obtain a deterministic predicate
                                                Abranch := Aunif ∧ Acons ,
which corresponds to the acceptance condition of Protocol 4.
    Let A0 and F denote the register containing |0⟩-ancillary qubits and a single-qubit register
initialized to |0⟩. Using the standard reversible-computation convention, we obtain a classical



                                                                 38
reversible circuit Γbranch satisfying that
                 ∀x ∈ (V × Σ)K ,    Γbranch |x⟩W |0̄⟩A0 |0⟩F = |x⟩W |0̄⟩A0 |Abranch (x)⟩F .
    Finally, we obtain the resulting stoquastic verification circuit by applying the branch-overlap
test (Lemma 2.13) to the circuit pair (Γbranch , I) on the input state |Ψ⟩W |0̄⟩A0 |0⟩F , where |Ψ⟩
equals |Φ⟩ for yes instances.

5.1.1     Analysis of Protocol 4
Now we analyze our branch-local verifier. Only the one-copy squared-amplitude distribution p
over V × Σ, as defined in Equation (5.1), matters, because the K-factor branch weights factor
as p⊗K , which corresponds, from the distribution testing perspective, to K i.i.d. samples drawn
from p. The vertex marginal q over V also has been defined in Equation (5.2).

Parameter choices. There are several running parameters in our analysis,
        ε, is the target error parameter in Protocol 4, which is positive and can be arbitrarily
        small;
        η, is the fixed constant from Dinur’s PCP Theorem 5.8, representing the minimum fraction
        of violating edges for any labeling in a no instance;
        δ, is the distance parameter used in Protocol 4, which we set to δ = η/48;
        κ, an auxiliary parameter, which we set to κ = η/64.

Completeness. For yes instances, the induced vertex distribution q is uniform, and the con-
sistency test is passed trivially with probability 1. Overall, the verifier accepts with probability
                                          √
at least 1 − ε for large enough K = O( n) by Theorem 5.9, where ε > 0 can be an arbitrarily
small constant, or even as small as 2− polylog(n) if we allow K = O(e √n). Hence,

Lemma 5.10 (Completeness of Protocol 4). The completeness of the classical branch predicate
is at least 1 − ε, and consequently, the completeness of the branch-local verifier V is at least
1 − ε/2.

Soundness. We now prove the soundness:
Lemma 5.11 (Soundness of Protocol 4). The soundness of the classical branch predicate is at
most ε, and consequently, the completeness of the branch-local verifier V is at most 1/2 + ε/2.
   If q is δ-far from the uniform distribution µV , the uniformity test rejects with probability
1 − ε. Hence, assume from now on that TV(q, µV ) < δ. Define the following sets
                               1
                                       H := v ∈ V q(v) > n2 ,
                                            
        L := v ∈ V q(v) < 2n     ,                                   G := V \ (L ∪ H).
Then because every v ∈ L contributes more than 2n      1
                                                          to the total deficit from µV , one has
|L| < 2δn; and analogously because every v ∈ H contributes more than n1 to the total excess
over µV , one has |H| < δn. Therefore, |V \ G| < 3δn.
    For each vertex v with q(v) > 0, define the conditional label distribution rv : Σ → R and the
plurality label ι∗ : V → Σ, that
                                        p(v, a)
                            rv (a) :=           ,     ι∗ (v) := arg max rv (a).
                                         q(v)                        a∈Σ

For vertices with q(v) = 0, choose ι∗ (v) arbitrarily. Define the local ambiguity
                                            bv := 1 − rv (ι∗ (v)).
Thus bv = 0 iff the label at v is deterministic. We split the soundness analysis into two cases.

                                                     39
 (a) There is substantial ambiguity on good vertices. Then the consistency test is likely to
     see a same vertex sampled twice with different labels by the birthday paradox, and thus
     rejects.

 (b) The label is almost deterministic on a good fraction of vertices. Then the consistency test
     is likely to see adjacent vertices with unsatisfying labels by the birthday paradox, and thus
     rejects.

    The following generalized birthday paradox, whose proof is deferred to Appendix C.2, cap-
tures the birthday-paradox estimate required by the two cases:

Lemma 5.12 (A generalized birthday paradox). Let Ω be a finite set of size n, µ be a probability
distribution on Ω, and B ⊆ Ω × Ω be a symmetric relation representing the “birthday collisions.”
For some subset Ω0 ⊆ Ω, if for some parameters α, β > 0 and some integer D > 0, the following
are true

 (1) µ(x) ≤ α/n for every x ∈ Ω0 ;
 (2) for every x ∈ Ω0 , the number of y ∈ Ω0 with (x, y) ∈ B is at most D;
 (3) the bad-pair weight on Ω0 satisfies
                                                X                          β
                                  λ :=                        µ(x)µ(y) ≥     .
                                                                           n
                                          (x,y)∈B∩(Ω0 ×Ω0 )

Then for any constant ε > 0, there is a large enough C such that the following holds for all
                                                                             √
sufficiently large n: Let X1 , . . . , XK be i.i.d. samples from µ with K = C n,
                        h                                              i
                      Pr ∃i < j such that (Xi , Xj ) ∈ B ∩ (Ω0 × Ω0 ) ≥ 1 − ε.

   With this generalized birthday paradox at our disposal, we prove the promised soundness of
our protocol by considering the aforementioned two cases:

Case (a): There is substantial ambiguity among good vertices. Suppose
                                        X
                                           q(v)bv ≥ κ
                                            v∈G

for κ > 0, whose exact choice κ is irrelevant in this case. To apply the birthday paradox, define
the sample space
                             Ω := V × Σ and µ(v, a) := p(v, a),
and define
                                          Ωver
                                           0 := G × Σ ⊆ Ω.

   Let Bver ⊆ Ω × Ω be the symmetric bad-pair relation consisting of all ordered pairs
                            ((v, a), (v, a′ )) with v ∈ G and a ̸= a′ .
   For x = (v, a) ∈ Ωver
                     0 , we have
                                                          2
                                   µ(x) = p(v, a) ≤ q(v) ≤  .
                                                          n
   Moreover, every x ∈ Ωver
                         0 has at most |Σ| − 1 neighbors inside Ω0 with respect to Bver . The
                                                                  ver

bad-pair weight equals
                             X                  X         X
                    λver :=        µ(x)µ(y) =       q(v)2     rv (a)rv (a′ )
                             (x,y)∈Bver                 v∈G        a̸=a′




                                                   40
   Since rv (ι∗ (v)) = 1 − bv and 1 − bv ≥ 1/|Σ|, one has the elementary bound
                               X                                     2
                                   rv (a)rv (a′ ) ≥ 2bv (1 − bv ) ≥     bv .
                                 ′
                                                                    |Σ|
                                 a̸=a

   Also, for v ∈ G one has q(v)2 ≥ q(v)/(2n). Therefore,
                             X q(v) 2            1 X                κ
                      λver ≥          ·   bv =           q(v)bv ≥      .
                                  2n |Σ|       |Σ|n               |Σ|n
                                   v∈G                      v∈G

   Applying the generalized birthday paradox (Lemma 5.12) with
                      Ω0 = Ωver
                             0 ,  α = 2|Σ|, β = κ,      D = |Σ| − 1,
                                √
we conclude that for K = C n with C sufficiently large, the consistency test rejects with
probability at least 1 − ε > 0.

Case (b): The label is unambiguous on most good vertices, meaning that
                                      X
                                         q(v)bv < κ,
                                                v∈G

Define T := {v ∈ G | bv ≤ 1/2}, the set of unambiguous vertices. Then G\T = {v ∈ G | bv > 1/2},
and hence                               X               X
                         q(G \ T ) ≤ 2       q(v)bv ≤ 2    q(v)bv < 2κ.
                                            v∈G\T           v∈G

Because every vertex in G has mass at least 1/(2n), this implies |G \ T | < 4κn. Consequently,
                                |V \ T | ≤ |V \ G| + |G \ T | < 3δn + 4κn.
   Since we are in a no instance, the plurality labeling ι∗ violates at least an η-fraction of the
edges, i.e., at least η|E| = ηdn/2 edges. Delete all edges incident to V \ T . Since the graph has
degree d, the number of deleted edges is at most
                                          d|V \ T | < 3δdn + 4κdn.
   Now our choice of parameters δ = η/48 and κ = η/64 guarantees that there remain at least
ηdn/4 violated edges (u, v) ∈ E such that:

 (i) both u and v lie in T ;
(ii) (ι∗ (u), ι∗ (v)) ∈
                      / Ruv .

Call these good violated edges. Now define the set
                Ωedge
                 0    := {(v, ι∗ (v)) | v is incident to some good violated edge} ⊆ Ω,
and define a symmetric bad-pair relation Bedge ⊆ Ω × Ω by including, for every good violated
edge (u, v), the two ordered pairs
                       ((u, ι∗ (u)), (v, ι∗ (v)))     and   ((v, ι∗ (v)), (u, ι∗ (u))).
Every atom in Ωedge
                 0    lies in T ⊆ G, hence has mass at most 2/n, and every atom has degree at
most d inside this relation.
   For a good violated edge, because u, v ∈ T ⊆ G, we have
                                         1                                  1
                          q(u), q(v) ≥      ,     ru (ι∗ (u)), rv (ι∗ (v)) ≥ .
                                        2n                                  2
Consequently, it holds that
                                                                  1
                                   p(u, ι∗ (u)) p(v, ι∗ (v)) ≥         .
                                                               16n2



                                                      41
Summing over the two orientations of each good violated edge yields
                                        X                  ηd
                            λedge :=          µ(x)µ(y) ≥      .
                                                          32n
                                        (x,y)∈Bedge

Applying the generalized birthday paradox (Lemma 5.12) with
                    Ω0 = Ωedge
                          0    , α = 2|Σ|,     β = ηd|Σ|/32,        D = d,
                                √
we conclude again that for K = C n with C sufficiently large, the consistency test rejects with
probability at least 1 − ε.

5.2   A StoqMAlog (2) protocol with inverse-polynomial gap
We now present the promised inverse-polynomial-gap version. In the constant-gap protocol,
                                                                               √
corresponding to its branch-local version presented in Protocol 4, the K = Θ( n) vertex-label
factor branches are used only to ensure that the relevant vertex- and edge-detection events have
constant total branch weight. With two vertex-label factor branches, the same events have
branch weight Θ(1/n), which is sufficient to obtain an inverse-polynomial promise gap.
                                                s            {
                                                             1        1
Theorem 5.5 (restated). NP ⊆ StoqMAO(log n) 2, 1 − Θ 2 , Θ 2               .
                                                            n         n
Proof. In view of Theorem 4.14, it suffices to prove
                                                s       {
                                                      1    1
                     NP ⊆ SymStoqMAO(log n) 2, 1 − Θ    ,Θ   .                                  (5.3)
                                                      n    n
   Consider a GapCG instance as in Theorem 5.8, with n = |V | vertices. Merlins send an
O(log n)-qubit state on the computational basis V × Σ. On a yes instance, for the satisfying
labeling ι : V → Σ, both Merlins send
                                             1 X
                                    |ϕL ⟩ = √    |v, ι(v)⟩.
                                              n
                                                  v∈V


The simple branch-local protocol and its stoquastic implementation. Similar to the
analysis in the previous subsection, it suffices to first consider the simple branch-local protocol
W , analogous to Protocol 4, as presented in Protocol 5.

 Protocol 5: Simple branch-local protocol for NP on a fixed 2-vertex-label branch.
  1. Consider a 2-vertex-label branch of |Ψ⟩ = |ψ⟩ ⊗ |ψ⟩, denoted by

                                     ((u, a), (v, b)) ∈ (V × Σ)2 .

   2. Apply either the uniformity or the consistency test, each with probability 1/2 :
       2.1 Uniformity test: Reject if u = v.
       2.2 Consistency test: Reject if either of the following occurs:
         (i) u = v and a ̸= b;
        (ii) (u, v) ∈ E and (a, b) ∈
                                   / Ruv .

   3. Accept if and only if the chosen test accepts.

    To implement Protocol 5 as a stoquastic verification circuit, we write the two acceptance
conditions of the uniformity and consistency tests, respectively, as deterministic predicates Aunif
and Acons , and implement them by classical reversible circuits Γunif and Γcons , respectively, using
the standard reversible-computation convention.

                                                 42
    Finally, we implement the convex combination (1/2, 1/2) of the two tests by combining
these circuits using an additional |+⟩ ancillary qubit, obtaining a reversible circuit Γbranch for
the uniform mixture of Γunif and Γcons . The resulting stoquastic verification circuit is then
obtained by applying the branch-overlap test (Lemma 2.13) to the circuit pair (Γbranch , I) with
the input state |+⟩|Ψ⟩|0̄⟩, where |Ψ⟩ coincides with |ϕL ⟩ ⊗ |ϕL ⟩ for yes instances.

Analysis of the branch-local verifier W . We analyze the branch-local protocol W on
two symmetric witnesses. From the distributional testing perspective, (u, a), (v, b) are drawn
from p⊗2 , where p is a distribution on V × Σ. We will use the same notation as in the proof
of Theorem 5.2.

Completeness of W . For every yes instance, the consistency test sees no violation, the only
rejection can occur in the uniformity test, when u = v, whose total weight is easily seen to be
2n , thus
 1

                                                      1
                                     Pr[W rejects] =    .                                  (5.4)
                                                     2n
Soundness of W . We claim that, for every no instance, and for a constant γ > 0,
                                                      1    γ
                                     Pr[W rejects] ≥    +                                    (5.5)
                                                     2n n
   Indeed, if the vertex marginal q is δ-far from uniform in total variation distance, the unifor-
mity test rejects with probability
                          1X             1     1              1    2δ 2
                                q(v)2 =     + ∥q − µV ∥22 ≥     +       ,
                          2 v           2n 2                 2n     n

where the last step is by Cauchy-Schwarz that 4TV(q, µV )2 = ∥q − µV ∥21 ≤ n∥q − µV ∥22 . Now
assume q is close to uniform, we split the remaining soundness analysis into two cases.

Ambiguous case. If q is close to uniform but there is substantial ambiguity. Let Bver ⊆ Ω × Ω
be the symmetric bad-pair relation consisting of all ordered pairs
                            ((v, a), (v, a′ )) with v ∈ G and a ̸= a′ .
   Then the bad-pair weight
                                                X
                               λver :=                        p(u, a)p(v, b)
                                         ((u,a),(v,b))∈Bver

based on the calculation in Case (a) from Theorem 5.2 is such that
                                                  κ
                                         λver ≥      ,
                                                |Σ|n
contributing an additional λver /2 rejection weight within the consistency test, to the weight
1/(2n) from the uniformity test.

Unambiguous case. Otherwise, q is close to uniform and the labels are unambiguous on a good
fraction of vertices. Let the symmetric bad-pair relation Bedge ⊆ Ω × Ω include the two ordered
pairs
                      ((u, a), (v, b)) and ((v, b), (u, a)), where (a, b) ̸∈ Ruv .
   The bad-pair weight with respect to Bedge ,
                                         X
                           λedge :=                            p(u, a)p(v, b),
                                         ((u,a),(v,b))∈Bedge




                                                    43
by the calculation in Case (b) from Theorem 5.2 gives
                                                    ηd
                                          λedge ≥      ,
                                                   32n
contributing an additional λedge /2 rejection weight within the consistency test, to the rejection
weight of 1/(2n) from the uniformity test.
   Then Equation (5.5) holds by taking
                                                          
                                                2    κ ηd
                                    γ = min 2δ ,        ,    .
                                                   2|Σ| 64

6     Upper bounds for StoqMA(k ) with logarithmic-size proofs
In this section, we provide nearly tight upper bounds for StoqMA(k ) with logarithmic-size proofs.
We first prove that StoqMAlog collapses to BPP, which provides positive evidence for the long-
standing open problem of whether StoqMA = MA, since MAlog = BPP (e.g., [Reg06, Theorem
3]), and aligns with the equivalence QMAlog = BQP [MW05, Theorem 3.10]:
Theorem 6.1 (Randomized singly exponential-time upper bound for StoqMA). For all effi-
ciently computable functions c(n) and ∆(n) with c(n) ∈ (1/2, 1], ∆(n) ∈ (0, 1/2], and c(n) −
∆(n) ≥ 1/2, and for every efficiently computable positive integer-valued function ℓ(n) ≤ poly(n),
the following inclusion holds:
                                                     3ℓ                  
                      StoqMAℓ J1, c, ∆K ⊆ BPTIME O   e 2       · poly(|V |)   .
                                                         ∆2
Here, |V | denotes the description size of the underlying stoquastic verification circuit V .
Furthermore, up to lower-order factors, this upper bound is tight with respect to the proof length
ℓ under randomized ETH.
    By taking ℓ(n) = O(log n) in Theorem 6.1, we immediately obtain:
Corollary 6.2. StoqMAlog = BPP.
   For multiple-prover scenarios, although the best known upper bound for QMA(2)log is the
same as that for general QMA(2), namely NEXP, we establish an upper bound StoqMA(2)log ⊆
MA that is better than the bound due to StoqMA(2) ⊆ StoqMA [GJ26]:
Theorem 6.3 (StoqMA(k ) with logarithmic-size proofs is in MA). For all efficiently computable
functions c(n) and ∆(n) with 1/2 < c(n) ≤ 1, ∆(n) ≥ 1/ poly(n), and c(n) − ∆(n) ≥ 1/2,
and for every efficiently computable positive integer-valued function ℓ(n) and k(n) such that
ℓ(n) ≤ O(log n) and k(n) ≤ poly(n), the following inclusion holds:
                                    StoqMAℓ Jk, c, ∆K ⊆ MA.
    In the remainder of this section, we first investigate the single-prover case in Section 6.1,
and then explore the multi-prover case in Section 6.2. Throughout this section, for convenience,
we slightly abuse notation and also use Γ to denote the exponential-size matrix induced by the
reversible circuit in an RCD or SepRCD instance.

6.1   StoqMAlog ⊆ BPP and general rETH-optimal BPTIME upper bound
The optimality, with respect to the proof length ℓ, of the BPTIME upper bound underlying
Theorem 6.1 follows from Lemma 6.4, and the proof is deferred to Appendix C.3.
Lemma 6.4 (Proof-length optimality under randomized ETH). Let ℓ(n) be an efficiently com-
putable positive integer-valued function satisfying ℓ(n) ≤ poly(n). Assume that
                                                                      
                        StoqMAℓ J1, 1, 1/2K ⊆ BPTIME 2o(ℓ) · poly(|V |) ,

                                               44
where |V | denotes the description size of the underlying stoquastic verification circuit V . Then
this randomized upper bound refutes randomized ETH.

6.1.1    Proof of Theorem 6.1
To establish the BPTIME upper bound for StoqMA, the key observation is that, once a
computational-basis witness state |a⟩ is fixed, with a ∈ {0, 1}ℓ , the only randomness remaining
in the compressed matrix MΓ comes from the |+⟩ ancillary qubits. Consequently, one random
simulation of Γ produces one sample from a column of MΓ . Estimating all 2ℓ columns takes
running time singly exponential in ℓ, which is polynomial in n when ℓ(n) = O(log n). We now
proceed with the detailed randomized algorithm and the corresponding analysis:

Proof of Theorem 6.1. Following Lemma 3.13, we consider a RCD instance (Γ, I) such that
                                 ⟨R0 (ψ)|R1 (ψ)⟩ = ⟨ψ|⟨0̄|⟨+̄|Γ|ψ⟩|0̄⟩|+̄⟩
for every non-negative state |ψ⟩. Therefore, it suffices to distinguish
                 I + M                          I + M 
                         Γ                                 Γ
            λmax            ≥ c(n) from λmax                   ≤ s(n) := c(n) − ∆(n).
                     2                                  2
Here, MΓ := ⟨0|⊗m0 ⟨+|⊗r Γ|0⟩⊗m0 |+⟩⊗r is a matrix of size 2ℓ × 2ℓ , which is polynomial in n when
ℓ(n) ≤ O(log n). The rETH-based optimality statement follows from Lemma 6.4.

 Algorithm 1: Column-sampling matrix reconstruction of MΓ .
   Input          : A reversible circuit Γ and an entrywise accuracy parameter η > 0.
   Output         : An explicit matrix M fΓ approximating MΓ .
   Parameters: The witness length ℓ, the number of |0⟩ ancillary qubits m0 , and the
                    number of |+⟩ ancillary qubits r.
 1 Set L := {0, 1}ℓ and U := {0, 1}r .
 2 Set T := C log(20|L|2 )/η 2 for a sufficiently large absolute constant C.
                                

 3 Initialize an |L| × |L| zero matrix M  fΓ .
 4 For each column a ∈ L :
 5     Initialize counters Nb,a := 0 for all b ∈ L.
 6     For each sample j ∈ {1, . . . , T } :
 7         Sample u ∼ Unif(U ).
 8         Compute Γ(a, 0m0 , u) = (b, z, u′ ) ∈ L × {0, 1}m0 × U .
 9         If z = 0m0 :
10              Update Nb,a ← Nb,a + 1.
11     For each row b ∈ L :
12         Set (MfΓ )b,a := Nb,a /T .
13 Return M fΓ .


    To this end, we provide a column-sampling matrix reconstruction procedure for MΓ , as
presented in Algorithm 1. By invoking Algorithm 1 with the circuit Γ and the accuracy param-
eter η = ∆/(8|L|), we obtain M fΓ by estimating MΓ column by column. For every fixed pair
(a, b) ∈ L × L, define the Bernoulli random variable
                     Ya,b (u) := I[Γ(a, 0m0 , u) ∈ {b} × {0m0 } × U ],   where u ∈ U.
It is easy to verify that the expectation of Ya,b corresponds to the matrix entry ⟨b|MΓ |a⟩:
            E    [Ya,b (u)] = 2−r |{u ∈ U | Γ(a, 0m0 , u) ∈ {b} × {0m0 } × U }| = ⟨b|MΓ |a⟩.   (6.1)
        u∼Unif(U )

   Since the number of samples used by Algorithm 1 is T = C log(20|L|2 )/η 2 , for every fixed
                                                                           



                                                    45
(a, b), the Hoeffding bound (see, e.g., [MU17, Theorem 4.12]) gives
                             fΓ |a⟩ − ⟨b|MΓ |a⟩ > η ≤ 2e−2T η2 ≤ 1 .
                         h                         i
                       Pr ⟨b|M                                                             (6.2)
                                                                   10|L|2
By taking a union bound over all |L|2 entries, each of which satisfies Equation (6.2), we obtain
                                                 X        h                           i
 Pr max ⟨b|M    fΓ |a⟩ − ⟨b|MΓ |a⟩ ≤ η ≥ 1 −             Pr ⟨b|M fΓ |a⟩ − ⟨b|MΓ |a⟩ > η (6.3a)
      (a,b)∈L×L
                                                (a,b)∈L×L
                                                           1      9
                                          ≥ 1 − |L|2 ·        2
                                                                = .                      (6.3b)
                                                         10|L|   10
   By Weyl’s perturbation theorem (see, e.g., [Bha96, Corollary III.2.6]), on the good event
underlying Equation (6.3), we obtain:
                 fΓ                 
              I +M              I + MΓ     1           
       λmax            − λmax            = · λmax M   fΓ − λmax (MΓ )                 (6.4a)
                 2                 2       2
                                            1
                                           ≤  · M
                                                fΓ − MΓ                                  (6.4b)
                                            2
                                            1
                                           ≤ · MfΓ − MΓ                                   (6.4c)
                                            2 v          2

                                            1 u                               2
                                               u X
                                           = ·t         ⟨b|M
                                                           fΓ |a⟩ − ⟨b|MΓ |a⟩            (6.4d)
                                            2
                                                    (a,b)∈L×L

                                          1         ∆
                                           ≤· |L|η = .                              (6.4e)
                                          2         16
   Consequently, conditioned on the good event underlying Equation (6.3), comparing 1 +
     fΓ /2 with the midpoint (c + s)/2 = c − ∆/2 correctly decides the promise problem.
        
λmax M

Time complexity. It remains to bound the running time. Algorithm 1 estimates |L| columns,
each using T samples, and every sample corresponds to a polynomial-time classical evaluation
of the reversible circuit Γ. Therefore, using the facts that |L| = 2ℓ and that estimating the
maximum eigenvalue of an explicit |L| × |L| symmetric matrix takes running time |L|3 (see,
e.g., [Dem97, Section 5.3.3]), the time complexity of Algorithm 1 is
                                                                                    
                                      3
                                                           1                      3
                                                                                     
        max |L| · T · poly(|V |), O |L|    = max O |L| · 2 · poly(|V |), O |L|
                                                   e
                                                            η
                                                3                      3ℓ 
                                                |L|                      2
                                           =Oe
                                                   2
                                                       · poly(|V |) = O
                                                                      e        · poly(|V |).
                                                 ∆                       ∆2

6.2     StoqMA(k )log ⊆ MA
We start with the two-prover case as a warm-up, and then move on to the multiple-prover case
with at most polynomially many provers.

6.2.1    A warm-up: StoqMA(2)log ⊆ MA

Since the full witness space has dimension 22ℓ = poly(n), after flattening the pair of witness
registers into one alphabet of size 22ℓ , Arthur can invoke Algorithm 1 exactly as in the one-
prover scenario. Nevertheless, the stoquastic separable value does not coincide with the largest
eigenvalue in general, the prover thus must provide a classical dyadic description of a rounded
separable witness, and Arthur evaluates that candidate product state against the reconstructed
matrix. We then continue with the actual proof:



                                               46
Theorem 6.5 (StoqMA(2) with logarithmic-size proofs is in MA). For all efficiently computable
functions c(n) and ∆(n) with 1/2 < c(n) ≤ 1, ∆(n) ≥ 1/ poly(n), and c(n) − ∆(n) ≥ 1/2, and
for every efficiently computable positive integer-valued function ℓ(n) such that ℓ(n) = O(log n),
the following inclusion holds:
                                     StoqMAℓ J2, c, ∆K ⊆ MA.

Proof. Using Lemma 3.13, we consider a SepRCD instance (Γ, I) such that
                                    ⟨R0 (Ψ)|R1 (Ψ)⟩ = ⟨Ψ|⟨0̄|⟨+̄|Γ|Ψ⟩|0̄⟩|+̄⟩
for every non-negative state |Ψ⟩ := |ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ |ψ2 ⟩. Write A = B = {0, 1}ℓ and U := {0, 1}r . We
define the matrix MΓ , indexed by (a, b), (a′ , b′ ) ∈ A × B, by
            a′ , b′ MΓ |a, b⟩ = 2−r u ∈ U Γ(a, b, 0m0 , u) ∈ {a′ } × {b′ } × {0m0 } × U .  (6.5)
                                   

Let QΓ := (I + MΓ )/2. Therefore, it suffices to distinguish the stoquastic separable value
            hSep+ (2ℓ ,2ℓ ) (QΓ ) ≥ c(n) from hSep+ (2ℓ ,2ℓ ) (QΓ ) ≤ s(n) := c(n) − ∆(n).

Here, the entry-wise non-negative matrix QΓ is of size 22ℓ × 22ℓ , which is polynomial in n when
ℓ(n) = O(log n), and satisfies that 0 ⪯ QΓ ⪯ I.

Rounding non-negative product-state witnesses to dyadic numbers. Fix δ := ∆/10,
                                              ℓ
and choose an integer t such that 2−t ≤ δ/2 2 . For every coordinate of |ψ1 ⟩ and |ψ2 ⟩, set
non-negative integer-valued vectors m1 and m2 by
                                                                     
                              1                                       1
                     t
        m1 (a) := 2 ⟨a|ψ1 ⟩ +     for a ∈ A and m2 (b) := 2 ⟨b|ψ2 ⟩ +
                                                           t
                                                                          for b ∈ B.
                              2                                       2
   Arthur interprets the classical witness (m1 , m2 ) as the normalized vectors
                          1 X                                   1 X
               ψ1′ :=              m1 (a)|a⟩ and ψ2′ :=                 m2 (b)|b⟩.
                       ∥m1 ∥2                                 ∥m2 ∥2
                                      a∈A                                                  b∈B

Consequently, the witness (m1 , m2 ) is a pair of integer lists describing a rounded non-negative
product-state witness, all of whose
                                P amplitudes are dyadic before normalization.     With the chosen
parameters, define |ψ1⋆ ⟩ := 2−t a∈A m1 (a)|a⟩ and |ψ2⋆ ⟩ := 2−t b∈B m2 (b)|b⟩. Then a direct
                                                                   P
calculation shows the following rounding-error bound:
                          ψ1′ ⊗ ψ2′ − |ψ1 ⟩⊗|ψ2 ⟩ 2                                                                   (6.6a)
                           ψ1′ ⊗ ψ2′ − ψ1′ ⊗|ψ2 ⟩ +               ψ1′                                                (6.6b)
                                                                                           
                  =                                                     ⊗|ψ2 ⟩ − |ψ1 ⟩⊗|ψ2 ⟩ 2
                  ≤       ψ2′   − |ψ2 ⟩ 2 +      ψ1′   − |ψ1 ⟩ 2                                                      (6.6c)
                          X
                                     ψj′ − ψj⋆               ψj⋆ − |ψj ⟩ 2                                           (6.6d)
                                                                               
                  ≤                                2
                                                       +
                      j∈{1,2}
                          X
                                     ψj⋆                   ψj⋆ − |ψj ⟩ 2                                              (6.6e)
                                                                           
                  =                         2
                                              −1 +
                      j∈{1,2}
                           X
                  ≤2                 ψj⋆ − |ψj ⟩ 2                                                                    (6.6f)
                          j∈{1,2}

                  ≤ 4 · 2ℓ · 2−ℓ/2 · 2−t−1                                                                            (6.6g)
                  ≤ 2δ.                                                                                              (6.6h)
Here, the third and fourth lines follow from the triangle inequality, the fifth line uses the identity
     ψj⋆ − ψj′    2
                      =     ψj⋆ − ψj⋆ / ψj⋆            2 2
                                                             = 1 − 1/ ψj⋆          2
                                                                                       ·    ψj⋆   2
                                                                                                      =   ψj⋆   2
                                                                                                                    −1 ,

and the sixth line uses the reverse triangle inequality and the fact that ∥|ψj ⟩∥2 = 1.


                                                             47
   As a consequence, Equation (6.6) yields that
                             ψ1′ ψ2′ QΓ ψ1′ ψ2′ − ⟨ψ1 |⟨ψ2 |QΓ |ψ1 ⟩|ψ2 ⟩                       (6.7a)
                          ≤ T ψ1′ ψ1′ ⊗ ψ2′ ψ2′ , |ψ1 ⟩⟨ψ1 |⊗|ψ2 ⟩⟨ψ2 |                         (6.7b)
                                                                       
                            q
                          = 1 − ⟨ψ1′ |ψ1 ⟩2 ⟨ψ2′ |ψ2 ⟩2                                         (6.7c)
                          ≤   ψ1′ ⊗ ψ2′ − |ψ1 ⟩⊗|ψ2 ⟩ 2                                     (6.7d)
                                  ∆
                          ≤ 2δ = .                                                          (6.7e)
                                  5
Here, the second line uses 0 ⪯ QΓ ⪯ I and the variational characterization of trace distance
(see, e.g., [Wil13, Lemma 9.1.7]),
                                 E the third line follows from Equation (2.2), and the fourth line
uses the fact that |ψj ⟩ and ψj are non-negative states for each j ∈ {1, 2}.
                               ′



Estimating the stoquastic separable value with the prover’s help. Upon receiving the
classical witness (m1 , m2 ), the verifier invokes Algorithm 1 with the circuit Γ and the accuracy
parameter η := ∆/(2|A×B|), and obtains the matrix M      fΓ with probability at least 9/10 satisfying
the following bound (i.e., the good event) via the same analysis as in Equation (6.4):

            e Γ − QΓ = 1 M fΓ − MΓ ≤ |A × B|η = ∆ , where Q                e Γ := I + MΓ .
                                                                                       f
            Q                                                                                    (6.8)
                        2                        2            4                      2
   Arthur then computes the quantity ⟨ψ ′ |⟨ψ ′ |Q
                                             1
                                                  e Γ |ψ ′ ⟩|ψ ′ ⟩ and accepts if and only if
                                                  2      1    2

                                    e Γ ψ1′ ψ2′ ≥ c + s = c − ∆ .
                            ψ1′ ψ2′ Q
                                                      2        2
Consequently, we complete the analysis using the following bounds:

   • For yes instances, on the good event, we obtain:
             ψ1′ ψ2′ Q
                     e Γ ψ1′ ψ2′
         ≥ ⟨ψ1 |⟨ψ2 |QΓ |ψ1 ⟩|ψ2 ⟩ −  ψ1′ ψ2′ QΓ ψ1′ ψ2′ − ⟨ψ1 |⟨ψ2 |QΓ |ψ1 ⟩|ψ2 ⟩
                      ψ1′ ψ2′   e Γ − QΓ ψ ′ ψ ′
                                         
                 −              Q            1  2

         ≥ ⟨ψ1 |⟨ψ2 |QΓ |ψ1 ⟩|ψ2 ⟩ −   ψ1′ ψ2′ QΓ ψ1′ ψ2′ − ⟨ψ1 |⟨ψ2 |QΓ |ψ1 ⟩|ψ2 ⟩ − Q
                                                                                      e Γ − QΓ
                 ∆ ∆            ∆
         ≥ c−       −    >c− .
                 5     4         2
      Here, the first inequality uses the reverse triangle inequality, the second inequality follows
      from the definition of the operator norm, and last line follows immediately from Equa-
      tions (6.8) and (6.7).

   • For no instances, the soundness condition guarantees that ⟨ψ1 |⟨ψ2 |QΓ |ψ1 ⟩|ψ2 ⟩ ≤ s for
     every non-negative product-state witness |ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ |ψ2 ⟩, and on the good event, it holds that:
                                                                              
             ′   ′ e     ′  ′       ′    ′      ′     ′
            ψ1 ψ2 QΓ ψ1 ψ2 ≤ ψ1 ψ2 QΓ ψ1 ψ2 + ψ1 ψ2 QΓ − QΓ ψ1′ ψ2′
                                                                ′   ′   e

                                   ≤ ψ1′ ψ2′ QΓ ψ1′ ψ2′ + Q
                                                          e Γ − QΓ
                                          ∆        ∆
                                   ≤s+       <c− .
                                          4         2
      Here, the first line uses the triangle inequality, the second line follows from the definition
      of the operator norm, and the last line follows immediately from Equation (6.8).




                                                  48
6.2.2    Proof of Theorem 6.3
The general k-prover proof follows the same dyadic rounding procedure used in the two-prover
case (Theorem 6.5), but avoids reconstructing the full matrix MΓ , whose dimension may already
be exponential. Instead, Arthur directly estimates a single overlap using the dual-access viewpoint
from distribution testing [CR14, Theorem 6], following an approach similar to that used to
establish eStoqMA ⊆ MA [Liu21, Section 3].

Theorem 6.3 (StoqMA(k ) with logarithmic-size proofs is in MA, restated). For all efficiently
computable functions c(n) and ∆(n) with 1/2 < c(n) ≤ 1, ∆(n) ≥ 1/ poly(n), and c(n)−∆(n) ≥
1/2, and for every efficiently computable positive integer-valued function ℓ(n) and k(n) such that
ℓ(n) ≤ O(log n) and k(n) ≤ poly(n), the following inclusion holds:
                                         StoqMAℓ Jk, c, ∆K ⊆ MA.

Proof. Following Lemma 3.13, we consider a SepRCDk instance (Γ, I) such that
                                ⟨R0 (Ψ)|R1 (Ψ)⟩ = ⟨Ψ|⟨0̄|⟨+̄|Γ|Ψ⟩|0̄⟩|+̄⟩
for every non-negative state |Ψ⟩ := |ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ · · · ⊗ |ψk ⟩. Write L := {0, 1}ℓ and U := {0, 1}r . We
can define the matrix MΓ , indexed by (a1 , . . . , ak ), (b1 , . . . , bk ) ∈ Lk , which directly generalizes
Equation (6.5). Let QΓ := (I + MΓ )/2. It thus suffices to distinguish the stoquastic value
              hSep+ [k;2ℓ ] (QΓ ) ≥ c(n) from hSep+ [k;2ℓ ] (QΓ ) ≤ s(n) := c(n) − ∆(n).

Here, the entry-wise non-negative matrix QΓ is of size 2kℓ × 2kℓ , which is no longer polynomial
in n when ℓ(n) = O(log n), and satisfies 0 ⪯ QΓ ⪯ I.

Rounding non-negative product-state witnesses to dyadic numbers. We now extend
the dyadic rounding procedure in the proof of Theorem 6.5 for two-prover cases to k-prover
cases. Fix δ := ∆/(5k), and choose an integer t such that 2−t ≤ δ/2ℓ/2 . For each proof i ∈ [k],
set non-negative integer-valued vectors mi coordinate-wise by
                                                    j            1k
                                ∀a ∈ L, mi (a) := 2t ⟨a|ψi ⟩ + .
                                                                 2
    Let |ψi ⟩ := ∥mi ∥2 a∈L mi (a)|a⟩, and define |Ψ ⟩ := |ψ1 ⟩⊗· · ·⊗|ψk′ ⟩. Following the reasoning
          ′        1                                 ′      ′
                       P

in Equation (6.6), we can similarly obtain the rounding-error bound via the triangle inequality:
                                           X                            ∆
                         ∥ Ψ′ − |Ψ⟩∥2 ≤        ∥ ψi′ − |ψi ⟩∥2 ≤ kδ = .                          (6.9)
                                                                        5
                                               i∈[k]

As a consequence, as in Equation (6.7), we similarly achieve the bound from Equation (6.9):
                                                                           ∆
                             Ψ′ QΓ Ψ′ − ⟨Ψ|QΓ |Ψ⟩ ≤           Ψ′ − |Ψ⟩ 2 ≤   .                (6.10)
                                                                           5
   The underlying classical witness (m1 , . . . , mk ) is of polynomial-size because k(n) ≤ poly(n),
ℓ(n) = O(log n), each integer mi (a) uses only O log 2ℓ k/∆ bits.
                                                                 


Estimating the stoquastic separable value via dual access to the witness state. Not-
ing that ⟨Ψ′ |QΓ |Ψ′ ⟩ = (1 + ⟨Ψ′ |MΓ |Ψ′ ⟩)/2, it suffices to estimate the overlap ⟨Ψ′ |MΓ |Ψ′ ⟩. Our
approach is inspired by the framework underlying the proof of eStoqMA ⊆ MA [Liu21, Section 3],
which boils down to the dual-access viewpoint from distribution testing [CR14].
     The starting point is that both query and sample access to |Ω′ ⟩ can be implemented efficiently
from the classical witness (m1 , · · · , mk ), where the initialized rounded witness |Ω′ ⟩ := |Ψ′ ⟩|0̄⟩|+̄⟩.
Implementing the query access to |Ω′ ⟩ follows immediately from the tensor-product structure of
|Ψ′ ⟩ and the fact that mi serves as a classical description of |ψi′ ⟩ whose amplitudes are dyadic


                                                       49
before normalization. To implement the sample access to |Ω′ ⟩, for each proof i ∈ [k], let Di be
the squared-amplitude distribution of |ψi′ ⟩, with the associated random variable Xi . Then,
                             mi (a)2                                X
                   Di (a) :=         = Pr[Xi = a], where Zi :=         mi (a)2 .           (6.11)
                              Zi
                                                                         a∈L

Consequently, one can sample from the distribution Di exactly:

 (1) Draw an integer Wi ∼ Unif([Zi ]) using O(log Zi ) random bits;

 (2) Identify the unique ai ∈ L such that b<ai mi (b)2 < Wi ≤ b≤ai mi (b)2 .
                                          P                    P

   Since the lists mi are explicit and Zi has polynomial bit length, this sampling procedure
runs in probabilistic polynomial time. By sampling all k proofs independently in this way and
then sampling u ∼ Unif(U ), one can implement the sample access to |ψi′ ⟩.

 Protocol 6: An MA protocol for estimating short-proof stoquastic separable values.
   Input          : A reversible circuit Γ.
   Output         : ACCEPT or REJECT.
   Parameters: The completeness parameter c, the promise gap parameter ∆, the
                    number of proofs k, the witness length ℓ, the number of |0⟩ ancillary
                    qubits m0 , and the number of |+⟩ ancillary qubits r.
   // Receive and check the legality of the classical witness encoded |Ψ′ ⟩.
 1 Receive the classical witness (m1 , · · · , mk ).
 2 For each proof i ∈ [k] :
       Set Zi := a∈L mi (a)2 .
                  P
 3
 4     If Zi = 0 :
 5         Return REJECT.
   // Estimate the inner product ⟨Ψ′ |QΓ |Ψ′ ⟩ via dual accesses to |Ψ′ ⟩.
 6 Set L := {0, 1}ℓ , U := {0, 1}r , and N := 12/∆2 .
                                                                  

 7 For each sample j ∈ [N ] :
 8     For each proof i ∈ [k] :
 9         Sample Wi ∼ P  Unif([Zi ]) using O(logP         Zi ) random bits, and identify the unique
             ai ∈ L with b<ai mi (b) < Wi ≤ b≤ai mi (b)2 .
                                          2

10     Sample u ∼ Unif(U ).
11     Compute Γ(a1 , . . . , ak , 0m0 , u) = (a′1 , . . . , a′k , z, u′ ).
12     If z ̸= 0m0 :
13         Set Rj := 0.
14     Else:
                               m (a′ )
           Set Rj := i∈[k] mii (aii ) .
                       Q
15

16     Set Yj := (1 + Rj )/2.
   // Return an estimate of ⟨Ψ′ |QΓ |Ψ′ ⟩ as a decision.
17 Set Yb := 1 PN Yj .
              N     j=1
18 If Y ≥ c − ∆/2 :
      b
19     Return ACCEPT.
20 Else:
21     Return REJECT.


The MA protocol. We now formalize the MA protocol in Protocol 6. Let (a′1 , . . . , a′k , z, u′ ) :=




                                                    50
Γ(a1 , . . . , ak , z, u), a direct calculation shows that
                                                        X                        Yq
                         Ψ′ MΓ Ψ′ = Ω′ Γ Ω′ =                                      Di (ai )Di (a′i ) · 2−r                    (6.12a)
                                                             (a1 ,...,ak )∈Lk i∈[k]
                                                              u∈U, z=0m0

                                                                                                   Di (a′i )
                                                                                                  p
                                                                  X              Y
                                                       =                               Di (ai ) · p                           (6.12b)
                                                                               k i∈[k]             Di (ai )
                                                             (a1 ,...,ak )∈L
                                                                 z=0m0
                                                       =                  E                R(A1 , . . . , Ak ),               (6.12c)
                                                             (A1 ,...,Ak )∼D1 ×···×Dk
                                                                           mi (A′i )
                                                             (Q
                                                                     i∈[k] mi (Ai ) ,      if z = 0m0
                      where R(A1 , . . . , Ak ) :=                                                        .                   (6.12d)
                                                                0,                       otherwise
Here, the second line uses the fact that |U | = 2r , and the last line follows from Equation (6.11),
and R := R(A1 , . . . , Ak ) denotes the ratio random variable. Consider the random variable
Y := (1 + R)/2, and then Equation (6.12) immediately implies that E[Y ] = ⟨Ψ′ |QΓ |Ψ′ ⟩.
      Next, we bound the second moment of R. Since Γ is a permutation, the map (a1 , . . . , ak , u) 7→
(a′1 , . . . , a′k , u′ ) is injective on the subset of tuples satisfying z = 0m0 . Consequently,
                      X           Y mi (ai )2        Y mj (a′j )2                     X           Y mi (a′ )2
      E[R2 ] =                                   ·                     =                                           i
                                                                                                                       ≤ 1.    (6.13)
                                          Zi                 mj (aj )2                                        Zi
                 (a1 ,...,ak )∈Lk i∈[k]              j∈[k]                       (a1 ,...,ak )∈Lk i∈[k]
                     z=0m0                                                           z=0m0

    Therefore, we obtain the following variance bounds from Equation (6.13):
                                                                                              Var[R]  1
                      Var[R] = E[R2 ] − E[R]2 ≤ 1 and                           Var[Y ] =            ≤ .                       (6.14)
                                                                                                4     4
   Let Yb := N1 N   j=1 Yj be the empirical mean of the N independent samples produced by
                  P
Protocol 6. By Chebyshev’s inequality (e.g., [MU17, Theorem 3.6]), we obtain
                                                 
                                    ∆      16 Var Yb     16 Var[Y ]   16  1
                   Pr Y − E[Y ] ≥
                        b                ≤       2
                                                      =        2
                                                                    ≤    = .        (6.15)
                                     4         ∆           N∆         48  3
Here, the last inequality uses Equation (6.14) and the fact that N = 12/∆2 .
                                                                           

   We now verify the completeness and soundness condition:

   • For yes instances, there exists a non-negative product state |Ψ⟩ such that ⟨Ψ|QΓ |Ψ⟩ ≥ c.
     Equation (6.15) yields the following bound, which holds with probability at least 2/3,
                                      ∆              ∆
                         Yb ≥ E[Y ] −   = Ψ′ QΓ Ψ′ −
                                      4              4
                                                                                                                       ∆
                                               ≥ ⟨Ψ|QΓ |Ψ⟩ −              Ψ′ QΓ Ψ′ − ⟨Ψ|QΓ |Ψ⟩ −
                                                                                                                       4
                                          ∆ ∆            ∆
                                             − ≥c−>c− .
                                           5    4        2
      Here, the second line uses the reverse triangle inequality, and the last line follows from
      Equation (6.10). The verifier thus accepts with probability at least 2/3.

   • For no instances, every non-negative product state, including |Ψ′ ⟩, satisfies ⟨Ψ′ |QΓ |Ψ′ ⟩ ≤ s.
     Equation (6.15) yields the following bound, which holds with probability at least 2/3,
                                ∆                  ∆          ∆        ∆    ∆
                  Yb ≤ E[Y ] +     = Ψ′ QΓ Ψ′ +        ≤s+      <s+      =c− .
                                 4                  4         4        2    2
      Consequently, the verifier accepts with probability at most 1/3.




                                                                 51
7     Upper bounds for StoqMA(k ) with nearly perfect completeness
In this section, we establish upper bounds for StoqMA(k ) with nearly perfect completeness,
which are stronger than the general deterministic exponential-time upper bound for StoqMA(k )
stated in Theorem 8.2 and proved in Section 8 via the Sum-of-Squares algorithm of Barak–
Kelner–Steurer [BKS14]:

Theorem 7.1 (StoqMA(k ) with doubly exponentially small completeness error is in PSPACE).
Let ε(n) and s(n) be efficiently computable functions satisfying 0 ≤ ε(n) ≤ exp(− exp(poly(n)))
and 1/2 ≤ s(n) ≤ 1 − 1/ poly(n), and define ∆(n) := 1 − ε(n) − s(n). Then, for all efficiently
computable positive integer-valued functions k(n), ℓ(n), m0 (n), and m+ (n), it holds that:
                                        kℓ                   kℓ                      
   StoqMAℓ Jk, 1 − ε, ∆K ⊆ DTISP exp O   e      max{kℓ, m+ } , O         max{kℓ, m0 , m+ } .
                                             ∆2                      ∆2
In particular, for every efficiently computable integer-valued function k that is polynomially
bounded in n, and for functions ε and s satisfying the above conditions, we have:
                                   StoqMA(k, 1 − ε, s) ⊆ PSPACE.

Theorem 7.2 (PreciseStoqMA(k ) with triply exponentially small completeness error is in EXP).
Let ε(n) and s(n) be efficiently computable functions such that
        0 ≤ ε(n) ≤ exp(− exp(exp(poly(n))))         and    1/2 ≤ s(n) ≤ 1 − 1/ exp(poly(n)),
and define ∆(n) := 1 − ε(n) − s(n). Then, for all efficiently computable positive integer-valued
functions k(n), ℓ(n), and m+ (n), the following inclusion holds:
                                               h                              i
               StoqMAℓ Jk, 1 − ε, ∆K ⊆ DTISP exp O(max{kℓ,       m+ }) , O 2kℓ .
                                                                      
                                                     e

In particular, for every efficiently computable integer-valued function k that is polynomially
bounded in n, and for functions ε and s satisfying the above conditions, it holds that:
                                  PreciseStoqMA(k, 1 − ε, s) ⊆ EXP.


   In the remainder of this section, we first introduce the rectangular structure of non-negative
product states in Section 7.1, via the StoqMA(2)-complete problem SepRCD, and then explain
how to test rectangular closure. Next, we provide two implementations of the formal algorithm
(Algorithm 2) together with their performance guarantees (Theorem 7.7) in Section 7.2, and
show how the complexity-theoretic consequences in Theorems 7.1 and 7.2 are derived. Lastly,
we prove the correctness of the rectangular closure testing algorithm in Section 7.3.

7.1    Rectangular structure of non-negative product states
We begin by describing the rectangular structure of non-negative witness states underlying yes
instances of StoqMA(2) with perfect completeness. In particular, we consider the StoqMA(2)-
complete problem SepRCD, introduced in Section 3.2.2.

Definition 7.3 (Perfectly agreeing pair). For any SepRCD instance (R0 , R1 ), we say that
(R0 , R1 ) is a perfectly agreeing pair if there exists a non-negative product state |ψ⟩ such that
      ⟨R0 (ψ)|R1 (ψ)⟩ = 1,     where |Rz (ψ)⟩ := Rz |ψ⟩|0⟩⊗m0 |+⟩⊗r for each z ∈ {0, 1}.            (7.1)
Furthermore, we say that (R0 , R1 ) is an ε-near perfectly agreeing pair if the condition in Equa-
tion (7.1) is relaxed to ⟨R0 (ψ)|R1 (ψ)⟩ ≥ 1 − ε.

Lemma 7.4 (Perfectly agreeing pairs admit product subset states). For every perfectly agreeing
pair (R0 , R1 ) corresponding to a yes instance of SepRCD1,β (ℓ, m0 , r), let |ψ ⋆ ⟩ := |ψ1⋆ ⟩ ⊗ |ψ2⋆ ⟩ be


                                                   52
a non-negative state that satisfies ⟨R0 (ψ ⋆ )|R1 (ψ ⋆ )⟩ = 1. Then there exist non-empty subsets
                             S1 ⊆ supp(|ψ1⋆ ⟩)       and     S2 ⊆ supp(|ψ2⋆ ⟩)
such that the product subset state |ϕ⟩ := |S1 ⟩ ⊗ |S2 ⟩ satisfies ⟨R0 (ϕ)|R1 (ϕ)⟩ = 1.

Proof. Following Lemma 3.13, it suffices to consider a SepRCD instance (Γ, I) such that
⟨R0 (ψ)|R1 (ψ)⟩ = ⟨ψ|⟨0̄|⟨+̄|Γ|ψ⟩|0̄⟩|+̄⟩ for every non-negative state |ψ⟩. We now write
               X                          X
      |ψ1⋆ ⟩ =   αx(1)
                    1
                       |x1 ⟩ and |ψ2⋆ ⟩ =    αx(2)
                                                2
                                                   |x2 ⟩, where αx(1)
                                                                   1
                                                                      ≥ 0 ∀x1 and αx(2)
                                                                                     2
                                                                                        ≥ 0 ∀x2 .
               x1                        x2

   For the non-negative states |ψ1⋆ ⟩ and |ψ2⋆ ⟩, we define their supports by
                           n               o                 n              o
                     S1 := x1 αx(1)  1
                                       > 0       and  S 2 :=  x 2  α (2)
                                                                     x2  > 0 .

Thus, the support of the initialized state is the product set K := S1 × S2 × {0m0 } × U . Since
⟨Ω⋆ |Γ|Ω⋆ ⟩ = 1, where |Ω⋆ ⟩ := |ψ ⋆ ⟩|0̄⟩|+̄⟩, a direct calculation shows that
         ∥|Ω⋆ ⟩ − Γ|Ω⋆ ⟩∥22 = ⟨Ω⋆ |Ω⋆ ⟩ + ⟨Ω⋆ |Γ† Γ|Ω⋆ ⟩ − 2⟨Ω⋆ |Γ|Ω⋆ ⟩ = 2 − 2⟨Ω⋆ |Γ|Ω⋆ ⟩ = 0.
Consequently, Γ|Ω⋆ ⟩ = |Ω⋆ ⟩. Since Γ is a permutation matrix, any basis vector with positive
amplitude cannot be sent outside the support of positive amplitudes. Thus, we obtain
                                  Γ(K) ⊆ K        and |Γ(K)| = |K|,                               (7.2)
where the second identity holds because Γ is bijective. Therefore, Equation (7.2) implies that
                                  Γ(K) = K         and Γ|K⟩ = |K⟩.                                (7.3)
Here, |K⟩ is the initialized full state of |ϕ⟩, corresponding to the set K, where the product subset
state |ϕ⟩ := |S1 ⟩⊗|S2 ⟩ corresponds to the set S1 ×S2 . Finally, using Equation (7.3), we complete
the proof by noting that ⟨Ωϕ |Γ|Ωϕ ⟩ = ⟨Ωϕ |Ωϕ ⟩ = 1, with |Ωϕ ⟩ := |ϕ⟩|0̄⟩|+̄⟩. as desired.

Testing rectangular closure. With this rectangular structure of non-negative product states
established in Lemma 7.4, we are now ready to understand how a reversible circuit, or equiva-
lently a permutation, acts on such states in combinatorial terms.
    To formalize this perspective, we need to introduce some additional notation. Specifically,
we refer to a Cartesian product A × B of two sets A, B ⊆ {0, 1}ℓ as a rectangle. As stated
in Lemma 3.13, without loss of generality, for any SepRCD instance (R0 , R1 ), it suffices to
consider the reversible circuit pair (Γ, I), which achieves the same parameters and thresholds.
Here, Γ can be viewed as a permutation matrix. We need the following notions:

   • Initialized sector: We denote the (m0 , r)-initialized sector over the rectangle S × T ,
     where S, T ⊆ {0, 1}ℓ and U := {0, 1}r , by
                                     K(S, T ) := S × T × {0m0 } × U.

   • Good and bad transitions: For any (a, b, u) ∈ A × B × U , where A, B ⊆ {0, 1}ℓ , we
     define the transition under Γ by
                                       Γ(a, b, 0m0 , u) = (a′ , b′ , z ′ , u′ ).
      If z ′ ̸= 0m0 , we call this a bad transition. Otherwise, we call it a good transition and write
                                              Γ0̄ (a, b, u) = (a′ , b′ ).

    Next, we define the notions of closed rectangle and rectangular closure. The former notion is
a static certificate: once the rectangle S × T is chosen, Definition 7.5 asks whether Γ maps the
initialized sector over that rectangle back into the same sector. By contrast, the latter notion
is a dynamic construction introduced in Definition 7.6: the underlying procedure starts with a


                                                     53
pair (a0 , b0 ), repeatedly updates the sets S + and T + for the current round, and either reaches
a closed rectangle or encounters a bad transition.

Definition 7.5 (Closed rectangle). For any given permutation Γ, a rectangle S × T ⊆ A × B is
closed with respect to Γ if the following inclusion holds.
                                          Γ(K(S, T )) ⊆ K(S, T )
Equivalently, this condition means that every transition that starts in the (m0 , r)-initialized sector
over the rectangle S × T stays in the initialized sector over the same rectangle.

Definition 7.6 (Rectangular closure from a starting pair). Fix a starting pair (a0 , b0 ) ∈ A × B.
Let S0 := {a0 } and T0 := {b0 }. For sets St and Tt that correspond to round t, we say that round
t is bad if there exist a ∈ St , b ∈ Tt , and u ∈ U such that
                          Γ(a, b, 0m0 , u) = (a′ , b′ , z ′ , u′ )   with   z ′ ̸= 0m0 .
If round t is not bad, we say that this round is good and define
                 St+1 := St ∪ a′ ∃a ∈ St , b ∈ Tt , u ∈ U, Γ0̄ (a, b, u) = (a′ , b′ ) ,
                             

                 Tt+1 := Tt ∪ b′ ∃a ∈ St , b ∈ Tt , u ∈ U, Γ0̄ (a, b, u) = (a′ , b′ ) .
                             


7.2    Rectangular closure testing and its consequences
We now formalize our intuition for testing rectangular closure and present the actual algorithm
in Algorithm 2. In particular, the procedure described in Definition 7.6 is implemented in Lines
5–16 of Algorithm 2.

 Algorithm 2: Rectangular Closure Testing Algorithm.
   Input         : A reversible circuit Γ.
   Output        : ACCEPT or REJECT.
   Parameters: The soundness parameter γ ∈ (0, 1), the witness length 2ℓ, the number of
                   |0⟩ ancillary qubits m0 , and the number of |+⟩ ancillary qubits r.
 1 Set L := ⌈(2ℓ ln 2 + 1)/ ln(1 + γ)⌉.
 2 Set A := {0, 1}ℓ , B := {0, 1}ℓ , and U := {0, 1}r .
 3 For each starting pair (a0 , b0 ) ∈ A × B :
 4    Initialize S0 := {a0 } and T0 := {b0 }.
      // Rectangular closure from (a0 , b0 ).
 5    For each round t ∈ {0, 1, · · · , L − 1} :
 6        Set temporary sets S + := St and T + := Tt .
 7        For every triple (a, b, u) ∈ St × Tt × U :
 8            Compute Γ(a, b, 0m0 , u) = (a′ , b′ , z ′ , u′ ).
 9            If z ′ ̸= 0m0 :
10                Declare that round t is bad .
11                Break.
12            Else:
13                Update S + ← S + ∪ {a′ } and T + ← T + ∪ {b′ }.
14        If round t is bad :
15            Break.
16        Set St+1 := S + and Tt+1 := T + .
17    If all rounds t ∈ {0, 1, · · · , L − 1} are good for (a0 , b0 ) :
18        Return ACCEPT.
19 Return REJECT.




                                                         54
   Next, we present the performance guarantees and detailed complexity bounds of Algorithm
2 under two different implementations, and the proof can be found in Section 7.3:
Theorem 7.7 (Explicit rectangular closure testing algorithms for SepRCD). For every effi-
ciently computable function γ(n) taking values in (0, 1), there is an L-round rectangular closure
testing algorithm for SepRCD1−ε,1−γ (ℓ, m0 , r), with the parameters
                                           
                           2ℓ ln 2 + 1       ℓ                       L+1
                     L=                  =O        and ε ≤ 25−r−2 (ℓ+4) .
                           ln(1 + γ)         γ
In particular, let TΓ and SΓ denote the time and workspace needed to evaluate Γ on the input
(a, b, 0m0 , u) ∈ A × B × {0m0 } × U , and let
                                 λ := 2ℓ + m0 + r + ⌈log(L + 2)⌉.
Then, Algorithm 2 can be implemented deterministically in either of the following ways:
 (1) The recursive implementation takes time (22ℓ+r )O(L) · poly(L, 2ℓ , 2r ) · TΓ and space O(Lλ +
     SΓ ).
 (2) The explicit-table implementation takes time O 24ℓ+r TΓ and space O(2ℓ + λ + SΓ ).
                                                              


7.2.1     Complexity-theoretic consequences of Theorem 7.7
Combined with Lemma 3.13, Theorem 7.7 implies the complexity-theoretic consequences stated
in Theorems 7.1 and 7.2, upon identifying the parameter r used below with the parameter m+
used in those theorems. Let gΓ (n) be the number of gates in Γ. Since all parameters ℓ(n), r(n),
m0 (n), and gΓ (n) are polynomially bounded, it holds that
      TΓ = O(gΓ · (2ℓ + m0 + r)) = poly(n) and SΓ = O(2ℓ + m0 + r + log gΓ ) = poly(n).
Consequently, we obtain the following bounds for StoqMA(k ) with nearly perfect completeness:
 (1) For the recursive implementationin Theorem 7.7(1), the underlying     algorithm runs in
     deterministic exp O γ max{ℓ, r} time and O γ max{ℓ, r, m0 } space. By combining
                           ℓ                          ℓ
                                                                       
                        e
     with prover compression (Corollary 4.2(2)),
                                                we obtain an kℓalgorithm for StoqMA(k ) that
     runs in deterministic exp O γ 2 max{kℓ, r} time and O γ 2 max{kℓ, r, m0 } space.
                                 kℓ
                                                                                 
                               e
        When γ(n) ≥ 1/ poly(n), the allowed completeness error ε(n) is inverse doubly exponential
        in n, and the space complexity is polynomial in n, yielding the PSPACE upper bound.
 (2) For the explicit-table implementation in Theorem 7.7(2), the underlying algorithm runs in
     deterministic O 24ℓ+r ·poly(n) = exp O(max{ℓ,    r}) time and O(2ℓ ) space. By combining
                                                         
                                              e
     with prover compression (Corollary 4.2(2)), we obtain an algorithm for StoqMA(k ) that
     runs in deterministic exp O(max{kℓ,
                                  e         r}) time and O(2kℓ ) space.
        When γ(n) ≥ 1/ exp(poly(n)), the allowed completeness error ε(n) is inverse triply expo-
        nential in n, and the deterministic runtime is exp O(max{kℓ,
                                                           e         r}) ≤ 2poly(n) , which leads
        to the EXP upper bound.

7.3     Analysis of Algorithm 2
We will analyze the correctness of Algorithm 2 separately for yes and no instances, namely the
completeness and soundness, and then put everything together.

Completeness. We begin with the perfect completeness case as a warm-up:
Lemma 7.8 (Perfectly agreeing pairs imply rectangular closure). Let (Γ, I) be a perfectly agree-
ing pair, viewed as a yes instance of SepRCD1,β (ℓ, m0 , r). Then, there exists a starting pair
whose rectangular closure never encounters a bad round.

                                                55
Proof. By utilizing Lemma 7.4, there exist non-empty sets S, T ⊆ {0, 1}ℓ such that Γ|K(S, T )⟩ =
|K(S, T )⟩, where the initialized sector K(S, T ) = S × T × {0m0 } × U and U = {0, 1}r . Since Γ
is a permutation, it follows that
                                           Γ(K(S, T )) = K(S, T )                               (7.4)
   Next, pick any starting pair (a0 , b0 ) ∈ S × T . We will prove by induction that
                              St ⊆ S and Tt ⊆ T hold for all rounds t,
and hence no round is bad. It is easy to see that the induction hypothesis holds at round t = 0,
because S0 = {a0 } and T0 = {b0 }.
   Now assume that the induction hypothesis holds at round t, equivalently, it holds that:
              If a ∈ St ⊆ S, b ∈ Tt ⊆ T, and u ∈ U,        then (a, b, 0m0 , u) ∈ K(S, T ).
    According to Equation (7.4), the image of Γ lies again in S × T × {0m0 } × U , and thus the
transition in this round is not bad. Therefore, any newly added coordinates (a′ , b′ ) satisfy a′ ∈ S
and b′ ∈ T , which establishes the induction hypothesis at round t + 1 via
                                      St+1 ⊆ S     and Tt+1 ⊆ T.

    Next, we relax the perfect completeness requirement in Lemma 7.8 and extend the result to
the setting in which the completeness error is sufficiently small relative to the number of rounds:

Lemma 7.9 (Near perfectly agreeing pairs imply rectangular closure in bounded rounds). Let
(Γ, I) be an ε-near perfectly agreeing pair, viewed as a yes instance of SepRCD1−ε,β (ℓ, m0 , r).
If the completeness error satisfies the upper bound
                         ε ≤ τL2 /2r+3 ,    where τ0 := 2−ℓ and τt+1 := τt2 /16,
then there exists a starting pair whose rectangular closure does not encounter a bad round up to
round L.

Proof. Let |ψ1 ⟩|ψ2 ⟩ be a non-negative product state whose initialized full state |Ω⟩ satisfies
                                             ⟨Ω|Γ|Ω⟩ ≥ 1 − ε.                                   (7.5)
Let p1 and p2 be probability distributions induced by the states |ψ1 ⟩ and |ψ2 ⟩, respectively,
defined by
                ∀x ∈ {0, 1}ℓ , p1 (x) := |⟨x|ψ1 ⟩|2 and p2 (x) := |⟨x|ψ2 ⟩|2 .
Since both distributions p1 and p2 are defined over [2ℓ ], there exist a0 and b0 such that
                            p1 (a0 ) ≥ 2−ℓ = τ0    and p2 (b0 ) ≥ 2−ℓ = τ0 .
We use this (a0 , b0 ) as the starting pair.

   We first bound the global near-invariance error. Since Γ is a permutation and ⟨Ω|Ω⟩ = 1,
together with Equation (7.5), we obtain
     ∥Γ|Ω⟩ − |Ω⟩∥22 = ⟨Ω|Γ† Γ|Ω⟩ + ⟨Ω|Ω⟩ − 2⟨Ω|Γ|Ω⟩ = 2 − 2⟨Ω|Γ|Ω⟩ ≤ 2 − 2(1 − ε) = 2ε.
Consequently, for every coordinate y ∈ {0, 1}2ℓ+m0 +r , it follows that
                                                         √
                                   |⟨y|Γ|Ω⟩ − ⟨y|Ω⟩| ≤ 2ε.                                      (7.6)
   Using the assumed threshold on ε and the fact that τt ≥ τL for every t ≤ L, we obtain
                                                 r
                                          √         τL2      τL          τt
                  ∀t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , L},   2ε ≤        r
                                                          =     r/2
                                                                    ≤          .         (7.7)
                                                   4·2      2·2       2 · 2r/2




                                                    56
   Next, we prove by induction that
                St ⊆ {a | p1 (a) ≥ τt } and Tt ⊆ {b | p2 (b) ≥ τt } for all rounds t ≤ L,
and hence no round before round L is bad. The induction hypothesis holds at round t = 0, as
S0 = {a0 } and T0 = {b0 }.
    Now assume that the induction hypothesis holds at round t < L. Then, if a ∈ St , b ∈ Tt ,
and u ∈ U , and we write x := (a, b, 0m0 , u), we have
                                          r                 r
                                             p1 (a)p2 (b)      τt2       τt
                                  ⟨x|Ω⟩ =          r
                                                          ≥      r
                                                                    = r/2 .                         (7.8)
                                                  2            2        2
    Let y := Γx, which implies ⟨y|Γ|Ω⟩ = ⟨x|Ω⟩. Consequently, combining the bounds in Equa-
tions (7.6) and (7.7) yields that
                                                                    √           τt
                          |⟨x|Ω⟩ − ⟨y|Ω⟩| = |⟨y|Γ|Ω⟩ − ⟨y|Ω⟩| ≤ 2ε ≤                  .             (7.9)
                                                                             2 · 2r/2
    We then show the transition in the current round is not bad by contradiction. More precisely,
if y were outside the initialized sector, i.e. if z ̸= 0m0 , then ⟨y|Ω⟩ = 0, and hence Equation (7.8)
would imply
                                                                     τt
                                     |⟨x|Ω⟩ − ⟨y|Ω⟩| = ⟨x|Ω⟩ ≥ r/2 ,
                                                                   2
which contradicts Equation (7.9), as desired.
    To establish the induction hypothesis at round t + 1, we write y = (a′ , b′ , 0m0 , u′ ). Then,
combining Equations (7.8) and (7.9) and the triangle inequality, it follows that:
       r
         p1 (a′ )p2 (b′ )                                           τt        τt           τt
                 r
                          = ⟨y|Ω⟩ ≥ ⟨x|Ω⟩ − |⟨x|Ω⟩ − ⟨y|Ω⟩| ≥ r/2 −              r/2
                                                                                     =           . (7.10)
               2                                                   2        2·2         2 · 2r/2
Since p1 (a′ ) ≤ 1 and p2 (b′ ) ≤ 1 hold for all a′ , b′ ∈ {0, 1}ℓ , squaring Equation (7.10) gives:
                            τt2    τ2                        τ2    τ2
                    p1 (a′ ) ≥  ≥ t = τt+1 and p2 (b′ ) ≥ t ≥ t = τt+1 .
                             4     16                        4     16
Therefore, we establish the induction hypothesis by concluding that all newly inserted coordi-
nates are heavy at threshold τt+1 , and no bad transition occurs in this round.

Soundness. We now prove the soundness part:

Lemma 7.10 (Rectangle size growth for no instances before encountering a bad round). Let
(Γ, I) be a no instance of SepRCDα,1−γ (ℓ, m0 , r) for some γ > 0. Then, for every starting pair
and every round t, one of the following holds: either round t is bad, or the rectangle size grows
by a multiplicative factor of 1 + γ:
                                   |St+1 × Tt+1 | ≥ (1 + γ)|St × Tt |.                             (7.11)
Consequently, no starting pair can avoid encountering a bad round before round
                                                        
                                             2ℓ ln 2 + 1
                                      L :=                 .
                                             ln(1 + γ)
Proof. Fix a starting pair and a round t. Assume that round t is not bad. It therefore suffices
to prove that Equation (7.11). To do so, we show that the rectangle size grows exponentially
even when one restricts attention to product subset state witnesses.
    Consider a valid product subset witness state |St ⟩|Tt ⟩, whose initialized full state is uniform




                                                   57
on K(St , Tt ) = St × Tt × {0m0 } × U . A direct calculation shows that
                     ⟨K(St , Tt )|Γ|K(St , Tt )⟩                                                     (7.12a)
                          1
                   =               |{y ∈ K(St , Tt ) | Γy ∈ K(St , Tt )}|                            (7.12b)
                     |K(St , Tt )|
                          1
                   = r             |{(a, b, u) ∈ St × Tt × U | Γ0̄ (a, b, u) ∈ St × Tt }|.           (7.12c)
                     2 |St × Tt |
By combining the soundness promise ⟨K(St , Tt )|Γ|K(St , Tt )⟩ ≤ 1 − γ with Equation (7.12), we
obtain a lower bound on the number of triples escaping from St × Tt × U :
                                                                    / St × Tt }| ≥ γ2r |St × Tt |.
     Esc(St , Tt , U ) := |{(a, b, u) ∈ St × Tt × U | Γ0̄ (a, b, u) ∈                                 (7.13)
    Because Γ is injective, these leaving triples (a, b, u) have distinct outputs (a′ , b′ ) = Γ0̄ (a, b, u).
For each output pair (a′ , b′ ), there are at most |U | = 2r possible choices of output random
strings u′ . Consequently, the number of distinct new output pairs outside St × Tt is at least
Esc(St , Tt , U )/|U |. Since all these new output pairs are included in St+1 × Tt+1 , it follows that
                                                Esc(St , Tt , U )
                    |St+1 × Tt+1 | ≥ |St × Tt | +
                                                      |U |
                                                γ2r |St × Tt |
                                 ≥ |St × Tt | +                 = (1 + γ)|St × Tt |.
                                                      2r
Here, the second line uses Equation (7.13), thereby establishing Equation (7.11).
   If a starting pair were to reach round L without encountering a bad round, then combining
Equation (7.11) with |S0 × T0 | = 1 would yield
                           |SL × TL | ≥ (1 + γ)L |S0 × T0 | = (1 + γ)L > 22ℓ .                        (7.14)
Here, the last inequality follows from the definition of L. Since SL × TL ⊆ {0, 1}ℓ × {0, 1}ℓ ,
Equation (7.14) leads to a contradiction. Therefore, no starting pair can reach round L without
encountering a bad round, as desired.

Putting everything together. Finally, we show the correctness of Algorithm 2:

Proof of Theorem 7.7. We first prove correctness separately for yes and no instances:

   • For yes instances, (Γ, I) is an ε-near perfectly agreeing pair, so there exists a non-negative
     product witness state whose initialized full state |Ω⟩ satisfies ⟨Ω|Γ|Ω⟩ ≥ 1 − ε. By
     Lemma 7.9, the error bound ε ≤ τL2 /2r+3 implies that the rectangular closure starting
     from some starting pair reaches round L without encountering a bad round. Therefore,
     Algorithm 2 accepts in this case.

   • For no instances, because (Γ, I) is a no instance, it follows that ⟨Ωψ |Γ|Ωψ ⟩ ≤ 1 − γ for all
     non-negative product witness states |ψ⟩. Using Lemma 7.10, no starting pair can reach
     round L without encountering a bad round. Hence, Algorithm 2 rejects.

    Next, we analyze two deterministic implementations of Algorithm 2:
Recursive implementation. For every fixed starting pair (a0 , b0 ), define indicator predicates
               ∀t ∈ {0, 1, · · · , L},    χSt (a) := I[a ∈ St ] and χTt (b) := I[b ∈ Tt ].
Initially, it holds that χS0 (a) = I[a = a0 ] and χT0 (b) = I[b = b0 ].
    For each round t < L, we first test whether round t is bad by evaluating the predicate
            Badt := ∃a, b, u I[χSt (a) ∧ χTt (b) ∧ Γ(a, b, 0m0 , u) ∈
                                                                    / A × B × {0m0 } × U ].




                                                     58
    If Badt is false, then the next-round predicates are simultaneously given by
           χSt+1 (a′ ) = χSt (a′ ) ∨ ∃a, b, b′ , u I χSt (a) ∧ χTt (b) ∧ Γ0̄ (a, b, u) = (a′ , b′ ) ,
                                                                                                   

            χTt+1 (b′ ) = χTt (b′ ) ∨ ∃a, a′ , b, u I χSt (a) ∧ χTt (b) ∧ Γ0̄ (a, b, u) = (a′ , b′ ) .
                                                                                                   

   A depth-first deterministic evaluation stores only one recursion path of length at most L,
together with a constant number of strings of total length O(λ) per level. Hence, the space is
O(Lλ + SΓ ). There are 22ℓ starting pairs, and at each level the deterministic search enumerates
at most 22ℓ+r triples. Thus, the running time is bounded by
                                      (22ℓ+r )O(L) · poly(L, 2ℓ , 2r ) · TΓ .
Explicit-table implementation. For each starting pair, Algorithm 2 stores St and Tt , together
with the newly added sets ∆St := St \ St−1 and ∆Tt := Tt \ Tt−1 , as bit tables of length 2ℓ ,
with the convention S−1 = T−1 = ∅. This implementation is still deterministic. During round t,
instead of scanning all triples in St × Tt × U , it suffices to scan, without duplication, only those
triples in                                                     
                                   (∆St × Tt ) ∪ (St × ∆Tt ) × U.
Indeed, every pair outside (∆St × Tt ) ∪ (St × ∆Tt ) already belonged to St−1 × Tt−1 , and hence
had already been scanned in an earlier round. If that earlier scan had found a bad transition,
the algorithm would already have rejected; otherwise, the corresponding output coordinates had
already been inserted into the current tables, so rescanning such a pair cannot create any new
element. Hence, for a fixed starting pair, each active pair in A × B is scanned at most once.
    For one starting pair, there are at most 22ℓ active pairs, and scanning one active pair requires
enumerating all u ∈ U and evaluating Γ, which costs O(2r TΓ ). Consequently, one starting pair
takes time O(22ℓ+r TΓ ). Since there are |A×B| = 22ℓ starting pairs, the total time is O(24ℓ+r TΓ ).
The space consists of a constant number of bit tables for St , Tt , ∆St , and ∆Tt , the current basis
strings and counters, and the workspace for evaluating Γ, namely O(2ℓ + λ + SΓ ).

    Finally, by the inequality γ/2 ≤ ln(1 + γ) ≤ γ for γ ∈ (0, 1), we simplify the round bound to
                                                         
                                         2ℓ ln 2 + 1        ℓ
                                   L=                  =O       .
                                         ln(1 + γ)          γ

8    A deterministic exponential-time upper bound for StoqMA(k )
In this section, we record an upper bound for StoqMA(k ), which follows from the Sum-of-Squares
algorithm of Barak–Kelner–Steurer [BKS14].

Theorem 8.1 ([BKS14, Theorem 3.1] with improved t-dependence). For any entrywise
non-negative, real-symmetric matrix M acting on (Cd )⊗t with ∥M ∥ ≤ 1, there is a degree-
O(t2 log d/ε2 ) Sum-of-Squares algorithm that approximates
                                              max        Tr M (xxT )⊗t
                                           x∈Rd :∥x∥=1

to within additive error ε.

    For completeness, we describe the BKS algorithm in the appendix. In addition, we slightly
sharpen BKS’s analysis, improving the dependence on the tensor order t from O(t3 log d/ε2 ), as
stated in [BKS14, Theorem 3.1], to the optimal dependence O(t2 log d/ε2 ) under ETH.25
    Since the matrix M arising from a stoquastic verification circuit is entrywise non-negative
and symmetric, we have the following upper bound:
  25
     The symmetry of the tensors is not important for this algorithm. The same algorithm works for asymmetric
tensors. But for our analysis to obtain O(t2 ) dependence, symmetry is crucial.



                                                         59
Theorem 8.2 (StoqMA(k ) ⊆ EXP). For all efficiently computable functions c(n) and ∆(n)
with 1/2 < c(n) ≤ 1 and c(n) − ∆(n) ≥ 1/2, and for every efficiently computable positive
integer-valued function k(n) and ℓ(n), the following inclusions hold:
                                                       h      k 2 ℓ2 i
                       SymStoqMAℓ Jk, c, ∆K ⊆ DTIME exp O                  ;             (8.1)
                                                                 ∆2
                                                       h      k 2 ℓ2 i
                           StoqMAℓ Jk, c, ∆K ⊆ DTIME exp O    e            .             (8.2)
                                                                 ∆2
In particular, for every efficiently computable integer-valued function k that is polynomially
bounded in n, the following inclusion holds:
                                       StoqMA(k ) ⊆ EXP.

    Here, Equation (8.1) is an application of Theorem 8.1 with t = k, d = 2ℓ , and ε = ∆/3,
which gives rise to a exp(O(k 2 ℓ2 /∆2 ))-size SDP; Equation (8.2) is a straightforward corollary
of Equation (8.1) and Theorem 4.11. Notably, the deterministic time bounds in Equations (8.1)
and (8.2) have an implicit exponential dependence on the number of |+⟩ ancillary qubits, arising
from transforming a stoquastic verification circuit Vx into the matrix MΓ :
Remark 8.3 (Implicit exponential dependence on the number of |+⟩ ancillary qubits). Let m0
and m+ be the numbers of |0⟩ and |+⟩ ancillary qubits. After contracting the initialized ancillary
registers, the Sum-of-Squares algorithm in Theorem 8.1 is applied to the matrix
            MΓ = ⟨0|⊗m0 ⟨+|⊗m+ Γ|0⟩⊗m0 |+⟩⊗m+ ∈ D+ (2kℓ ),       where Γ := Vx† XO Vx .
Consequently, the resulting tensor order and local dimension are k and 2ℓ , respectively, so the
degree and size of the resulting SDP have no explicit dependence on m+ . Nevertheless, in the
succinct-circuit representation, the coefficients of MΓ satisfy
           ⟨b|MΓ |a⟩ = 2−m+ |{u ∈ {0, 1}m+ | Γ(a, 0m0 , u) ∈ {b} × {0m0 } × {0, 1}m+ }|.
Therefore, the m+ -independence applies to the SDP-size bound once MΓ is available, whereas
deterministically constructing its coefficients directly from Vx incurs a 2O(m+ ) preprocessing cost
unless an efficient coefficient-access procedure is assumed.

ETH-based optimality. A remarkable consequence is the essential optimality under ETH of
the above upper bound result, and both lower bounds Theorems 5.1 and 5.4 obtained in Section 5.
Since Dinur’s PCP (Theorem 5.8) can be reduced from SAT instances in near-linear time, the
two StoqMA protocols for Dinur’s PCP (Theorems 5.1 and 5.4) together with Equations (8.1)
and (8.2) both imply a exp(O(n))
                            e     algorithm for SAT.

Corollary 8.4 (ETH-based optimality of Theorems 5.4, 8.1 and 8.2). Under ETH, up to lower-
order factors, the following statements hold:

 (1) Equation (8.1) in Theorem 8.2 is tight with respect to the number of provers k in view
     of Theorem 5.1; consequently, the BKS algorithm in Theorem 8.1 is tight with respect to
     the order of tensor t.

 (2) Equation (8.1) in Theorem 8.2 is tight with respect to the proof length ℓ in view of Theo-
     rem 5.4; consequently, the BKS algorithm in Theorem 8.1 is tight with respect to the log
     dimension log d.

The same holds for Equation (8.2).

Proof. By Dinur’s PCP Theorem 5.8 and our protocols Theorems 5.1 and 5.4, we have for some




                                                60
ε > 0 and ∆ > 0,
                                         √
                                    s                  {
                                                  1
            SAT ∈ SymStoqMAO(log n) O( n), 1 − ε, − 2ε ;                                     (8.3)
                                                  2
                              s                {
                                         1
                         e √n) 2, 1 − ε,
            SAT ∈ StoqMAO(                                 e √n) J2, 1 − ε, ∆K.
                                           − 2ε ⊆ SymStoqMAO(                                (8.4)
                                         2
                                                                                      √
    We first prove Item (1). Applying Theorem 8.2 to Equation (8.3) with k = O( n) and
ℓ = O(log n), we obtain SAT ∈ DTIME(exp(O(n))), e     matching the ETH barrier up to lower-
order factors. Therefore for any constant η > 0, an improvement of the k 2 dependence in
Equation (8.1) to k 2−η , or an improvement in Theorem 5.1 with n1/2−η provers, O(log n)-length
proofs and a constant gap would imply a subexponential-time algorithm for SAT.
    Now we show Item (2). Similarly, applying Theorem 8.2 to Equation (8.4) with k = 2 and
     e √n) also saturates ETH. Therefore, for any η > 0, an improvement in Equation (8.1)
ℓ = O(
with order exp(ℓ2−η ), or an improvement in Theorem 5.4 with two provers, sending proofs of
length n1/2−η and a constant gap would also imply a subexponential-time algorithm for SAT.
    A completely analogous argument works for Equation (8.2), since the simulations between
StoqMA(k ) and SymStoqMA(k ) (Theorems 4.11 and 4.14) are length-efficient, prover-preserving,
and constant-gap-preserving.


Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Thomas Vidick for insightful discussions and helpful comments on
an earlier version of our manuscript, which helped improve its readability and led to Question
(i). The authors also thank Aviv Taller for asking about the computational power of StoqMA(k )
with logarithmic-size witnesses, which eventually led to Section 6. YL was supported by funding
from the Swiss State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation (SERI). ChatGPT was
used interactively to explore possible approaches to the research problems addressed in the main
technical sections, identify relevant references, and proofread the manuscript, while all writing,
including mathematical statements and reasoning, was accomplished by the authors.


References
[ABD+ 09]     Scott Aaronson, Salman Beigi, Andrew Drucker, Bill Fefferman, and Peter Shor.
              The power of unentanglement. Theory of Computing. 5(1):1–42. 2009. doi:
              10.4086/toc.2009.v005a001. arXiv:0804.0802. Appearances: 2, 4, 7, 9, 11, 23,
              24, 29, 36

[AG19]        Dorit Aharonov and Alex Bredariol Grilo. Stoquastic PCP vs. randomness. In
              Proceedings of the IEEE 60th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Sci-
              ence (FOCS 2019). pages 1000–1023. IEEE. 2019. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2019.00065.
              arXiv:1901.05270. Appearances: 1

[AG21]        Dorit Aharonov and Alex B. Grilo. Two combinatorial MA-complete problems.
              In Proceedings of the 12th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Confer-
              ence (ITCS 2021). volume 185 of LIPIcs. pages 36:1–36:20. Schloss Dagstuhl
              - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. 2021. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ITCS.2021.36.
              arXiv:2003.13065. Appearances: 70, 71

[AGL25]       Dorit Aharonov, Alex B. Grilo, and Yupan Liu. StoqMA vs. MA: the power of
              error reduction. Quantum. 9:1853. 2025. doi:10.22331/Q-2025-09-11-1853.
              arXiv:2010.02835. Appearances: 1, 4, 7



                                               61
[AL18]      Tameem Albash and Daniel A Lidar. Adiabatic quantum computation. Reviews of
            Modern Physics. 90(1):015002. 2018. doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.90.015002. arXiv:
            1611.04471. Appearances: 1

[Bab85]     László Babai. Trading group theory for randomness. In Proceedings of the 17th
            Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing. pages 421–429. 1985. doi:
            10.1145/22145.22192. Appearances: 1

[BBH+ 12]   Boaz Barak, Fernando G. S. L. Brandão, Aram W. Harrow, Jonathan Kelner,
            David Steurer, and Yuan Zhou. Hypercontractivity, sum-of-squares proofs, and
            their applications. In Proceedings of the 44th Annual ACM Symposium on The-
            ory of Computing (STOC 2012). pages 307–326. ACM. 2012. doi:10.1145/
            2213977.2214006. arXiv:1205.4484. Appearances: 3

[BBT06]     Sergey Bravyi, Arvid J Bessen, and Barbara M Terhal. Merlin–Arthur games and
            stoquastic complexity. arXiv preprint. 2006. arXiv:quant-ph/0611021. Appear-
            ances: 1, 3, 9, 15

[BCWdW01] Harry Buhrman, Richard Cleve, John Watrous, and Ronald de Wolf. Quan-
          tum fingerprinting. Physical Review Letters. 87(16):167902. 2001. doi:10.1103/
          PhysRevLett.87.167902. arXiv:quant-ph/0102001. Appearances: 15, 20, 21

[BCY11]     Fernando G. S. L. Brandão, Matthias Christandl, and Jon Yard. Faithful squashed
            entanglement. Communications in Mathematical Physics. 306(3):805–830. 2011.
            doi:doi:10.1007/s00220- 011- 1302- 1. Preliminary version in STOC 2011.
            arXiv:1010.1750. Appearances: 2, 3

[BDOT08]    Sergey Bravyi, David P DiVincenzo, Roberto Oliveira, and Barbara M Terhal.
            The complexity of stoquastic local Hamiltonian problems. Quantum Information
            & Computation. 8(5):361–385. 2008. doi:10.26421/QIC8.5-1. arXiv:quant-ph/
            0606140. Appearances: 1

[Bei10]     Salman Beigi. NP vs. QMAlog (2). Quantum Information & Computation.
            10(1):141–151. 2010. arXiv:0810.5109. Appearances: 2, 4, 8, 11

[BFL+ 24]   Roozbeh Bassirian, Bill Fefferman, Itai Leigh, Kunal Marwaha, and Pei Wu.
            Quantum Merlin–Arthur with an internally separable proof. arXiv preprint. 2024.
            arXiv:2410.19152. Appearances: 2

[BFM24]     Roozbeh Bassirian, Bill Fefferman, and Kunal Marwaha. Quantum Merlin–
            Arthur and proofs without relative phase. In Proceedings of the 15th Innova-
            tions in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS 2024). volume 287 of
            LIPIcs. pages 9:1–9:19. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. 2024.
            doi:10.4230/LIPICS.ITCS.2024.9. arXiv:2306.13247. Appearances: 2

[BGG+ 17]   Vijay Bhattiprolu, Mrinalkanti Ghosh, Venkatesan Guruswami, Euiwoong Lee,
            and Madhur Tulsiani. Weak decoupling, polynomial folds, and approximate opti-
            mization over the sphere. In Proceedings of the 58th IEEE Symposium on Foun-
            dations of Computer Science (FOCS). pages 1008–1019. IEEE Computer Society.
            2017. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2017.97. arXiv:1611.05998. Appearances: 3

[BGM06]     Elmar Böhler, Christian Glaßer, and Daniel Meister. Error-bounded probabilistic
            computations between MA and AM. Journal of Computer and System Sciences.
            72(6):1043–1076. 2006. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-45138-9_19. Preliminary ver-
            sion in MFCS 2003. ECCC:TR03-069. Appearances: 1


                                            62
[BH13]     Fernando G. S. L. Brandão and Aram W. Harrow. Quantum de Finetti theorems
           under local measurements with applications. In Proceedings of the Symposium
           on Theory of Computing Conference (STOC 2013). pages 861–870. ACM. 2013.
           doi:10.1145/2488608.2488718. arXiv:1210.6367. Appearances: 2, 3

[BH15]     Fernando G. S. L. Brandão and Aram W. Harrow. Estimating operator norms
           using covering nets. arXiv preprint. 2015. arXiv:1509.05065. Appearances: 3

[BH17]     Sergey Bravyi and Matthew Hastings. On complexity of the quantum Ising
           model. Communications in Mathematical Physics. 349(1):1–45. 2017. doi:
           10.1007/s00220-016-2787-4. arXiv:1410.0703. Appearances: 1

[Bha96]    Rajendra Bhatia. Matrix Analysis. volume 169 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics.
           Springer New York, NY. 1996. doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-0653-8. Appearances:
           46

[BHW25]    Harry Buhrman, Jonas Helsen, and Jordi Weggemans. Quantum PCPs: on adap-
           tivity, multiple provers and reductions to local Hamiltonians. Quantum. 9:1791.
           2025. doi:10.22331/q-2025-07-11-1791. arXiv:2403.04841. Appearances: 12

[BKS14]    Boaz Barak, Jonathan A. Kelner, and David Steurer. Rounding sum-of-squares re-
           laxations. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 2014).
           pages 31–40. ACM. 2014. doi:10.1145/2591796.2591886. arXiv:1312.6652. Ap-
           pearances: 3, 4, 6, 10, 11, 52, 59, 74, 75

[BKS17]    Boaz Barak, Pravesh K. Kothari, and David Steurer. Quantum entanglement,
           sum of squares, and the log rank conjecture. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual
           ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 2017). pages 975–988.
           ACM. 2017. doi:10.1145/3055399.3055488. arXiv:1701.06321. Appearances: 3

[Bra15]    Sergey Bravyi. Monte Carlo simulation of stoquastic Hamiltonians. Quantum In-
           formation & Computation. 15(13-14):1122–1140. 2015. doi:10.26421/qic15.13-
           14-3. arXiv:1402.2295. Appearances: 11

[BT10]     Sergey Bravyi and Barbara Terhal. Complexity of stoquastic frustration-free
           Hamiltonians. SIAM Journal on Computing. 39(4):1462–1485. 2010. doi:
           10.1137/08072689X. arXiv:0806.1746. Appearances: 1, 9

[BT12]     Hugue Blier and Alain Tapp. A quantum characterization of NP. computational
           complexity. 21(3):499–510. 2012. doi:10.1007/S00037-011-0016-2. Preliminary
           version in ICQNM 2009. arXiv:0709.0738. Appearances: 2, 4, 8, 11, 36

[Can20]    Clément L. Canonne. A Survey on Distribution Testing: Your Data is Big.
           But is it Blue?   Number 9 in Graduate Surveys. Theory of Computing Li-
           brary. 2020. URL: http://www.theoryofcomputing.org/library.html. doi:
           10.4086/toc.gs.2020.009. Appearances: 37

[CCZZ22]   Nai-Hui Chia, Chi-Ning Chou, Jiayu Zhang, and Ruizhe Zhang. Quantum
           meets the minimum circuit size problem. In Proceedings of the 13th Innova-
           tions in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS 2022). LIPIcs. pages
           47:1–47:16. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. 2022. doi:
           10.4230/LIPICS.ITCS.2022.47. arXiv:2108.03171. Appearances: 4

[CD10]     Jing Chen and Andrew Drucker. Short multi-prover quantum proofs for SAT
           without entangled measurements. arXiv preprint. 2010. arXiv:1011.0716. Ap-
           pearances: 2, 4, 9, 11, 36

                                          63
[CF13]      Alessandro Chiesa and Michael A. Forbes. Improved soundness for QMA with
            multiple provers. Chicago Journal of Theoretical Computer Science. 2013(1). 2013.
            doi:10.4086/cjtcs.2013.001. Appearances: 2, 4, 8, 11

[CM16]      Toby Cubitt and Ashley Montanaro. Complexity classification of local Hamil-
            tonian problems. SIAM Journal on Computing. 45(2):268–316. 2016. doi:
            10.1137/140998287. Preliminary version in FOCS 2014. arXiv:1311.3161. Ap-
            pearances: 2

[CM25]      Eric Culf and Arthur Mehta. New approaches to complexity via quantum graphs.
            Quantum Information & Computation. 25(5):453–487. 2025. doi:10.2478/qic-
            2025-0026. arXiv:2309.12887. Appearances: 11

[CNS18]     Libor Caha, Daniel Nagaj, and Martin Schwarz. Shorter unentangled proofs for
            ground state connectivity. Quantum Information Processing. 17(7):174. 2018. doi:
            10.1007/S11128-018-1944-4. arXiv:1712.07400. Appearances: 11

[CR14]      Clément Canonne and Ronitt Rubinfeld. Testing probability distributions under-
            lying aggregated data. In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and
            Programming. pages 283–295. Springer. 2014. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-43948-
            7_24. arXiv:1402.3835. Appearances: 2, 49

[CRTY23]    Lijie Chen, Ron D. Rothblum, Roei Tell, and Eylon Yogev. On exponential-time
            hypotheses, derandomization, and circuit lower bounds. Journal of the ACM.
            70(4):25:1–25:62. 2023. doi:10.1145/3593581. Preliminary version in FOCS 2020.
            ECCC:TR19-169. Appearances: 81

[CS12]      André Chailloux and Or Sattath. The complexity of the separable Hamiltonian
            problem. In Proceedings of the IEEE 27th Conference on Computational Complex-
            ity (CCC 2012). pages 32–41. 2012. doi:10.1109/CCC.2012.42. Appearances: 3,
            12

[Dem97]     James W. Demmel. Applied Numerical Linear Algebra. SIAM. 1997. doi:10.1137/
            1.9781611971446. Appearances: 46

[DGPP18]    Ilias Diakonikolas, Themis Gouleakis, John Peebles, and Eric Price. Sample-
            optimal identity testing with high probability. In Proceedings of the 45th In-
            ternational Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP
            2018). pages 41–1. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. 2018. doi:
            10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2018.41. arXiv:1708.02728. Appearances: 36

[DHM+ 14]   Holger Dell, Thore Husfeldt, Dániel Marx, Nina Taslaman, and Martin Wahlen.
            Exponential time complexity of the permanent and the Tutte polynomial. ACM
            Transactions on Algorithms. 10(4):21:1–21:32. 2014. doi:10.1145/2635812. Pre-
            liminary version in ICALP 2010. arXiv:1206.1775. Appearances: 4, 81

[Din07]     Irit Dinur. The PCP theorem by gap amplification. Journal of the ACM. 54(3):12.
            2007. doi:10.1145/1236457.1236459. Preliminary version in STOC 2006. ECCC:
            TR05-046. Appearances: 8, 9, 36, 37

[DPS04]     Andrew C. Doherty, Pablo A. Parrilo, and Federico M. Spedalieri. Complete family
            of separability criteria. Physical Review A. 69(2):022308. 2004. doi:10.1103/
            PhysRevA.69.022308. arXiv:quant-ph/0308032. Appearances: 3




                                            64
[FF21]     Kun Fang and Hamza Fawzi. The sum-of-squares hierarchy on the sphere, and
           applications in quantum information theory. Mathematical Programming. 190(1–
           2):331–360. 2021. doi:10.1007/s10107-020-01537-7. arXiv:1908.05155. Ap-
           pearances: 3

[FL16]     Bill Fefferman and Cedric Lin. Quantum Merlin–Arthur with exponentially small
           gap. arXiv preprint. 2016. arXiv:1601.01975. Appearances: 5, 70

[FL18]     Bill Fefferman and Cedric Yen-Yu Lin. A complete characterization of uni-
           tary quantum space. In Proceedings of the 9th Innovations in Theoretical Com-
           puter Science Conference (ITCS 2018). volume 94. page 4. 2018. doi:10.4230/
           LIPIcs.ITCS.2018.4. arXiv:1604.01384. Appearances: 5, 70

[Gan00]    Feliks Ruvimovich Gantmakher. The theory of matrices. volume 131. American
           Mathematical Society. 2000. Appearances: 79

[GHMW15]   Gus Gutoski, Patrick Hayden, Kevin Milner, and Mark M. Wilde. Quantum in-
           teractive proofs and the complexity of separability testing. Theory of Computing.
           11(3):59–103. 2015. doi:10.4086/toc.2015.v011a003. arXiv:1308.5788. Appear-
           ances: 3

[GHV21]    András Gilyén, Matthew B. Hastings, and Umesh V. Vazirani. (sub)exponential
           advantage of adiabatic quantum computation with no sign problem. In Pro-
           ceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Comput-
           ing (STOC 2021). pages 1357–1369. ACM. 2021. doi:10.1145/3406325.3451060.
           arXiv:2011.09495. Appearances: 11

[GJ26]     William Gay and Fernando Granha Jeronimo. The collapse of unentangled sto-
           quastic Merlin–Arthur proof systems. arXiv preprint. 2026. arXiv:2605.16249.
           Appearances: 4, 6, 12, 44

[GK25]     Sevag Gharibian and Jonas Kamminga. On the complexity of estimating ground
           state entanglement and free energy. arXiv preprint. 2025. arXiv:2510.06796.
           Appearances: 3

[GL23]     Sevag Gharibian and François Le Gall. Dequantizing the quantum singular
           value transformation: Hardness and applications to quantum chemistry and the
           quantum PCP conjecture. SIAM Journal on Computing. 52(4):1009–1038. 2023.
           doi:10.1137/22M1513721. Preliminary version in STOC 2022. arXiv:2111.09079.
           Appearances: 11

[GPY20]    Sevag Gharibian, Stephen Piddock, and Justin Yirka. Oracle complexity classes
           and local measurements on physical Hamiltonians. In Proceedings of the 37th
           International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS
           2020). volume 154 of LIPIcs. pages 20:1–20:37. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum
           für Informatik. 2020. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.STACS.2020.20. arXiv:1909.05981.
           Appearances: 11

[GR26a]    Sabee Grewal and Dorian Rudolph. On the pure quantum polynomial hierarchy
           and quantified Hamiltonian complexity. In Proceedings of the 53rd International
           Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2026). volume
           374 of LIPIcs. pages 103:1–103:23. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Infor-
           matik. 2026. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2026.103. arXiv:2510.06522. Appear-
           ances: 11



                                           65
[GR26b]     Alex B. Grilo and Marios Rozos. The complexity of stoquastic sparse Hamiltoni-
            ans. arXiv preprint. 2026. arXiv:2605.02845. Appearances: 12

[GS89]      Shafi Goldwasser and Michael Sipser. Private coins versus public coins in in-
            teractive proof systems. Advances in Computing Research. 5:73–90. 1989. doi:
            doi.org/10.1145/12130.12137. Preliminary version in STOC 1986. Appearances:
            1

[GSS+ 22]   Sevag Gharibian, Miklos Santha, Jamie Sikora, Aarthi Sundaram, and Justin
            Yirka. Quantum generalizations of the polynomial hierarchy with applications
            to QMA(2). computational complexity. 31(2):1–52. 2022. Preliminary version in
            MFCS 2018. arXiv:1805.11139. Appearances: 11

[GSU13]     Sevag Gharibian, Jamie Sikora, and Sarvagya Upadhyay. QMA variants with
            polynomially many provers. Quantum Information & Computation. 13(1-2):135–
            157. 2013. doi:10.26421/QIC13.1-2-8. arXiv:1108.0617. Appearances: 11

[Hal35]     Philip Hall. On representatives of subsets. Journal of the London Mathematical
            Society. s1-10(1):26–30. 1935. doi:10.1112/jlms/s1-10.37.26. Appearances: 29

[Has21]     Matthew B. Hastings. The power of adiabatic quantum computation with no
            sign problem. Quantum. 5:597. 2021. doi:10.22331/q-2021-12-06-597. arXiv:
            2005.03791. Appearances: 11

[HBS26]     Yassine Hamoudi, Yvan Le Borgne, and Shrinidhi Teganahally Sridhara. De-
            quantization barriers for guided stoquastic Hamiltonians.  arXiv preprint
            arXiv:2602.23183. 2026. Appearances: 11

[HGRD25]    Ryu Hayakawa, Casper Gyurik, Mahtab Yaghubi Rad, and Vedran Dunjko. Com-
            putational complexity of the homology problem with orientable filtration: MA-
            completeness. arXiv preprint. 2025. arXiv:2510.07014. Appearances: 11

[HKW+ 09]   Robert Hübener, Matthias Kleinmann, Tzu-Chieh Wei, Carlos González-Guillén,
            and Otfried Gühne. Geometric measure of entanglement for symmetric states.
            Physics Review A. 80:032324. 2009. doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.80.032324. arXiv:
            0905.4822. Appearances: 33

[HM13]      Aram W Harrow and Ashley Montanaro. Testing product states, quantum Merlin–
            Arthur games and tensor optimization. Journal of the ACM. 60(1):1–43. 2013.
            Preliminary version in FOCS 2010. arXiv:1001.0017. Appearances: 2, 7, 9, 12,
            14, 23, 26, 79

[HNW17]     Aram W Harrow, Anand Natarajan, and Xiaodi Wu. An improved semidefinite
            programming hierarchy for testing entanglement. Communications in Mathemat-
            ical Physics. 352(3):881–904. 2017. doi:10.1007/s00220-017-2859-0. arXiv:
            1506.08834. Appearances: 3

[IPM+ 20]   Marios Ioannou, Stephen Piddock, Milad Marvian, Joel Klassen, and Barbara M
            Terhal. Termwise versus globally stoquastic local Hamiltonians: questions of com-
            plexity and sign-curing. arXiv preprint. 2020. arXiv:2007.11964. Appearances:
            11

[Jer03]     Mark Jerrum. Counting, Sampling and Integrating: Algorithms and Complexity.
            Lectures in Mathematics. ETH Zürich. Springer Basel AG. 1st edition. 2003. doi:
            10.1007/978-3-0348-8005-3. Appearances: 72, 74


                                            66
[Jia25]     Jiaqing Jiang. Local Hamiltonian problem with succinct ground state is MA-
            complete. PRX Quantum. 6(2):020312. 2025. doi:10.1103/PRXQuantum.6.020312.
            arXiv:2309.10155. Appearances: 11

[JLW26]     Fernando Granha Jeronimo, Itai Leigh, and Pei Wu. The QMA(2) universe: Com-
            plexity, entanglement, and optimization. ACM SIGACT News. 57(1):64–99. 2026.
            doi:10.1145/3802807.3802814. Appearances: 2

[JS22]      Nathaniel Johnston and Jamie Sikora. Completely positive completely positive
            maps (and a resource theory for non-negativity of quantum amplitudes). Linear
            Algebra and its Applications. 653:395–429. 2022. doi:10.1016/j.laa.2022.08.016.
            arXiv:2110.13568. Appearances: 20

[JW23]      Fernando Granha Jeronimo and Pei Wu. The power of unentangled quantum
            proofs with non-negative amplitudes. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual ACM
            Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 2023). pages 1629–1642. ACM. 2023.
            doi:10.1145/3564246.3585248. arXiv:2402.18790. Appearances: 2, 3, 4, 36

[JW24]      Fernando Granha Jeronimo and Pei Wu. Dimension independent disentanglers
            from unentanglement and applications. In Proceedings of the 39th Computa-
            tional Complexity Conference (CCC 2024). volume 300 of LIPIcs. pages 26:1–
            26:28. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. 2024. doi:10.4230/
            LIPICS.CCC.2024.26. arXiv:2402.15282. Appearances: 2

[Kit99]     Alexei Kitaev. Quantum NP. Public Talk at AQIP’99: the 2nd Workshop on
            Algorithms in Quantum Information Processing. 1999. Appearances: 1

[KMP+ 20]   Joel Klassen, Milad Marvian, Stephen Piddock, Marios Ioannou, Itay Hen, and
            Barbara M. Terhal. Hardness and ease of curing the sign problem for two-local
            qubit Hamiltonians. SIAM Journal on Computing. 49(6):1332–1362. 2020. doi:
            10.1137/19M1287511. arXiv:1906.08800. Appearances: 11

[KMY09]     Hirotada Kobayashi, Keiji Matsumoto, and Tomoyuki Yamakami. Quantum
            Merlin-Arthur proof systems: Are multiple Merlins more helpful to Arthur?
            Chicago Journal of Theoretical Computer Science. 2009:3. 2009. Preliminary ver-
            sion in ISACC 2003. arXiv:quant-ph/0306051. Appearances: 2, 6, 7, 15, 20,
            21

[Kob03]     Hirotada Kobayashi. Non-interactive quantum perfect and statistical zero-
            knowledge. In Proceedings of the 14th International Symposium on Algorithms and
            Computation. pages 178–188. Springer. 2003. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-24587-2_
            20. arXiv:quant-ph/0207158. Appearances: 20

[KR26]      Jonas Kamminga and Dorian Rudolph. The pure-state consistency of local den-
            sity matrices problem: In PSPACE and complete for a class between QMA
            and QMA(2). In Proceedings of the 17th Innovations in Theoretical Computer
            Science Conference (ITCS 2026). LIPIcs. pages 83:1–83:23. Schloss Dagstuhl -
            Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. 2026. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.ITCS.2026.83. arXiv:
            2411.03096. Appearances: 3

[KSV02]     Alexei Y. Kitaev, Alexander H. Shen, and Mikhail N. Vyalyi. Classical and Quan-
            tum Computation. volume 47 of Graduate Studies in Mathematics. American
            Mathematical Society. 1st edition. 2002. doi:10.1090/gsm/047/08. Appearances:
            1, 72



                                           67
[KT19]    Joel Klassen and Barbara M. Terhal. Two-local qubit Hamiltonians: when are
          they stoquastic? Quantum. 3:139. 2019. doi:10.22331/q-2019-05-06-139.
          arXiv:1806.05405. Appearances: 11

[Kup15]   Greg Kuperberg. How hard is it to approximate the Jones polynomial? The-
          ory of Computing. 11(1):183–219. 2015. doi:10.4086/toc.2015.v011a006. arXiv:
          0908.0512. Appearances: 3

[KvM02]   Adam R. Klivans and Dieter van Melkebeek. Graph nonisomorphism has subexpo-
          nential size proofs unless the polynomial-time hierarchy collapses. SIAM Journal
          on Computing. 31(5):1501–1526. 2002. doi:10.1137/S0097539700389652. Prelim-
          inary version in STOC 1999. ECCC:TR98-075. Appearances: 2

[Le 25]   François Le Gall. Classical algorithms for constant approximation of the ground
          state energy of local Hamiltonians. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual European
          Symposium on Algorithms (ESA 2025). LIPIcs. pages 73:1–73:19. Schloss Dagstuhl
          - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. 2025. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.ESA.2025.73. arXiv:
          2410.21833. Appearances: 11

[Liu07]   Yi-Kai Liu. The local consistency problem for stoquastic and 1-D quantum sys-
          tems. arXiv preprint. 2007. arXiv:0712.1388. Appearances: 11

[Liu21]   Yupan Liu. StoqMA meets distribution testing. In Proceedings of the 16th Con-
          ference on the Theory of Quantum Computation, Communication and Cryptog-
          raphy (TQC 2021). volume 197 of LIPIcs. pages 4:1–4:22. Schloss Dagstuhl –
          Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. 2021. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.TQC.2021.4. arXiv:
          2011.05733. Appearances: 2, 3, 7, 8, 11, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 49, 70, 79

[LNN12]   François Le Gall, Shota Nakagawa, and Harumichi Nishimura. On QMA protocols
          with two short quantum proofs. Quantum Information & Computation. 12(7–
          8):589–600. 2012. doi:10.26421/QIC12.7-8-4. Appearances: 2, 4, 8, 11

[LS15]    Ke Li and Graeme Smith. Quantum de Finetti theorem under fully-one-way
          adaptive measurements. Physical review letters. 114(16):160503. 2015. doi:
          10.1103/PhysRevLett.114.160503. arXiv:1408.6829. Appearances: 2, 3

[LW17]    Cécilia Lancien and Andreas Winter. Flexible constrained de Finetti reductions
          and applications. Journal of Mathematical Physics. 58(9). 2017. doi:10.1063/
          1.5003633. arXiv:1605.09013. Appearances: 11

[LW26]    Yupan Liu and Pei Wu. Unentangled stoquastic Merlin–Arthur proof systems: the
          power of unentanglement without destructive interference. arXiv preprint. 2026.
          arXiv:2604.27886v1. Appearances: 17, 79

[MS26]    Kunal Marwaha and James Sud. A complexity phase transition at the EPR Hamil-
          tonian. arXiv preprint. 2026. arXiv:2604.13026. Appearances: 2

[MU17]    Michael Mitzenmacher and Eli Upfal. Probability and computing: Randomization
          and probabilistic techniques in algorithms and data analysis. Cambridge University
          Press. 2017. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511813603. Appearances: 46, 51

[MV05]    Peter Bro Miltersen and N Variyam Vinodchandran. Derandomizing Arthur–
          Merlin games using hitting sets. computational complexity. 14(3):256–279. 2005.
          doi:10.1007/s00037-005-0197-7. Preliminary version in FOCS 1999. Appear-
          ances: 2


                                          68
[MW05]    Chris Marriott and John Watrous. Quantum Arthur–Merlin games. computational
          complexity. 14(2):122–152. 2005. doi:10.1007/s00037-005-0194-x. Preliminary
          version in CCC 2004. arXiv:cs/0506068. Appearances: 3, 44

[NC10]    Michael A Nielsen and Isaac L Chuang. Quantum computation and quantum
          information. Cambridge University Press. 2010. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511976667.
          Appearances: 12, 13, 15

[NOP09]   Miguel Navascués, Masaki Owari, and Martin B. Plenio. Power of symmetric
          extensions for entanglement detection. Physical Review A. 80(5):052306. 2009.
          doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.80.052306. arXiv:0906.2731. Appearances: 3

[NZ23]    Anand Natarajan and Tina Zhang. Quantum free games. In Proceedings of the
          55th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 2023). pages 1603–
          1616. ACM. 2023. doi:10.1145/3564246.3585208. arXiv:2302.04322. Appear-
          ances: 2, 11

[Pan08]   Liam Paninski. A coincidence-based test for uniformity given very sparsely sam-
          pled discrete data. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory. 54(10):4750–4755.
          2008. doi:10.1109/TIT.2008.928987. Appearances: 9, 37

[Per12]   Attila Pereszlényi. Multi-prover quantum Merlin–Arthur proof systems with small
          gap. arXiv preprint. 2012. arXiv:1205.2761. Appearances: 2, 4, 5, 36

[PM17]    Stephen Piddock and Ashley Montanaro. The complexity of antiferromagnetic
          interactions and 2D lattices. Quantum Information & Computation. 17(7&8):636–
          672. 2017. doi:10.26421/QIC17.7-8-6. arXiv:1506.04014. Appearances: 2

[Reg06]   Oded Regev. Witness-preserving amplification of QMA. https://cims.nyu.edu/
          ~regev/teaching/quantum_fall_2005/ln/qma.pdf. 2006. Appearances: 44

[REG26]   Asad Raza, Jens Eisert, and Alex B Grilo. Complexity of geometrically local
          stoquastic Hamiltonians. Quantum. 10:2004. 2026. doi:10.22331/q-2026-02-
          11-2004. arXiv:2407.15499. Appearances: 11

[Rei89]   Rolf-Dieter Reiss. Approximate Distributions of Order Statistics: With Applica-
          tions to Nonparametric Statistics. Springer Series in Statistics. Springer New York,
          NY. 1st edition. 1989. doi:10.1007/978-1-4613-9620-8. Appearances: 14

[RT22]    Ran Raz and Avishay Tal. Oracle separation of BQP and PH. Journal of the
          ACM. 69(4):1–21. 2022. doi:10.1145/3530258. Preliminary version in STOC
          2019. ECCC:TR18-107. Appearances: 1

[Sch78]   Thomas J. Schaefer. The complexity of satisfiability problems. In Proceedings of
          the 10th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 1978). pages
          216–226. ACM. 1978. doi:10.1145/800133.804350. Appearances: 2

[ST13]    Daniel A. Spielman and Shang-Hua Teng. A local clustering algorithm for massive
          graphs and its application to nearly linear time graph partitioning. SIAM Jour-
          nal on Computing. 42(1):1–26. 2013. doi:10.1137/080744888. arXiv:0809.3232.
          Appearances: 1

[SW15]    Yaoyun Shi and Xiaodi Wu. Epsilon-net method for optimizations over sep-
          arable states. Theoretical Computer Science. 598:51–63. 2015. doi:10.1016/
          j.tcs.2015.03.031. Preliminary version in ICALP 2012. arXiv:1112.0808. Ap-
          pearances: 3

                                           69
[SW22]        Mehdi Soleimanifar and John Wright. Testing matrix product states. In Pro-
              ceedings of the 2022 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA
              2022). pages 1679–1701. SIAM. 2022. doi:10.1137/1.9781611977073.68. arXiv:
              2201.01824. Appearances: 7, 12, 26

[Vya03]       Mikhail Vyalyi. qma = pp implies that pp contains ph. In Electronic Colloquium
              on Computational Complexity. Citeseer. 2003. ECCC:TR03-021. Appearances: 3

[Wai25]       Gabriel Waite. The guided local Hamiltonian problem for stoquastic Hamiltonians.
              arXiv preprint. 2025. arXiv:2509.25829. Appearances: 11

[Wat00]       John Watrous. Succinct quantum proofs for properties of finite groups. In Proceed-
              ings 41st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science. pages 537–546.
              IEEE. 2000. doi:10.1109/sfcs.2000.892141. arXiv:cs/0009002. Appearances:
              13

[WB26]        Gabriel Waite and Michael J. Bremner. The complexity of local stoquastic Hamil-
              tonians on 2D lattices. Quantum. 10:2097. 2026. doi:10.22331/q-2026-05-06-
              2097. arXiv:2502.14244. Appearances: 11

[WFC24]       Jordi Weggemans, Marten Folkertsma, and Chris Cade. Guidable local Hamil-
              tonian problems with implications to heuristic ansatz state preparation and the
              quantum PCP conjecture. In Proceedings of the 19th Conference on the Theory of
              Quantum Computation, Communication and Cryptography (TQC 2024). volume
              310 of LIPIcs. pages 10:1–10:24. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Infor-
              matik. 2024. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.TQC.2024.10. arXiv:2302.11578. Appearances:
              11

[Wil13]       Mark M. Wilde. Quantum Information Theory. Cambridge University Press. 2013.
              doi:10.1017/9781316809976. Appearances: 48

[WL25]        Gabriel Waite and Karl Lin. On the complexity of the succinct state local Hamil-
              tonian problem. arXiv preprint. 2025. arXiv:2509.25821. Appearances: 11

[dW19]        Ronald de Wolf. Quantum computing: Lecture notes. arXiv preprint. 2019. arXiv:
              1907.09415. Appearances: 12


A    PSPACE ⊆ PreciseStoqMA1
In this section, we establish the equivalence between PreciseStoqMA1 , PreciseStoqMA, and
PSPACE, where PreciseStoqMA1 denotes PreciseStoqMA with perfect completeness:

Theorem A.1 (PreciseStoqMA with perfect completeness contains PSPACE). There exists an
explicit efficiently computable function s⋆ (n) = 1 − 2− poly(n) such that
                               PSPACE ⊆ PreciseStoqMA(1, s⋆ ).

    Then, combining Theorem A.1 with PreciseQMA ⊆ PSPACE [FL16, FL18] immediately yields
the following equivalence, thereby giving a positive answer to and fully resolving the open prob-
lem in [Liu21, Section 1.2] asking whether PreciseStoqMA captures the full PSPACE power:

Corollary A.2. PreciseStoqMA1 = PreciseStoqMA = PSPACE.


   To establish Theorem A.1, we begin with the PSPACE-complete problem Clean Con-
nected Component, introduced in [AG21]:

                                               70
Definition A.3 (Clean Connected Component, CleanCC, adapted from [AG21, Definition
3.1]). Let G = (V, E) be a graph with vertex set V = {0, 1}n , and suppose that every vertex
v ∈ V has degree d(v) ≤ dG ≤ poly(n). We say that a pair of polynomial-size classical circuits
(CG , CM ), where CG : V × JdG K → V and CM : V → {0, 1}, is an instance of CleanCC(n, dG )
if the following conditions hold for every v ∈ V :

 (1) For each j ∈ JdG K, CG (v, j) outputs the j-th neighbor of v. Furthermore, every neighbor
     of v appears exactly once in the list CG (v, 0), · · · , CG (v, dG − 1), and every remaining slot
     is padded with the self-loop value v.

 (2) CM (v) outputs 1 if the vertex v is marked; otherwise, it outputs 0, and v is unmarked.

The problem is to decide which of the following holds:

   • Yes. There exists a non-empty connected component H⋆ ⊆ V such that all vertices in H⋆
     are unmarked.

   • No. Every connected component H ⊆ V contains at least one marked vertex.

Lemma A.4 (Adapted from [AG21, Appendix D]). CleanCC is PSPACE-complete.

   Now we are ready to state the main technical result in this section, which, together with
Lemma A.4, establishes Theorem A.1:

Theorem A.5 (CleanCC ∈ PreciseStoqMA1 ). For any efficiently computable function dG (n)
bounded by a polynomial in n, the following holds:
                                                                
                                                         1
                   CleanCC(n, dG ) ∈ StoqMA 1, 1 − 2n+2           .
                                                   2    (dG + 1)

A.1    Constructing the stoquastic verification circuit
We first make each move from a vertex u ∈ V to its j-th neighbor CG (u, j) reversible by
introducing the return-index circuit C
                                     eG , whose efficient construction is given below:

Proposition A.6 (Return-index circuit can be efficiently constructed). Given the circuit CG
that describes the graph G = (V, E) with |V | = 2n and the maximum degree dG ≤ poly(n), one
                                              eG : V × JdG K → JdG K satisfying the following:
can efficiently construct a classical circuit C

   • For every edge (u, v) ∈ E and every neighbor index j with CG (u, j) = v, define C
                                                                                     eG (u, j) to
     be the unique return index at v, namely the unique index satisfying CG v, CG (u, j) = u.
                                                                                         
                                                                                 e

   • For every padded self-loop port with CG (u, j) = u, define C
                                                                eG (u, j) = j.

Proof. For every edge (u, v) ∈ E such that CG (u, j) = v, C
                                                          eG (u, j) can be implemented efficiently
by simply checking all j ∈ JdG K and finding the unique index j⋆′ satisfying CG (v, j⋆′ ) = u. This
                          ′

construction is efficient because the maximum degree dG ≤ poly(n).

   Next, we introduce the classical reversible circuit ΓG , built from the classical circuits CG and
eG and made reversible by using additional |0⟩ ancillary qubits, as defined by
C
                                                                   E
                 ∀j ∈ JdG K, ∀v ∈ V, ΓG |j⟩|v⟩|0̄⟩ = C   eG (v, j) |CG (v, j)⟩|0̄⟩.            (A.1)

By construction, it follows that Γ2G |j⟩|v⟩|0̄⟩ = |j⟩|v⟩|0̄⟩. Similarly, we define the classical re-
versible circuit ΓM , built from the classical circuit CM , by
                     ∀v ∈ V, ∀c ∈ {0, 1},    ΓM |v⟩|c⟩|0̄⟩ = |v⟩|c ⊕ CM (v)⟩|0̄⟩.               (A.2)



                                                 71
We also note that the reversible circuits ΓG and ΓM are both efficiently implementable.26
   With these reversible circuits in place, we present the stoquastic verification circuit for
CleanCC used in the proof of Theorem A.5, as given in Protocol 7.

  Protocol 7: A stoquastic verification circuit VCG ,CM for CleanCC.
   Input       : A CleanCC(n, dG ) instance (CG , CM ).
   Parameters: q := ⌈log(dG + 1)⌉ and J := 2q .
   Registers : B: the q-qubit branch-index register.
                  V: the n-qubit vertex-label register.
                  M: the single-qubit marking register.
                  A: the register containing |0⟩ ancillary qubits.
   1. Construct the classical reversible circuits ΓG and ΓM , as expressed in
    Equations (A.1) and (A.2), using Proposition A.6.

       2. Define a classical reversible circuit Γ on the quantum registers (B, V, M, A) as follows:
        (1) Apply ΓG to the registers (B, V, A) when 0 ≤ j < dG ;
        (2) Apply ΓM to the registers (V, M, A) when j = dG ;
        (3) Do nothing otherwise.
       Equivalently, Γ can be expressed as
                                                E
                                      CeG (v, j) |CG (v, j)⟩ |c⟩ |0̄⟩ , 0 ≤ j < dG ,
                                                            V   M    A
                                                 B
              Γ|j⟩B |v⟩V |c⟩M |0̄⟩A = |j⟩ |v⟩ |c ⊕ CM (v)⟩ |0̄⟩ ,        j = dG ,                      (A.3)
                                        B    V            M    A
                                     
                                     |j⟩ |v⟩ |c⟩ |0̄⟩ ,
                                         B    V    M  A                  dG < j < J.

        3. Apply the branch-overlap test (Lemma 2.13) to the reversible circuit pair (Γ, I)
        with the input state stored in the registers (B, V, M).



A.2       Analysis of Protocol 7
In this subsection, we prove Theorem A.5. Before presenting the proof, we first specify the
acceptance probability   of the stoquastic verification circuit in
                                                                 PProtocol 7. For a non-negative
witness |ψ⟩ = v∈V αv |v⟩, where αv ≥ 0 for each v ∈ V and v∈V αv2 = 1, let |Ωψ ⟩ denote the
                P
initialized state corresponding to |ψ⟩. Then Lemma 3.13 guarantees that
                                                                                J−1
                                  1 1                                    1 X
  Pr[VCG ,CM accepts |ψ⟩] =        + ⟨Ωψ |Γ|Ωψ ⟩,        where |Ωψ ⟩ := √       |j⟩B |ψ⟩V |0⟩M |0̄⟩A . (A.4)
                                  2 2                                     J j=0
    We now proceed with the proof of Theorem A.5. At a high level, for yes instances, the
subset state |H⋆ ⟩ serves as the witness state. For no instances, however, the analysis is more
delicate, since it must apply to all non-negative witness states. The key observation is that,
in any connected component containing a marked vertex, large witness mass must create either
noticeable mass on a marked vertex or noticeable amplitude differences across edges. This
argument is a path form of the Poincaré principle (cf. [Jer03, Section 5.2]): local edge differences,
together with marked-vertex mass, control the total mass in the component.

Proof of Theorem A.5. We begin by expanding ⟨Ωψ |Γ|Ωψ ⟩ according to the
                                                                     P branch-index register
B. For the first dG neighbor-index branches, we obtain the overlap      v αv αCG (v,j) . For the
  26
    Since the classical circuits CG , C
                                      eG , and CM are all efficiently implementable, it follows that ΓG and ΓM are
also efficiently implementable using the standard compute-swap-uncompute trick (cf. [KSV02, Theorem 7.3]).


                                                       72
marking branch j = dG , the initialized bit c = 0 remains in the initialized sector exactly on
unmarked vertices, contributing v:CM (v)=0 αv2 . The remaining J −dG −1 branches are identities
                               P

and each contributes v αv2 = 1. Consequently, we conclude the following identity:
                     P
                                                                               
                          1   X    X                    X
           ⟨Ωψ |Γ|Ωψ ⟩ =              αv αCG (v,j) +         αv2 + (J − dG − 1).       (A.5)
                          J
                                 j∈JdG K v∈V                  v:CM (v)=0


Completeness. For yes instances, let the witness state be the subset state
                                               1     X
                                   |H⋆ ⟩ = p             |v⟩,
                                              |H⋆ | v∈H⋆

where H⋆ is an unmarked connected component. Then αv = 1/ |H⋆ | for each v ∈ H⋆ and
                                                                     p

αv = 0 otherwise. Consequently, every neighbor-index branch maps vertices of H⋆ back into H⋆
and the marking branch also leaves the initialized state unchanged. Thus, a direct calculation
from Equation (A.5) shows that
                                                                              
                        1    X     X     1         X         1
         ⟨ΩH⋆ |Γ|ΩH⋆ ⟩ =                     +                  + (J − dG − 1)       (A.6a)
                        J               |H⋆ |              |H⋆ |
                                 j∈JdG K v∈H⋆           v:CM (v)=0
                        dG + 1 + (J − dG − 1)
                       =                      = 1.                                              (A.6b)
                                  J
   Substituting Equation (A.6) into Equation (A.4), we obtain the desired equality
                                                                   1 1
                             Pr[VCG ,CM accepts |H⋆ ⟩] =            + · 1 = 1.
                                                                   2 2

Soundness. For no instances, we first derive an expression for the rejection probability:
                                                                               
                                         1    X                     X
          1 − Pr[VCG ,CM accepts |ψ⟩] =            (αu − αv )2 +            αv2 .       (A.7)
                                        2J
                                                         (u,v)∈E                 v:CM (v)=1

   To see Equation (A.7), we use Equation (A.5) and compute
                                         X X                                     X
              J(1 − ⟨Ωψ |Γ|Ωψ ⟩) = dG −          αv αCG (v,j) +                           αv2
                                                j∈JdG K v∈V                  v:CM (v)=1
                                        1 X X                       2       X
                                      =               αv − αCG (v,j) +             αv2
                                        2
                                          j∈JdG K v∈V                   v:CM (v)=1
                                          X                     X
                                      =        (αu − αv )2 +           αv2 .
                                         (u,v)∈E                    v:CM (v)=1

Here, the second line uses     v αv = 1 and
                                  2
                             P
                                         X X
                                                       2
                                                      αC G (v,j)
                                                                 = dG ,
                                        j∈JdG K v∈V

which follows because the map (v, j) 7→ C   eG (v, j), CG (v, j) is a permutation of JdG K × V . The
                                                                

third line uses the fact that the graph G is undirected: every non-loop edge (u, v) ∈ E is counted
twice in the directed-edge sum, while padded self-loop terms contribute zero.

   Equipped with Equation (A.7) and |V | = 2n , it now suffices to prove the following in-
equality, which follows from a path-based Poincaré-type estimate of Jerrum’s canonical-path




                                                       73
inequality [Jer03, Theorem 5.2 and Remark 5.3(a)]:
                            X                   X                               1
                                 (αu − αv )2 +                        αv2 ≥         .      (A.8)
                                                                              |V |2
                              (u,v)∈E                   v:CM (v)=1

    Fix one connected component H ⊆ V and define its weight µH := v∈H αv2 . Since (CG , CM )
                                                                     P
is a no instance, the connected component H contains at least one marked vertex s. Also, by
an averaging argument, there exists a vertex t ∈ H such that αt2 ≥ µH /|H|. Now we consider a
simple path in H from s to t, denoted by u0 ∼ u1 ∼ · · · ∼ um , with u0 := s and um := t. Since
m + 1 ≤ |H| ≤ |V |, we obtain
                                            X
                                                                                          (A.9)
                                                            
                                 αt = αs +       αui+1 − αui .
                                                  i∈JmK

    Applying the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality to Equation (A.9) gives
                                                                            
                                           2                                 2
                          X                                X
      αt2 ≤ (m + 1)αs2 +    αui+1 − αui  ≤ |H|αs2 +                                    (A.10)
                                                                          
                                                                αui+1 − αui 
                              i∈JmK                                       i∈JmK

   Since the chosen path from s to t in H lies inside H and s is marked, the contribution of the
component H to the left-hand side of Equation (A.8) satisfies
              X                       X                    X                2
                    (αu − αv )2 +              αv2 ≥ αs2 +      αui+1 − αui             (A.11a)
           (u,v)∈E(H)                   v∈H:CM (v)=1                  i∈JmK

                                                                αt2
                                                            ≥                            (A.11b)
                                                              |H|
                                                               µH      µH
                                                            ≥     2
                                                                    ≥       .            (A.11c)
                                                              |H|     |V |2
Here, the second line is obtained via rearranging Equation (A.10), and the last line follows from
the facts that αt2 ≥ µH /|H| and H is a subgraph of G.
    Finally, summing Equation (A.11) over all connected components of G and using v αv2 = 1,
                                                                                      P
we establish Equation (A.8) and conclude the desired lower bound:
                 X                     X           X µH          1 X 2        1
                      (αu − αv )2 +          αv2 ≥         2
                                                             =      2
                                                                      αv =        .
                                                      |V |     |V |         |V |2
               (u,v)∈E                  v:CM (v)=1          H                     v∈V


B     The Barak-Kelner-Steurer algorithm and a refined analysis
We refer the reader to the original paper of Barak, Kelner, and Steurer [BKS14, Section 1] for
the background on the sum-of-squares algorithm. Our goal is to prove the following theorem for
the purpose of completeness:

Theorem 8.1 ([BKS14, Theorem 3.1] with improved t-dependence, restated). For any entrywise
non-negative, real-symmetric matrix M acting on (Cd )⊗t with ∥M ∥ ≤ 1, there is a degree-
O(t2 log d/ε2 ) Sum-of-Squares algorithm that approximates
                                            max        Tr M (xxT )⊗t
                                         x∈Rd :∥x∥=1

to within additive error ε.

    Our treatment largely follows Barak–Kelner–Steurer’s proof, with similar notation. We use
“degree” and “level” interchangeably: a degree-D pseudodistribution (resp., pseudoexpectation)
is what they would call a level-D pseudodistribution (resp., pseudoexpectation). We improve
the analysis to have the optimal dependence on t, the order of the tensor, but otherwise the
same. The main tool underlying their algorithm is the “reweighting”:


                                                       74
Definition B.1 (Conditioning, or reweighting). Let X be a random variable over the (d − 1)-
                        e be a degree-D pseudoexpectation of X. Let B(x) = S(x)2 be a square
dimensional sphere, and E
polynomial with Ex∼X [B] > 0. The reweighted pseudoexpectation for X | B is defined by
                e

                                         e x∼X|B [P (x)] := Ex∼X [P (x)B(x)]
                                                            e
                                         E
                                                              e x∼X [B(x)]
                                                              E
for every polynomial P of degree at most D − deg(B).

   For a tuple i1 , . . . , it−1 ∈ [d], we write
                                                                       t−1
                                                                       Y
                                              Xi1 ,...,it−1 := X |           x2ij .
                                                                       j=1

This is exactly the conditioning operation used in [BKS14].

B.1     SoS algorithm and rounding
The feasibility SDP. Binary search for value ν such that the following degree-D pseudoex-
pectation is feasible, for D = O(t2 log d/ε2 ):
                                              e ⊨ Tr M (x · xT )⊗t ≥ ν,
                                              E                                                             (B.1)
                                              e ⊨ ∥x∥2 = 1.
                                              E                                                             (B.2)
Here E                  e (x)Q2 (x)] ≥ 0 for any deg P + 2 deg Q ≤ D; while E
     e ⊨ P (x) ≥ 0 ⇐⇒ E[P                                                   e ⊨ P (x) =
0 ⇐⇒ E[P (x)Q(x)] = 0 for all deg P + deg Q ≤ D.
       e

The random variables A(X), A1 , . . . , At . Fix any level-D pseudodistribution on X with
D ≥ 2t. Define random variables A1 , . . . , At over [d] by
                                                                                       t
                                                                                      hY          i
                          Pr[(A1 , . . . , At ) = (i1 , . . . , it )] := E
                                                                         e x∼X                x2ir .
                                                                                        r=1
        Qt          Qt
Since         2
         r=1 xir = (   r=1 xir   )2 is a square of degree 2t, these numbers are non-negative. Also,
                             X                    t
                                                 hY        i           d
                                                                    h X     t i
                                         E
                                         e x∼X         x2ir = E
                                                              e x∼X      x2i      = 1,
                            i1 ,...,it           r=1                          i=1

so A1 , . . . , At are honest random variables. Their common marginal is the distribution A(X) on
[d] given by
                                      Pr[A(X) = i] := E e x∼X [x2 ].
                                                                i

We also write A for a random variable distributed according to A(X), and define
                                            Ψ(X) := H(A(X)) = H(A).
Because the joint moments are symmetric under permutation of the t coordinates, the tuple
(A1 , . . . , At ) is exchangeable.
                                                                                         Qt
The direct rounding. For α = (i1 , . . . , it ) ∈ [d]t , write xα :=                          r=1 xir .
                            t
  Define vectors y, z ∈ R[d] by
                                   1/2                         t
                                                                 Y                t 
                                                                                  Y                1/2
                  yα := Ee x∼X [x2 ]
                                 α       ,               zα :=         x∗ir :=          e x∼X [x2 ]
                                                                                        E       ir      .
                                                                 r=1              r=1




                                                            75
Then ∥y∥ = ∥z∥ = 1, because
                  X                      d
                                      h X         t i             X             d
                                                                                 X        t
                        yα2 = E
                              e x∼X          x2i          = 1,           zα2 =      (x∗i )2 = 1.
                    α                  i=1                           α            i=1
Here x∗  corresponds to the direct rounding ignoring the correlation arising from the tensor
product.
   Abbreviate M (x) := α,β∈[d]t Mαβ xα xβ . Because Mαβ ≥ 0 and pseudoexpectations satisfy
                        P
Cauchy–Schwarz,
                                                                1/2
                      Ee x∼X [xα xβ ] ≤ Ee x∼X [x2 ] E
                                                     e x∼X [x2 ]      = yα yβ .
                                                             α           β

Hence                                                      X
                             ν≤E
                               e x∼X [M (x)] ≤                   Mαβ yα yβ = ⟨y, M y⟩.
                                                           α,β

On the other hand, by our rounding and the choice of z, we have
                                              M (x∗ ) = ⟨z, M z⟩.
So for symmetric M ,
            ν − M (x∗ ) ≤ ⟨y, M y⟩ − ⟨z, M z⟩ = ⟨y − z, M (y + z)⟩ ≤ ∥M ∥ ∥y − z∥ ∥y + z∥.
Since y and z are unit vectors, ∥y +z∥ ≤ 2; and ∥M ∥ ≤ 1, one concludes that the direct rounding
is worse than the SDP value by an additive term 2∥y − z∥:
                                           ν − M (x∗ ) ≤ 2∥y − z∥                                  (B.3)
    The Hellinger distance is the bridge from ∥ · ∥ to an entropic argument. In particular,
                                Xp
              ∥y − z∥2 = 2 − 2        Pr[(A1 , . . . , At ) = α] Pr[{A1 } · · · {At } = α]
                                       α
                                                                    2
                            = 2 dH {A1 · · · At }, {A1 } · · · {At } .
{X} denotes the law of X, and dH is the Hellinger distance. So the above analysis on the direct
rounding can be summarized below:

Lemma B.2 (Direct rounding). Let X be a level-2t pseudodistribution satisfying (B.1)-(B.2).
If                                                           
                         dH {A1 · · · At }, {A1 } · · · {At } ≤ ε,
then the unit vector x∗ ∈ Rd with
                                                                1/2
                                             x∗i := Ee x∼X [x2 ]
                                                             i

satisfies                                                   √
                                             M (x∗ ) ≥ ν − 2 2 ε.

Reweighting. If direct rounding fails to provide a good approximation, then
                                                               
                           dH {A1 · · · At }, {A1 } · · · {At } ≳ ε.
Hence the variables Ai are somewhat correlated, and one can pin some variables to make the
remaining variables more deterministic. Updating the pseudodistribution by reweighting (con-
ditioning on the pinnings) iteratively decreases the entropy of the variables Ai . Since entropy
is bounded, within a bounded number of iterations, the Hellinger distance must be small and
at that time the direct rounding would work. This is the part where we tighten the analysis in
BKS exploiting the chain rule and symmetry bypassing a wasteful triangle inequality.




                                                            76
Lemma B.3 (Entropy decrement per conditioning round). If
                                                             
                         dH {A1 · · · At }, {A1 } · · · {At } > ε,
then
                                                                                2ε2
                                    H(At | A1 , . . . , At−1 ) ≤ H(A) −             .                             (B.4)
                                                                                 t
Proof. Let P := {A1 · · · At } and Q := {A1 } · · · {At }. Using Lemma 2.7, we obtain
                                       KL(P ∥Q) ≥ 2 dH (P, Q)2 > 2ε2 .                                            (B.5)
By the chain rule for relative entropy,
                                     t
                                     X
                     KL(P ∥Q) =            I(Aj ; A1 , . . . , Aj−1 ) ≤ t · I(At ; A1 , . . . , At−1 )            (B.6)
                                     j=1

The inequality holds, because (A1 , . . . , At ) is exchangeable with marginal A, and for every j,
             I(Aj ; A1 , . . . , Aj−1 ) ≤ I(At ; A1 , . . . , At−1 ) = H(A) − H(At | A1 , . . . , At−1 ).
Then (B.4) in the statement follows by combining the above inequalities.

Corollary B.4 (BKS conditioning succeeds when direct rounding fails). If
                                                              
                          dH {A1 · · · At }, {A1 } · · · {At } > ε,
then there exist i1 , . . . , it−1 ∈ [d] with
                                      Pr[A1 = i1 , . . . , At−1 = it−1 ] > 0
such that
                                                                           2ε2
                                        Ψ(Xi1 ,...,it−1 ) ≤ Ψ(X) −             .
                                                                            t
Proof. Lemma B.3 says that the average, over (A1 , . . . , At−1 ), of the conditional entropy H(At |
A1 , . . . , At−1 ) is at most H(A) − 2ε2 /t. Hence there exists a particular (i1 , . . . , it−1 ) of positive
probability such that
                                                                         2ε2
                            H(At | A1 = i1 , . . . , At−1 = it−1 ) ≤ H(A) −  .
                                                                          t
It remains to identify this conditional law with A(Xi1 ,...,it−1 ). For every i ∈ [d],
                                                     e x∼X [x2 Qt−1 x2 ]
                                                     E       i  j=1 ij
       Pr[At = i | A1 = i1 , . . . , At−1 = it−1 ] =         Qt−1 2
                                                      Ex∼X [ j=1 xij ]
                                                       e
                                                                               2
                                                         =E
                                                          e x∼X
                                                                i1 ,...,it−1 [xi ] = Pr[A(Xi1 ,...,it−1 ) = i].

Therefore
                Ψ(Xi1 ,...,it−1 ) = H(A(Xi1 ,...,it−1 )) = H(At | A1 = i1 , . . . , At−1 = it−1 ),
and the claim follows.

Putting things together. Set
                                                                     
                                  ε                           t log d
                            δ := √         and       R :=               + 1.
                                 2 2                            2δ 2
We now imitate the BKS combining algorithm, but with the corrected entropy decrement.
                                                        (s)         (s)
    Start with X (0) := X. At stage s, let A(s) (X), A1 , . . . , At , and Ψ(X (s) ) denote the objects
associated with the current pseudodistribution X (s) . If
                                   (s)      (s)     (s)          (s) 
                            dH {A1 · · · At }, {A1 } · · · {At } ≤ δ,

                                                           77
then Lemma B.2 yields a unit vector x∗ with
                                         √
                          M (x∗ ) ≥ ν − 2 2 δ ∥M ∥ ≥ ν − ε∥M ∥,
and we stop. Otherwise, direct rounding fails at stage s, so Corollary B.4 gives a tuple
 (s)          (s)
i1 , . . . , it−1 ∈ [d] such that
                                        (s)                                           2δ 2
                                                              ≤ Ψ(X (s) ) −
                                                          
                                  Ψ X (s)           (s)                                    .
                                        i1    ,...,it−1                                t
We then set
                                                                   (s)
                                         X (s+1) := X (s)                  (s)    .
                                                                   i1 ,...,it−1

    If direct rounding were to fail for every stage s = 0, 1, . . . , R − 1, then repeated application
of Corollary B.4 would give
                                                   2δ 2                2δ 2
                       Ψ(X (R) ) ≤ Ψ(X (0) ) − R ·       ≤ log d − R ·        < 0,
                                                     t                  t
which is impossible because entropy is always nonnegative. Hence some stage must succeed, and
the resulting vector x∗ satisfies M (x∗ ) ≥ ν − ε.
    Each conditioning step reweights by the square monomial t−1     j=1 xij , whose degree is 2(t − 1).
                                                                            2
                                                                   Q

Hence after s rounds, the total degree loss is 2s(t − 1). To keep direct rounding available
at stage s, we still need level at least 2t at that stage. Therefore it is enough to start with
D ≥ 2t + 2(t − 1)R. By our choice of R,
                                                 2        
                                                   t log d
                                         D=O                 .
                                                      ε2
Thus, we have completed the proof of Theorem 8.1.


C     Omitted proofs
C.1    Omitted proofs in Section 3
We first show the multiplicativity of stoquastic separable values of product Hermitian matrices:

Lemma 3.9 (Stoquastic separable values of product Hermitian matrices are multiplicative, re-
stated). Let M
Q
                             ′
                Q and ′M be entrywise non-negative product Hermitian matrices of dimensions
   i∈[k] di and  i∈[k] di , respectively, and suppose that these matrices admit the product decompo-
sitions
                              M = M1 ⊗· · ·⊗Mk and M ′ = M1′ ⊗· · ·⊗Mk′ ,                       (3.7)
where each factor Mi and Mi′ is Hermitian and entrywise non-negative for i ∈ [k]. Then the
stoquastic separable value is multiplicative under tensor products, namely
              hSep+ (d1 d′ ,··· ,dk d′ ) M ⊗M ′ = hSep+ (d1 ,··· ,dk ) (M ) · hSep+ (d′ ,··· ,d′ ) (M ′ ).
                                               
                         1           k                                                1        k


Proof. For simplicity, we prove only the case where k = 2, and the same argument directly
extends to general k. Similar to Proposition 3.7, it suffices to consider only non-negative quantum
states. Also, the lower bound is straightforward, following the same argument as that used for
the corresponding part of the proof of Lemma 3.8.
    We now establish the upper bound. Let the operator M act on quantum registers A and B,
and let the operator M ′ act on quantum registers A′ and B′ . After regrouping the registers as
AA′ and BB′ , we obtain
                          MAB ⊗ MA′ ′ B′ = (M1 ⊗ M1′ )AA′ ⊗ (M2 ⊗ M2′ )BB′




                                                              78
from Equation (3.7). Then it follows that:
           hSep+ (d1 d′ ,d2 d′ ) (M ⊗M ′ )
                        1     2

       =                    max                ⟨ϕ1 |(M1 ⊗ M1′ )|ϕ1 ⟩ · ⟨ϕ2 |(M2 ⊗ M2′ )|ϕ2 ⟩
           |ϕ1 ⟩∈S+ (d1 d1 ), |ϕ2 ⟩∈S+ (d2 d′2 )
                            ′


       ≤ λmax (M1 ⊗ M1′ ) · λmax (M2 ⊗ M2′ )
       ≤ λmax (M1 ) · λmax (M2 ) · λmax (M1′ ) · λmax (M2′ )
             max ⟨ψ1 |⊗⟨ψ2 |(M1 ⊗M2 )|ψ1 ⟩⊗|ψ2 ⟩ · max ψ1′ ⊗ ψ2′ M1′ ⊗M2′ ψ1′ ⊗ ψ2′
                                                                         
       =
           |ψ1 ⟩,|ψ2 ⟩                            |ψ1 ⟩,|ψ2 ⟩
                                                    ′     ′


       = hSep+ (d1 ,d2 ) (M ) · hSep+ (d′ ,d′ ) (M ′ ).
                                               1   2

Here, the fourth line follows from Theorem 3 in [Gan00, Section VIII.3], which states that the
absolute value of each eigenvalue of an entrywise non-negative matrix A is at most the largest
eigenvalue λmax (A). The fifth line uses the fact that λmax (A) = max|ψ⟩ ⟨ψ|A|ψ⟩ = ⟨ψ⋆ |A|ψ⋆ ⟩ for
some non-negative unit vector |ψ⋆ ⟩ that attains the optimum.

   Similar to the notion of separable in [HM13], one may wonder whether Lemma 3.9 extends to
convex combinations of such matrices, which we refer to as product-convex Hermitian matrices.
An explicit counterexample can be found in an earlier version of our work [LW26, Remark 3.10].

   Next, we prove that SepRCDk is complete for StoqMA(k ):
Lemma 3.13 (SepRCDk is StoqMA(k )-complete, restated). For all efficiently computable func-
tions α(n) and β(n), and every efficiently computable positive integer-valued function k(n) ≤
poly(n), such that 0 ≤ β(n) < α(n) ≤ 1 and α(n) − β(n) ≥ 1/poly(n), we have
                                                             
                                                 1+α 1+β
                    SepRCDk [α, β] is StoqMA k,        ,        -complete.
                                                   2       2
In particular, for any stoquastic verification circuit Vx , the hard instance is given by the reversible
circuit pair R0 = Vx† XO Vx := Γx and R1 = I.
Proof. The StoqMA(k ) containment follows directly from applying the branch-overlap test
(Lemma 2.13) to the reversible circuit pair (R0 , R1 ), with the input state chosen as
                                                   |Ψ⟩ = |ψ1 ⟩ ⊗ · · · ⊗ |ψk ⟩.
    The StoqMA(k )-hardness follows from [Liu21, Figure 2]. Let Vx be a stoquastic verifier
corresponding to x ∈ (Iyes , Ino ), where (Iyes , Ino ) ∈ StoqMA k, 1+a
                                                                     2 , 2 . Let the reversible
                                                                          1+b
                                               †
circuits R0 and R1 be defined by R0 := Vx XO Vx and R1 := I. Using the construction A
for these choices of R0 and R1 to define a new stoquastic verifier Vbx , Lemma 2.13 yields the
corresponding acceptance probability as follows:
                     h                i 1 ⟨R |R ⟩
                                                    0 1
                   Pr Vbx accepts ψ ′ = +                                               (C.1a)
                                          2          2
                                                          X + I 
                                                             O
                                        = ψ ′ ⟨0̄|⟨+̄|Vx†          Vx ψ ′ |0̄⟩|+̄⟩      (C.1b)
                                                              2
                                        = Pr Vx accepts ψ ′ .                           (C.1c)
                                                               

This identity completes the proof, as desired.

C.2    Omitted proof of the generalized birthday paradox
Lemma 5.12 (A generalized birthday paradox, restated). Let Ω be a finite set of size n, µ be a
probability distribution on Ω, and B ⊆ Ω × Ω be a symmetric relation representing the “birthday
collisions.” For some subset Ω0 ⊆ Ω, if for some parameters α, β > 0 and some integer D > 0,
the following are true

                                                               79
 (1) µ(x) ≤ α/n for every x ∈ Ω0 ;
 (2) for every x ∈ Ω0 , the number of y ∈ Ω0 with (x, y) ∈ B is at most D;
 (3) the bad-pair weight on Ω0 satisfies
                                                X                          β
                                   λ :=                       µ(x)µ(y) ≥     .
                                                                           n
                                          (x,y)∈B∩(Ω0 ×Ω0 )

Then for any constant ε > 0, there is a large enough C such that the following holds for all
                                                                             √
sufficiently large n: Let X1 , . . . , XK be i.i.d. samples from µ with K = C n,
                        h                                              i
                      Pr ∃i < j such that (Xi , Xj ) ∈ B ∩ (Ω0 × Ω0 ) ≥ 1 − ε.

Proof. Let Iij be the indicator that (Xi , Xj ) ∈ B ∩ (Ω0 × Ω0 ), and
                                                 X
                                       Z :=            Iij .
                                                 1≤i<j≤K
                                               √
               K
Then E[Z] = 2 λ. Because λ ≥ β/n and K = C n, we have E[Z] ≥ βC 2 /3 for all sufficiently
                 

large n.
    We claim that E[Z 2 ] = O(1) + O(E[Z]2 ), with constants depending only on α, β, D, C.
Expand                             X            X
                              Z2 =    Iij + 2         Iij Ikℓ .                      (C.2)
                                          i<j         (i,j)<(k,ℓ)

There are three kinds of terms in the above equation:
Diagonal terms. These contribute exactly E[Z].
Disjoint pairs of pairs. If {i, j} ∩ {k, ℓ} = ∅, then Iij and Ikℓ are independent, so
                                            E[Iij Ikℓ ] = λ2 .
The total contribution of all disjoint pairs of pairs is therefore O(K 4 λ2 ), which is O(E[Z]2 ).
Overlapping pairs of pairs. It remains to bound terms such as E[Iij Iik ]. Define
                                            X             Dα
                                 s(x) :=           µ(y) ≤     ,
                                                           n
                                           y∈Ω0 :(x,y)∈B

where the inequality is due to our assumption (i) and (ii). Hence
                                  X             Dα X                 Dα
                    E[Iij Iik ] =   µ(x)s(x)2 ≤           µ(x)s(x) =    λ.
                                                  n                   n
                                x∈Ω0                       x∈Ω0

Because λ ≤ Dα/n as well, this contribution is O(1/n2 ). There are only O(K 3 ) = O(n3/2 )
overlapping pairs of pairs, so their total contribution is O(K 3 /n2 ) = o(1).
   Combining all contributions,
                                 E[Z 2 ] ≤ E[Z] + O(E[Z]2 ) + o(1).
Choose C large enough so that E[Z] ≥ 1 for all sufficiently large n. Then, for large n,
                                           E[Z 2 ] ≤ A E[Z]2
for some constant A = A(α, β, D, C) > 0. Paley–Zygmund now yields
                                                     E[Z]2  1
                                       Pr[Z > 0] ≥      2
                                                           ≥ .
                                                     E[Z ]  A
    To further amplify the above probability to 1 − ε, we increase the number of samples by a
factor of log(1/ε). More precisely, we repeat the experiment in O(log(1/ε)) independent blocks


                                                   80
and accept if any block finds a bad pair; this procedure reduces the failure probability to at
most ε. For constant ε, this procedure only changes the absolute constant C. This gives the
desired conclusion.

C.3    Omitted proofs of rETH-optimality of the BPTIME upper bound for
       StoqMA
Lemma 6.4 (Proof-length optimality under randomized ETH, restated). Let ℓ(n) be an effi-
ciently computable positive integer-valued function satisfying ℓ(n) ≤ poly(n). Assume that
                                                                       
                       StoqMAℓ J1, 1, 1/2K ⊆ BPTIME 2o(ℓ) · poly(|V |) ,

where |V | denotes the description size of the underlying stoquastic verification circuit V . Then
this randomized upper bound refutes randomized ETH.

Proof. Let φ be an n-variable SAT instance. We now provide an efficient construction of a
single-prover stoquastic verification circuit with witness length ℓ(n) = n, completeness 1, and
soundness 1/2. The witness register W consists of n qubits and is interpreted as an assignment
a ∈ {0, 1}n . Let Q be a single-qubit register initialized to |+⟩, let F be a single-qubit flag register
initialized to |0⟩, and let A be a poly(n)-qubit work register initialized to |0̄⟩ that includes a
single-qubit register B.
    The stoquastic verification circuit Vφ does the following:

 (1) Compute the bit SATφ (a) = I[φ(a) is satisfied] and write the resulting bit into B.

 (2) Apply XB ToffoliQ,B→F XB , which flips F when Q contains |1⟩ and φ(a) is unsatisfied.

 (3) Uncompute the work register and measure Q in the Hadamard basis.

Correctness analysis. For a basis witness |a⟩, if φ(a) is satisfied, then Vφ accepts with probability
                                                                                             √
1. If φ(a) is unsatisfied, then the resulting state in the registers (Q, F) is (|00⟩ + |11⟩)/ 2, and
thus Vφ accepts with probability 1/2.
    Now let us move on to the general case. Consider the witness state |ψ⟩ = a∈{0,1}n αa |a⟩,
                                                                                     P

where a |αa |2 = 1. By linearity, the acceptance probability can be expressed as
       P

                                            1 1              X
                      Pr[Vφ accepts |ψ⟩] = +                               |αa |2 .
                                            2 2            n
                                                    a∈{0,1} ∧ φ(a) is satisfied

    Consequently, if φ is satisfiable, a satisfying assignment basis state makes the verifier accept
with probability 1; whereas if φ is unsatisfiable, then every witness is accepted with proba-
bility exactly 1/2. Therefore, φ is efficiently mapped to a stoquastic verification circuit for
StoqMAℓ J1, 1, 1/2K with ℓ(n) = n and |Vφ | = poly(n). Together with the hypothesis, this reduc-
tion yields a randomized 2o(n) poly(n)-time algorithm for SAT, which contradicts randomized
ETH [DHM+ 14, Section 1.3] (see also [CRTY23, Hypothesis 1]).




                                                  81
