                                         Impossibility Results for Strong Linearizability:
                                         The Difficulty of Consistent Refereeing
                                         Hagit Attiya # 
                                         Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
                                         Armando Castañeda # 
                                         Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM)
                                         Constantin Enea # 
                                         LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, CNRS and Institut Polytechnique de Paris

                                               Abstract
                                          This paper studies the relation between agreement and strongly linearizable implementations of
                                         various objects. This leads to new results about implementations of concurrent objects from various
arXiv:2506.18401v3 [cs.DC] 10 Jun 2026




                                         primitives including window registers, interfering primitives and stacks.
                                              We identify that lock-free, respectively, wait-free, strongly linearizable implementations of several
                                         concurrent objects entail a form of agreement that does not require full consensus but cannot be
                                         implemented in a strongly-linearizable manner with combinations of non-universal primitives. In
                                         both cases, lock-free and wait-free, this form of agreement requires a distinguished process to referee
                                         a competition that involves all other processes. Our results show that consistent refereeing of such
                                         competitions (i.e., once resolved, the outcome cannot be revised in any extension of the execution)
                                         requires high coordination power.
                                              More specifically, two contest objects are defined and used to help characterize coordination
                                         constraints imposed by strong linearizability in lock-free and wait-free implementations, respectively.
                                         Both objects are strictly weaker than consensus, in the sense that they have a wait-free linearizable
                                         (in fact, decisively linearizable) implementation from reads and writes.
                                              The contest objects capture strong linearizability in two complementary ways. First, they admit
                                         strongly linearizable implementations from several high-level objects such as queues, snapshots, and
                                         counters, so impossibility results for the contest objects immediately carry over to these objects.
                                         Second, they admit powerful impossibility results for strong linearizability that involve window
                                         registers, interfering primitives and stacks, which are non-universal.


                                          1      Introduction
                                         A key way to construct complex distributed systems is through modular composition of linearizable
                                         concurrent objects [17]. Yet linearizable objects do not always compose correctly with randomized
                                         programs [13,14], or with programs that should not leak information [7]. This deficiency is addressed
                                         by strong linearizability [13], a restriction of linearizability, which ensures that properties holding
                                         when a concurrent program is executed in conjunction with an atomic object, continue to hold
                                         when the program is executed with a strongly linearizable implementation of the object. Strong
                                         linearizability was shown [7, 12] to preserve hyperproperties [10], such as security properties and
                                         probability distributions of reaching particular program states.
                                             The universal implementation of concurrent objects from compare&swap [16], is strongly lin-
                                         earizable [13]. But any attempt to reduce the usage of costly, hardware-dependent compare&swap
                                         has been shown to be challenging and require subtle algorithms (see, for example, [18]).
                                             There have been several impossibility results showing there are no strongly linearizable implemen-
                                         tations of common objects from widely-available primitives, like read, write, swap and test&set, even
                                         when they have linearizable implementations from the same primitives. For example, max registers,
                                         snapshots, or monotonic counters do not have wait-free strongly linearizable implementations, even
                                         with multi-writer registers [11]. Single-writer registers do not suffice even for lock-free strongly
                                         linearizable multi-writer registers, max registers, snapshots, or counters [15]. While queues and
                                         stacks admit lock-free and wait-free linearizable implementations from read, write, test&set and
2   Impossibility Results for Strong Linearizability


    swap [1, 17], there are no lock-free strongly linearizable implementations of those objects from the
    same primitives [4].
        Strong linearizability seems to have a close connection with the cornerstone consensus task.
    Indeed, most of the impossibility results rely on valency arguments [6, Chapter 7], heavily used
    to study agreement tasks, in particular, consensus. These proofs are ad-hoc and, in some cases,
    quite complicated. Other proofs [4] are by reduction from agreement tasks, like set agreement, a
    generalization of consensus, but they rely on the non-trivial assumption that the underlying shared
    memory base-objects or primitives are readable.1

    Our results and their ramifications
    This paper aims to elucidate the relation between agreement and strongly linearizable implementations
    of various objects. By doing so, we are able to derive a host of new results about implementations of
    concurrent objects from various primitives, including in particular, w-window registers [19], whose
    consensus number is exactly w, and atomic stacks, whose consensus number is 2, that were not
    considered in prior work.
         We identify that lock-free and wait-free strongly linearizable implementations of several concurrent
    objects entail a form of agreement that is weaker than consensus but impossible to strongly linearizable
    implement with combinations of non-universal primitives. In both cases, lock-free and wait-free, this
    form of agreement requires a distinguished process to referee a competition that involves all other
    processes. Our main results, explained below, show that consistent refereeing of such competitions
    (i.e. the outcome of the competition does not change in extensions of the current execution, as in
    strongly linearizable implementations) requires high coordination power.
         More in detail, we define two contest objects which are strictly weaker than consensus and helps
    to derive impossibility results for lock-free or wait-free strongly linearizable implementations of
    several concurrent objects. These objects are strictly weaker than consensus, since, unlike consensus,
    they have a wait-free linearizable implementation from reads and writes. The implementations are in
    fact decisive linearizable [8]. Furthermore, the objects admit strongly linearizable implementations
    from many “high-level” objects like queues, snapshots, counters, etc, and therefore, impossibility
    results about them have many interesting corollaries and also admit powerful impossibility results for
    strong linearizability that involve stacks, window registers and many non-universal synchronization
    primitives.
         For impossibility results that concern lock-freedom, we define a contest object in which, similarly
    to id-consensus [9], the id of one among several competitor processes is picked. However, in the
    contest object a single, non-competing process is the referee who picks the winner and is the only one
    knowing this information. Unlike agreement tasks, competitor processes in a contest object do not
    need to agree on an outcome and always return the same response; only a single distinguished process
    observes the result of the competition. Indeed, the contest object admits a decisive linearizable
    implementation from reads and writes (Theorem 3).
         Our first main contribution is that there is no lock-free strongly linearizable implementation for n
    processes of a contest object from atomic stacks, (n − 2)-window registers and interfering primitives
    (Theorem 5). The class of interfering primitives [16] has consensus number two, and includes read,
    write, test&set, swap, among other useful primitives. The proof relies on a simple valency argument.
    It shows that even relatively strong but non-universal synchronization primitives do not suffice for
    lock-free strongly linearizable contest implementations. We complement this impossibility result by
    presenting a wait-free strongly linearizable implementation of a contest object from (n − 1)-window
    registers (Theorem 4).
         Since a queue can be used in a wait-free strongly linearizable implementation of a contest object,


    1
        Readability might change the coordination power of a high-level object or primitive. For example,
        queues and stacks, whose consensus numbers are both two, have infinite consensus number when read
        operations are added.
Attiya, Castañeda and Enea                                                                                 3


it follows that there is no lock-free strongly linearizable implementation of a queue from stacks,
(n − 2)-window registers and interfering primitives (Corollary 12).
    Some very useful objects, including counters, snapshots and max registers, have strongly lin-
earizable implementations for a bounded number of invocations, which are also lock-free. To show
that they do not have wait-free strongly linearizable implementations for an unbounded number
of operations, we define the long-lived contest object. In this object, competitor processes can
participate any number of times in the competition, and the referee must return an integer x such
that every competitor has participated no more than x times so far. Again, this information is
known only by the referee. The long-lived contest object has a wait-free decisively linearizable
implementation from reads and writes (Theorem 13).
    Using a group valency argument [11], we prove that there is no wait-free strongly linearizable
implementation of a long-lived contest object from reads and writes only, for n ≥ 3 (Theorem 25).
We extend this result also to implementations from w-window registers and test&set objects, for
n ≥ 4 and 3w ≤ n (Theorem 30). Since either a counter or a snapshot or a max register or a
fetch&increment or a fetch&add can be used in a wait-free strongly linearizable implementation of a
contest object, this also means there are no wait-free strongly linearizable implementations of these
objects from the same primitives (Corollary 26 and Corollary 31).

Additional related work
If one only requires obstruction-freedom, which ensures an operation to complete only if it executes
alone, then any strongly linearizable object can be implemented from single-writer registers [15].
    When considering the stronger property of lock-freedom, which requires that as long as some
operation is pending, some operation completes, single-writer registers are not sufficient for imple-
menting strongly linearizable multi-writer registers, max registers, snapshots, or counters [15]. If the
implementations can use multi-writer registers, though, it is possible to get lock-free implementations
of max registers, snapshots, and monotonic counters [11], as well as of objects whose operations
commute or overwrite [20].
    It was also shown [5] that there is no lock-free implementation of a queue or a stack with
universal helping, from objects whose readable versions have consensus number less than the number
of processes, e.g., readable test&set. The proof is by reduction to consensus, which is possible due
to the readability assumption. Universal helping is a formalization of helping mechanisms used in
universal constructions, and that can be understood as an eventual version of strong linearizability.
Using a similar reduction, it is shown that lock-free strongly linearizable queues and stacks are
impossible from interfering primitives [4]. Again, the reduction is based on the assumption that base
objects are readable. Readability does not change the consensus number of interfering primitives.
Through a valency argument (instead of a reduction), we extend this impossibility result for queues to
encompass (n−2)-window registers and stacks (Corollary 12), and remove the readability assumption.
    For the even stronger property of wait-freedom, which requires every operation to complete, it is
possible to implement strongly linearizable bounded max registers from multi-writer registers [15],
but it is impossible to implement strongly linearizable max registers, snapshots, or monotonic
counters [11] even with multi-writer registers. The impossibility in [11], based on group valency
arguments, is for counters and then extended, via a reduction, to max registers and snapshots. Our
impossibility is inspired by the group valency argument used in [11], and for the case of four or more
processes, it strengthens the result to encompass test&set and window registers.
    It has been shown that, for any number of processes, there are wait-free linearizable implementa-
tions of fetch&increment and fetch&add from reads, writes and test&set [2, 3]. Our results show that
this is no longer true if we consider strong linearizability instead, and even if w-window registers are
available, with 3w ≤ n.
4   Impossibility Results for Strong Linearizability


     2      Model of Computation
    We consider a standard shared memory system with n asynchronous processes, p0 , . . . , pn−1 , which
    may crash at any time during an execution. Processes communicate with each other by applying
    atomic operations to shared base objects.
         A (high-level) concurrent object is defined by a state machine consisting of a set of states, a set
    of operations, and a set of transitions between states. Such a specification is known as sequential.
    An implementation of an object T is a distributed algorithm A consisting of a local state machine
    Ap , for each process p. Ap specifies which primitive operations on base objects p applies and which
    local computations p performs in order to return a response when it invokes an operation of T . Each
    of these base object operation invocations and local computations is a step. For the rest of this
    section, fix an implementation A of an object T .
         We use w-window registers, whose consensus number is exactly w [19]. Specifically, a w-window
    register [19] stores the sequence of the last w values written to it (or the last x values when only
    x < w values have been written). A write with input v appends v at the end of the sequence and
    removes the first one if the sequence is already of size w. A read operation returns the current
    sequence. A standard register is a 1-window register. Interfering primitives [16] include read, write,
    test&set, swap and fetch&add operations, among others. More specifically, at any state of a register,
    application of any pair of interfering primitives either commute or one overwrites the other.
         A configuration C of the system contains the states of all shared base objects and processes. In
    an initial configuration, base objects and processes are in their initial states. Given a configuration
    C and a process p, p(C) is the configuration after p takes its next step in C. Moreover, p0 (C) = C
    and for every n ∈ N, pn+1 (C) = p(pn (C)). Note that the next step p takes in C depends only on its
    local state in C.
         An execution of A starting from C0 is a (possibly infinite) sequence C0 e1 C1 e2 C2 · · · , where each
    ei is a step of a process, or an invocation/response of a high-level operation by a process and if ei is
    a step, then Ci+1 = ei (Ci ); furthermore, the sequence satisfies:
     1. Each process can invoke a new (high-level) operation only when its previous operation (if there
         is any) has a corresponding response, i.e., executions are well-formed.
     2. A process takes steps only between an invocation and a response.
     3. For any invocation of process p, the steps of p between that invocation and the following response
         of p, if there is one, correspond to steps of p that are specified by Ap .

         An execution β is an extension of a finite execution α if α is a prefix of β. A configuration C is
    reachable if there is a finite execution α starting from an initial configuration whose last configuration
    is C; we say that α ends with C. A configuration C ′ is reachable from a configuration C if there is a
    finite execution starting from C that ends with C ′ . Two configurations C and C ′ are indistinguishable
    to process p if the state of every base object and the state of p are the same in C and C ′ .
         An operation in an execution is complete if both its invocation and response appear in the
    execution. An operation is pending if only its invocation appears in the execution. An implementation
    is wait-free if every process completes each of its operations in a finite number of its steps; formally,
    if a process executes infinitely many steps in an execution, it completes infinitely many operations.
    An implementation is lock-free if whenever processes execute steps, at least one of the operations
    terminates; formally, in every infinite execution, infinitely many operations are complete. Thus, a
    wait-free implementation is lock-free but not necessarily vice versa.
         In an execution, an operation op precedes another operation op′ if the response of op appears
    before the invocation of op′ .
         Linearizability [17] is the standard notion used to identify a correct implementation. Roughly
    speaking, an implementation is linearizable if each operation appears to take effect atomically at
    some time between its invocation and response, hence operations’ real-time order is maintained.
    Formally, let A be an implementation of an object T . An execution α of A is linearizable if there is
    a sequential execution S of T (i.e., a sequence of matching invocation-response pairs, starting with
    an invocation) such that:
Attiya, Castañeda and Enea                                                                                   5


 1. S contains every complete operation in α and some of the pending operations in α. Hence, the
    output values in the matching responses of an invocation in S and the complete operations in α
    are the same.
 2. If op precedes op′ in α, then op precedes op′ in S; namely, S respects the real-time order in α.
A is linearizable if all its executions are linearizable.
    An implementation of a data type is strongly linearizable [13] if linearizations of executions can
be defined by appending operations to linearizations of prefixes. Formally, there is a prefix-closed
function L mapping each execution to a linearization such that if an execution α is a prefix of
an execution β, then L(α) is a prefix of L(β). Decisive linearizability [8] is a weakening of strong
linearizability which requires that there is a function L mapping each execution to a linearization,
such that if an execution α is a prefix of an execution β, then L(α) is a subsequence of L(β).2


    3     Motivating Example: Impossibility of Lock-Free Strongly
          Linearizable Queues from Interfering Primitives
We start with a crisp example that demonstrates how strongly linearizable objects can be used to
pick a decision among a set of competing values, and that this property can be used to show they
cannot be implemented from interfering primitives.
▶ Theorem 1. There is no lock-free strongly linearizable queue implementation from interfering
primitives, for four or more processes.
Proof. Towards a contradiction, suppose that there is such an implementation A. Let us consider all
failure-free executions where process pi , i ∈ {0, 1, 2}, executes a single enqueue(i) operation, and p3
executes a single dequeue() operation starting once at least one enqueue operation is completed. By
lock-freedom of A, eventually the operation of p3 starts and completes. By the linearizability of A,
it is not possible that p3 ’s dequeue operation returns empty.
     A configuration C is multivalent if for distinct values v, v ′ ∈ {0, 1, 2}, there are extensions of C
in which p3 ’s dequeue returns v and v ′ , respectively. A configuration C is v-univalent, v ∈ {0, 1, 2},
if in all extensions of C where p3 ’s dequeue returns a value, the value is v. Recall that in both cases
we focus on executions where p3 ’s dequeue starts after at least one enqueue is completed.
     For i ∈ {0, 1, 2}, consider the following execution αi : process pi executes until completion
enqueue(i), and then p3 executes dequeue() until completion. Execution αi exists due to lock-
freedom of A, and the dequeue operation of p3 returns i, due to linearizability of A. This implies
that the initial configuration C0 is multivalent.
     Since the initial configuration is multivalent, it follows that every reachable configuration is
either 0-univalent, 1-univalent, 2-univalent or multivalent; these properties are mutually exclusive.
     It is obvious that if p3 completes its dequeue, then the configuration is univalent. Interestingly,
with strong linearizability the same holds also when one of the other process completes its enqueue
operation. Note that this is the only place where strong linearizability is used.
▷ Claim 2.     A reachable configuration in which the enqueue of p0 , p1 or p2 is complete is univalent.
Proof. Consider a prefix-closed linearization function L of A, which is guaranteed to exist due to
strong linearizability of A. Let α be an execution that ends with configuration C, in which at least
one enqueue operation completes. We observe the following cases:
    The dequeue operation of p3 , denoted op, appears in L(α) returning value v ∈ {0, 1, 2}. If op is
    complete then clearly v is the non-empty value that p3 returns in every extension of C. Thus C
    is univalent. If op is pending, then consider an extension C ′ of C, and let α′ be an execution that
    extends α and ends at C ′ . Since L is prefix-closed, L(α) is prefix of L(α · α′ ), hence op appears
    in L(α · α′ ) returning v. Therefore, if op is completed in C ′ , it returns v. Thus C is univalent.


2
    A sequence σ is a sub-sequence of another sequence σ ′ if σ can be obtained from σ ′ by deleting some
    symbols.
6   Impossibility Results for Strong Linearizability


         The dequeue operation of p3 does not appear in L(α). Let v the value enqueued by the first
         enqueue operation in L(α). Consider any extension C ′ of C such that the dequeue operation of
         p3 completes, returning u, and let α′ be an execution that extends α and ends at C ′ . Since L
         is prefix-closed, L(α) is prefix of L(α · α′ ), hence v is the first enqueue value in L(α · α′ ), from
         which follows that u = v, due to linearizability. Thus C is univalent.                               ◀

        Starting with the initial configuration C0 , which is multivalent, we let p0 , p1 and p2 take steps as
    long as the next configuration is multivalent. This execution cannot go forever since the operations
    of p0 , p1 and p2 eventually terminate, due to lock-freedom, and every configuration where an enqueue
    is terminated is univalent, due to the claim above. Thus, we reach a critical configuration C such
    that (1) p0 , p1 and p2 are active, (2) p3 is idle, (3) C is multivalent, and (4) a step of one of
    distinct processes p and q makes the configuration v-univalent, and a step of the other makes the
    configuration u-univalent, with u =  ̸ v. Without loss of generality, let p and q be processes p0 and p1 .
        Let Ri , i ∈ {0, 1}, be the base object pi is about to access with primitive fi , in the configuration C.
    We complete the proof by considering the following cases:
        R0 = ̸ R1 . This case leads to a contradiction because the configurations p1 p0 (C) and p0 p1 (C)
        have different valencies, and both are indistinguishable to p2 and p3 , which implies that p3
        cannot return distinct values in the extensions of p1 p0 (C) and p0 p1 (C) in which first p2 runs
        solo until it completes its enqueue, and then p3 starts and completes its dequeue.
        R0 = R1 and f0 and f1 commute. We reach a contradiction as well, because p1 p0 (C) and p0 p1 (C)
        are indistinguishable to p2 and p3 .
        R0 = R1 , and without loss of generality, suppose that f0 overwrites f1 . Therefore, configurations
        p0 (C) and p0 p1 (C) are indistinguishable to p2 and p3 , which is a contradiction.                    ◀


     4       Impossibility of Lock-Free Strongly Linearizable Implementations:
             The One-Shot Contest Object
    We extend the example of a queue by considering a contest object, defined next. The contest
    sequential, one-shot object provides two operations, compete() that can be invoked by processes
    p1 , . . . , pn−1 , the competitors, and decide() that can be invoked by process p0 , the referee. The
    specification is that compete() always returns true, and decide() returns the index of the first process
    that executed compete(), or f alse if there is no such operation. The contest object is weaker than a
    consensus object, as it can be implemented from reads and writes.

    ▶ Theorem 3. There is a wait-free (decisively) linearizable contest implementation from reads and
    writes, for n ≥ 2 processes.

    Proof. Consider the following read/write wait-free implementation. The processes share a variable X,
    initialized to f alse. Every competitor pi reads X and if the read value is f alse, it writes i in X and
    returns true, otherwise it returns true without writing to X. The referee returns the value it reads
    from X.
        We argue that the implementation is decisively linearizable. Consider any finite execution α of
    the algorithm. Pending operations of α are treated as follows. For any pending compete() operation
    in α, it is completed if it writes to X, otherwise it is removed. If α has a pending decide() operation,
    this operation is removed. For simplicity, let α itself denote the modified execution. Reading α from
    beginning to end, operations are linearized as follows:

         if the current step is a write to X from a compete() operation, there are two sub-cases: if there is
         no decide() in the linearization so far, the compete() operation is linearized at the first position
         of the linearization, otherwise it is appended to the linearization.
         if the current step is a read of X returning a process index from a compete() operation, then
         this is appended to the linearization (this compete() operation will not write to X)
         if the current step is a read of X from a decide() operation, then this is appended to the
         linearization,
Attiya, Castañeda and Enea                                                                                     7


    Observe that all compete() operations that write to X are concurrent. Thus, the linearization
just defined respects the real-time order of operations in α. The linearization is valid for the contest
object because, as operations are linearized reading α from beginning to end, at all times X contains
the index of the competitor whose compete() appears first in the linearization, or f alse if there is
no such operation, which makes the response of decide() correct.
    This is decisively linearizable because the order between operations already linearized in α does
not change as α is extended with more steps.                                                          ◀

    A strongly linearizable contest object can be implemented from (n − 1)-window registers.

▶ Theorem 4. There is a wait-free strongly linearizable contest implementation from (n − 1)-window
registers, for n ≥ 2 processes.

Proof. Consider an implementation where the processes share an (n − 1)-window register X,
initialized to ⊥, and when a competitor pi invokes compete(), writes i in X, and when the referee
invokes decide(), it reads X and returns the index of the first process in the read value, or f alse if
the read value is ⊥.
     The implementation is obviously wait-free. To prove strong linearizability, in any execution
decide() operations are linearized at the step where the referee reads X, and a compete() operation
is linearized at the step where the competitor writes in X. Strong linearizability follows from the
observation that there are n − 1 competitors and every competitor writes at most once in X, and
the assumption that X is atomic.                                                                    ◀

    In contrast, (n − 2)-window registers do not suffice to implement a strongly linearizable contest
object, even together with interfering primitives.

▶ Theorem 5. There is no wait-free strongly linearizable contest implementation from interfering
primitives and (n − 2)-window registers and atomic stacks, for n ≥ 4 processes.

Proof. By contradiction, suppose that there is such an implementation A. We will reason about all
failure-free executions where each competitor process p1 , . . . , pn−1 executes its compete() operation,
and the referee p0 starts its decide() operation once at least one compete() operation is completed.

▷ Claim 6.   p0 eventually completes its operation, obtaining a non-f alse value.

Proof. Since p1 , . . . , pn−1 are correct and A is wait-free, eventually their compete() operations
complete. Thus, eventually the operation of p0 starts and completes, and due to linearizability of A,
the operation of p0 returns the index of a process.                                                ◀

    A configuration C is multivalent if there are two distinct values v, v ′ ∈ {1, . . . , n − 1}, such that
there are two extensions from C in which p0 returns v and p0 returns v ′ , respectively. A configuration
C is v-univalent, v ∈ {1, . . . , n − 1}, if in all extensions from C where p0 returns a value, the value
is v. Recall that in both definitions we focus on executions where the referee starts once at least one
competitor completes.

▷ Claim 7.   The initial configuration C0 is multivalent.

Proof. For i ∈ {1, . . . , n−1}, consider the following execution αi : process pi executes until completion
compete(), and then p0 executes decide() until completion. Execution αi exists as A is wait-free,
and the decide() operation of p0 returns i, due to linearizability of A.                                  ◀

    The next claim follows from the definitions and the fact that the initial configuration is multivalent.

▷ Claim 8. A reachable configuration is either v-univalent, for some v ∈ {1, . . . , n−1}, or multivalent;
furthermore, the properties are mutually exclusive.

     It is obvious that if p0 completes its decide() operation in a configuration C, then C is univalent.
Interestingly, with strong linearizability the same holds also when one of the competitors complete
its compete() operation. The proof of the next claim is similar to the proof of Claim 2 above.
8   Impossibility Results for Strong Linearizability


    ▷ Claim 9.    Any reachable configuration where some compete() operation completes is univalent.

    Proof. Consider any prefix-closed linearization function L of A, which is guaranteed to exist due
    to strong linearizability of A. Let C be any reachable configuration with at least one completed
    compete() operation, and let α be an execution that ends at C. We observe the following cases:
        The decide() operation of p0 appears in L(α) returning value v (̸= f alse). Such operation of p0 ,
        denoted op, might be pending or complete in C. If op is complete then clearly v is the non-f alse
        value that p0 returns in every extension of C, as op is already complete. Thus, C is v-univalent.
        If op is pending, then consider an extension C ′ of C, and let α′ be an execution that extends α
        and ends at C ′ . Since L is prefix-closed, L(α) is prefix of L(α · α′ ), hence op′ appears in L(α · α′ )
        returning v. Therefore, if op is completed in C ′ , it returns v. Thus, C is v-univalent.
        The decide() operation of p0 does not appear in L(α). Let v the process index of the first
        compete() operation in L(α), whose existence is guaranteed by the hypothesis of the lemma
        and since L is a linearization function. Consider any extension C ′ of C such that the decide()
        operation of p0 returns value u (̸= f alse), and let α′ be an execution that extends α and ends
        at C ′ . Since L is prefix-closed, L(α) is prefix of L(α · α′ ), hence v is the process index of the
        first compete() in L(α · α′ ), from which follows that u = v, due to linearizability. Thus, C is
        v-univalent.                                                                                          ◀

        We now prove the existence of a reachable configuration C that is critical, that is:

    ▷ Claim 10. There is a reachable configuration C such that
    1. (1) p1 , . . . , pn−1 are active,
    2. (2) p0 is idle,
    3. (3) C is multivalent,
    4. (4) the step of any pi , 1 ≤ i ≤ n − 1, makes the next configuration vi -univalent,
    5. (5) for some processes pi and pj , vi ̸= vj .

    Proof. We know that C0 is multivalent. Starting from C0 , we let processes p1 , . . . , pn−1 take steps
    as long as the next configuration is multivalent. This cannot go forever since the operation of some
    process eventually terminates, due to wait-freedom, and every configuration where a compete() of pi
    terminates is univalent. Thus, we can reach a multivalent configuration C where a step of each process
    p1 , . . . , pn−1 makes the next configuration univalent. Let vi the value the configuration becomes
    vi -univalent after the step of pi . Since C is multivalent, it cannot be that v1 = . . . = vn−1 .   ◀

        We can now complete the proof of the theorem. Consider the critical configuration C and let Ri
    and Rj be the base objects pi and pj are about to access in C, through primitives fi and fj . We
    complete the proof by showing a contradiction in each of the following cases, recalling that there are
    at least three competitors (since n ≥ 4):
     1. Ri ̸= Rj . This case leads to a contradiction because configuration pj pi (C) is vi -valent and
        configuration pi pj (C) is vj -valent, but pj pi (C) and pi pj (C) are indistinguishable to p0 and all
        competitors distinct to pi and pj , which implies that p0 cannot output distinct values in the
        extensions of pj pi (C) and pi pj (C) in which a competitor pk ̸= pi , pj runs solo and completes its
        compete() operation, and then p0 starts and completes its decide() operation.
     2. Ri = Rj and is an interfering object:
        a. fi and fj commute. We reach a contradiction too because pj pi (C) and pi pj (C) are indistin-
           guishable to p0 and all competitors distinct to pi and pj .
        b. fi overwrites fj (without loss of generality). Configurations pi (C) and pi pj (C) are indistin-
           guishable to p0 and all competitors distinct to pi and pj , which is a contradiction.
     3. Ri = Rj and is a window register:
        a. At least one of fi or fj is a read. Without loss of generality, suppose fi is a read. We reach
           a contradiction because pj pi (C) and pj (C) are indistinguishable to p0 and all competitors
           distinct to pi and pj .
Attiya, Castañeda and Enea                                                                                             9


   b. Both fi and fj are writes. First we make the following observation. Consider any competi-
      tor pk =    ̸ pi , pj , 1 ≤ k ≤ n, and let vk the value pk (C) is vk -univalent. Let Rk be the base
      object pk is about to access in C, through primitive fk . Since vi ̸= vj , vk is distinct to vi
      or vj . By cases (1) and (3.a), if it is not true that Rk = Ri = Rj and fk is a write, then
      we reach a contradiction (either through pi or pj ). Thus, in C we have that all processes
      p1 , . . . , pn−1 are about to write to the same base object R. Without loss of generality, let us
      assume that pi = p1 and pj = p2 . Since R is an (n − 2)-window register, process p0 and all
      competitors distinct to p1 and p2 cannot distinguish between configurations pn−1 . . . p3 p2 p1 (C)
      and pn−1 . . . p3 p2 (C), which is a contradiction.
4. Ri = Rj and is a stack. Without loss of generality, we assume that in every execution of A,
   every value v is input of at most one push operation.3
   a. Both fi and fj are pop operations. We reach a contradiction in this case because pj pi (C)
      and pi pj (C) are indistinguishable to p0 and all competitors distinct to pi and pj .
   b. Both fi and fj are push operations. Let R denote Ri (= Rj ), and ui and uj be the input
      values of operations fi and fj , respectively. Let pk be any competitor distinct to pi and pj .
      Consider any x ≥ 1 such that pk ’s compete() operation is completed in pxk pj pi (C). Our
      analysis depends on whether pk pops ui or uj from R in pxk pj pi (C):
                                                                                    ′
       i. pk pops ui and uj . Thus, there is 1 ≤ x′ < x such that, in pxk pj pi (C), pk is poised to
           perform a pop operation in R and ui is at the top of R (which implies that pk already
           popped uj from R). Due to the specification of R, neither pk nor p0 can distinguish
                           ′                       ′
           between pxk +1 pj pi (C) and pk pi pxk pj (C), which is a contradiction.
      ii. pk pops uj but not ui . Consider any y ≥ 1 such that p0 ’s decide() operation is completed
           in py0 pxk pj pi (C). Due to the specification of R, if p0 does not pop ui from R in configuration
           py0 pxk pj pi (C), then p0 is in the same local state in that configuration and py0 pxk pj (C), which
           implies that in both configurations p0 ’s operation return the same, but that contradicts
           the properties of C. Thus, it must be that p0 pops ui from R in py0 pxk pj pi (C), and hence
                                                     ′
           there is 1 ≤ y ′ < y such that, in py0 pxk pj pi (C), p0 is poised to perform a pop operation in
           R and ui is at the top of R. Again, due to the specification of R, p0 cannot distinguish
                           ′                           ′
           between py0 +1 pxk pj pi (C) and p0 pi py0 pxk pj (C), which is a contradiction.
     iii. pk does not pop neither ui nor uj . Consider any y ≥ 1 such that p0 ’s decide() is completed
           in py0 pxk pj pi (C). We finalize this case by considering if p0 pops ui or uj from R in that
           configuration.
                p0 does not pop neither ui nor uj . Then, p0 is in the same local state in py0 pxk pj pi (C)
                and py0 pxk pi pj (C), which derives in a contradiction.
                p0 pops uj but not ui . Then, p0 is in the same local state in py0 pxk pj pi (C) and py0 pxk pj (C),
                which derives in a contradiction too.
                p0 pops ui and uj . Here we can reach a contradiction using a similar argument as in
                case (4.b.i) above.
   c. One of fi and fj is push and the other pop. The argument for this case is very similar to
      the argument for the previous case. Without loss of generality, let fj be push with input uj
      and fi be pop. Let R denote Ri (= Rj ). Note that if R is empty in configuration C, then
      neither p0 nor any competitor distinct to pi is able to distinguish between pj (C) and pj pi (C),
      which derives in a contradiction. Thus, R is not empty in C. Let pk be a competitor different
      from pi and pj . Let ui be the value at the top of R in pi (C) (possibly the value denoting
      the stack is empty). Consider any x ≥ 1 such that pk ’s compete() operation is completed in
      pxk pj pi (C). We proceed as in case (4.b) above,4 considering whether pk pops ui or uj from R


3
  Algorithm A can be modified so that every process pi stamps input v of a push operation with a
  pair (i, t), where t is a local counter incremented after each push operation. Such a change does not
  affect A’s correctness and progress properties.
4
  The analysis is exactly the same, as one can conceive the next step pi in C is a push operation with
  input ui .
10   Impossibility Results for Strong Linearizability


            in pxk pj pi (C):
                                                                                           ′
             i. pk pops ui and uj . Thus, there is 1 ≤ x′ < x such that, in pxk pj pi (C), pk is poised to
                perform a pop operation in R and ui is at the top of R (which implies that pk already
                popped uj from R). Due to the specification of R, neither pk nor p0 can distinguish
                                ′                       ′
                between pxk +1 pj pi (C) and pk pi pxk pj (C), which is a contradiction.
            ii. pk pops uj but not ui . Consider any y ≥ 1 such that p0 ’s decide() operation is completed
                in py0 pxk pj pi (C). Due to the specification of R, if p0 does not pop ui from R in configuration
                py0 pxk pj pi (C), then p0 is in the same local state in that configuration and py0 pxk pj (C), which
                implies that in both configurations p0 ’s operation return the same, but that contradicts
                the properties of C. Thus, it must be that p0 pops ui from R in py0 pxk pj pi (C), and hence
                                                          ′
                there is 1 ≤ y ′ < y such that, in py0 pxk pj pi (C), p0 is poised to perform a pop operation in
                R and ui is at the top of R. Again, due to the specification of R, p0 cannot distinguish
                                ′                           ′
                between py0 +1 pxk pj pi (C) and p0 pi py0 pxk pj (C), which is a contradiction.
           iii. pk does not pop neither ui nor uj . Consider any y ≥ 1 such that p0 ’s decide() is completed
                in py0 pxk pj pi (C). We finalize this case by considering if p0 pops ui or uj from R in that
                configuration.
                     p0 does not pop neither ui nor uj . Then, p0 is in the same local state in py0 pxk pj pi (C)
                     and py0 pxk pi pj (C), which derives in a contradiction.
                     p0 pops uj but not ui . Then, p0 is in the same local state in py0 pxk pj pi (C) and py0 pxk pj (C),
                     which derives in a contradiction too.
                     p0 pops ui and uj . Here we can reach a contradiction using a similar argument as in
                     case (4.b.i) above.                                                                               ◀


     ▶ Proposition 11. A lock-free strongly linearizable queue can implement a wait-free strongly lineariz-
     able contest object.

     Proof. Let A be any such implementation. Due to strong linearizability, we can assume that A is
     an atomic base object. To implement a contest object from A, each competitor pi simply performs
     A.enqueue(i), and the referee p0 performs A.dequeue() and returns the value it obtains, if distinct
     from empty, otherwise returns f alse.
         As A is lock-free and processes execute at most one operation on A, the implementation is
     wait-free. To prove strong linearizability, consider any finite execution α of the implementation.
     Let us complete any pending compete() operations that access A, and remove any other pending
     operation. Let α denote the modified execution. Every operation of α is linearized at its step that
     access A. Since A is a linearizable queue, when p0 ’s decide() operation returns a value v =  ̸ f alse,
     there is a previous enqueue(v) of a competitor, and that must be the first enqueue on A. Thus, the
     linearization points induce a valid linearization. The implementation is strongly linearizable because
     the linearization points in α remain fixed in any extension of it.                                   ◀

     ▶ Corollary 12. There is no lock-free strongly linearizable queue implementation from interfering
     primitives and (n − 2) window registers and atomic stacks, for n ≥ 4 processes.


      5      Impossibility of Wait-Free Strongly Linearizable Implementations:
             The Long-Lived Contest Object
     The long-lived contest object provides two operations, decide() that can be invoked at most once
     by p0 , the referee, and compete() that can be invoked any number of times by p1 , . . . , pn−1 , the
     competitors. While compete() returns nothing, decide() returns an integer x such that every
     competitor has executed at most x operations so far. Below, the referee is denoted p, and the
     competitors q1 , . . . , qn−1 .
         We first show that there are linearizable long-lived contest implementations from read/write
     registers, and strongly linearizable implementations from atomic objects such as counters.
Attiya, Castañeda and Enea                                                                                  11


▶ Theorem 13. There is a wait-free long-lived contest (decisively) linearizable implementation from
read/write registers, for n ≥ 2 processes.

Proof. Consider the following wait-free, read/write implementation. The processes share an array M
with one entry per competitor (initialized to 0). Each competitor first increments a local persistent
counter (initialized to 0), and then writes that value to its entry in M , and the referee first collects
all values in M and returns the maximum among those values.
     We argue that the implementation is decisively linearizable. Consider any finite execution α of
the algorithm. For any pending compete operation in α, it is completed if it writes to M , otherwise
it is removed. If α has a pending decide operation, this operation is removed. For simplicity, let α
itself denote the modified execution. Operations are linearized as follows: each compete operation is
linearized at its write step, and, if α has a decide operation returning x, the operation is linearized
at any step in which the maximum value in M is x. To prove linearizability, observe that if a
decide operation returns x, then the maximum value in M when the operation starts is at most x,
and the maximum value in M when the operations completes is at least x. Thus, there is a step
that lies between the invocation and response of the operation in which the maximum in M is x.
This implies that the linearization points defined above respect the real-time order in α, and the
induced sequential execution is valid for the long-lived contest object. Finally, the linearization
points also induce a subsequence-closed linearization function: compete operations are appended to
the current linearization, and when the decide operation completes, it is placed somewhere in the
current linearization where its output is justified.                                                   ◀


▶ Lemma 14. For n ≥ 2 processes, a wait-free strongly linearizable long-lived contest implementation
can be obtained from a wait-free strongly linearizable counter, snapshot, max register, fetch&increment
or fetch&add.

Proof. Consider the following wait-free long-lived-contest implementations:
   Counter. Each competitor executes increment() once, and the referee returns the value it obtains
   in read(). The implementation is linearizable because, at all times, the counter records the sum
   of the number of operations that all competitors have executed so far. Strong linearizability
   follows from the fact that the counter is strongly linearizable.
   Max register. Each competitor first increments a local persistent counter (initialized to 0),
   and then writes that value using maxW rite(·), and the referee returns the value it gets from
   maxRead(). Linearizability follows from the fact that, at all times, the max register object
   stores the maximum number of operations that each competitor has executed so far, and strong
   linearizability follows from strong linearizability of the base object.
   Snapshot. It is easy to implement a wait-free strongly linearizable counter or max register from
   a single strongly linearizable snapshot.
   Fetch&increment. Each competitor performs f etch&inc(), and the referee returns the value
   it obtains in f etch&inc(). Linearizability follows from the observation that the object upper
   bounds the number operations the competitor have executed. Strong linearizability follows from
   strong linearizability of the base object.
   Fetch&add. Clearly, f etch&add(1) implements f etch&inc().                                     ◀

    We now prove impossibility results for long-lived contest. Fix a wait-free strongly linearizable
long-lived contest implementation A for n processes. Pick any prefix-closed linearization function L
of A. For the time being, we do not care about the primitives used in A and the value of n.
    The proof follows an idea similar to that in [11], and is based on the following notions:

▶ Definition 15. Let α be a finite execution.
  The competitors-valency of α, denoted W (α), is the set with every x such that there is a finite
   competitors-only extension β such that decide() appears in L(αβ) with output x.
12   Impossibility Results for Strong Linearizability


        The execution α is competitors-closed if every competitors-only infinite extension γ of α has
        a finite prefix β such that decide() appears in L(αβ). If α is not competitors-closed, then it is
        competitors-supervalent.

        Furthermore, decide() ∈ L(α) denotes that decide() appears in L(α). For compactness, prefix
     competitors- is dropped from the notions above. It directly follows from the definitions:

     ▶ Proposition 16. For every execution α:

     1. if W (α) ≥ 2, decide() ∈/ L(α);
     2. for every competitors-only extension β of α, W (αβ) ⊆ W (α);
     3. if α is closed, for every competitors-only extension β, αβ is closed;
     4. if α is supervalent, there is a competitor q such that αq is supervalent;
     5. if α is supervalent, decide() ∈/ L(α) (hence decide() has not started or is pending in α);
     6. if decide() is not started in α, then α is supervalent;

         Lemma 17 is used several times, and its proof is a key place where we use the fact that A
     is strongly linearizable. Then, we define the notion of supervalent executions that are helping:
     intuitively, no matter what the competitors do, the next step of the referee decides its current
     operation.

     ▶ Lemma 17. Let α be closed execution that is indistinguishable from an execution α′ to the referee p
     and a competitor q. Then W (α) ∩ W (α′ ) ̸= ∅.

     Proof. Let γ be the infinite q-solo extension of α. Due to wait-freedom, q completes infinitely many
     operations in αγ. Since α is closed, there is a finite prefix β of γ such that decide() ∈ L(αβ). Let
     us pick any such β. As L is prefix-closed, decide() ∈ L(αβ ′ ), for every finite prefix β ′ of γ having
     β as a prefix. Let x be the output of decide() in L(αβ), and let β ′ be a prefix of γ such that q
     completes more than x operations in αβ ′ and β is a prefix of β ′ . Let σ be the p-solo extension of αβ ′
     where p’s operation is completed (which must exist due to wait-freedom). Since L is prefix-closed,
     the output of decide() in αβ ′ σ is x. Now observe that β ′ σ is an extension of α′ , as p and q cannot
     distinguish between α and α′ . Thus, in α′ β ′ σ, q completes more than x operations and decide() is
     complete with output x. Finally, we note that decide() ∈ L(α′ β ′ ) and outputs x, which implies that
     x ∈ W (α′ ), because if not, then in L(α′ β ′ ) the competitor q completes more than x operations, and
     L(α′ β ′ σ) has decide() with output x, which is invalid for the long-lived contest object.           ◀

     ▶ Definition 18. A supervalent execution α is competitors-helping ( helping for short) if for every
     competitors-only extension β of α, αβp is closed.


     ▶ Lemma 19. There are helping supervalent executions.

     Proof. By Proposition 16(6), A has supervalent executions. By contradiction, suppose that none
     of them is helping. Then, for every such supervalent execution α, there is a competitors-only
     extension β such that αβp is supervalent. For the empty execution α0 , which is supervalent by
     Proposition 16(6), there is a competitors-only extension β0 such that α1 = α0 β0 p is supervalent.
     Note that p takes at least one step in α1 , and by Proposition 16(5), decide() is pending in α1 . For
     α1 , there is a competitors-only extension β1 such that α2 = α1 β1 p is supervalent. Note that p takes
     at least two steps in α2 , and by Proposition 16(5), decide() is pending in α2 . Thus, we can construct
     an execution α∞ in which p takes infinitely many steps and decide() is pending, hence contradicting
     that A is wait-free.                                                                                 ◀
Attiya, Castañeda and Enea                                                                                      13


5.1     The case of read/write registers
We now suppose that A uses only read/write registers and n ≥ 3. Lemma 20 shows that this
assumption implies an important property of valencies, which is then used to characterize valencies
of closed and supervalent executions.

▶ Lemma 20. Let α be an execution such that αq is closed, for a competitor q. For every competitor
q ′ ̸= q, W (αq) ∩ W (αq ′ ) ̸= ∅.

Proof. We analyze the steps q and q ′ are poised to take at the end of α, in all cases concluding that
W (αq) ∩ W (αq ′ ) ̸= ∅:
   q or q ′ reads. Suppose first that q ′ is poised to read. Then, αq and αq ′ q are indistinguishable
   to p and q. By Lemma 17, W (αq) ∩ W (αq ′ q) ̸= ∅. By Proposition 16(2), W (αq ′ q) ⊆ W (αq ′ ),
   from which follows W (αq) ∩ W (αq ′ ) ̸= ∅. Now suppose that q is poised to read. Then, αq ′
   and αqq ′ are indistinguishable to p and q ′ . By Proposition 16(3), αqq ′ is closed. Lemma 17
   implies that W (αq ′ ) ∩ W (αqq ′ ) ̸= ∅. Since W (αqq ′ ) ⊆ W (αq), by Proposition 16(2), we have
   W (αq) ∩ W (αq ′ ) ̸= ∅.
   q and q ′ write to distinct registers. Thus, αqq ′ and αq ′ q are indistinguishable to p and q
   (and q ′ ). By Lemma 17, W (αqq ′ ) ∩ W (αq ′ q) ̸= ∅. By Proposition 16(3), αqq ′ is closed. Since
   W (αq) ⊆ W (αqq ′ ) and W (αq ′ ) ⊆ W (αq ′ q), by Proposition 16(2), we have W (αq) ∩ W (αq ′ ) ̸= ∅.
   q and q ′ write to the same register. Then, αq and αq ′ q are indistinguishable to p and q. We have
   that W (αq) ∩ W (αq ′ q) ̸= ∅, by Lemma 17. By Proposition 16(2), W (αq ′ q) ⊆ W (αq ′ ), hence
   W (αq) ∩ W (αq ′ ) ̸= ∅.                                                                           ◀


▶ Lemma 21. If α is closed, |W (α)| = 1.

Proof. By contradiction, suppose that |W (α)| ≥ 2. We extend α as follows: we let a competitor take
its next step as long as this yields an extension β with |W (αβ)| ≥ 2. Observe that such extension β
cannot be infinite, because if so, for every finite prefix β ′ of β we have that decide() ∈
                                                                                          / L(αβ ′ ), by
Proposition 16(1), hence contradicting that α is closed. Pick any such finite extension β. Thus,
|W (αβ)| ≥ 2, and for every competitor q, |W (αβq)| = 1. By Proposition 16(3), αβq is closed, for
every competitor q. Proposition 16(2) implies that there are distinct competitors q and q ′ such that
W (αβq) ∩ W (αβq ′ ) = ∅. This contradicts Lemma 20.                                                   ◀


▶ Lemma 22. If α is supervalent, |W (α)| = 0.

Proof. Suppose otherwise, and consider any x ∈ W (α). We extend α as follows: we let a competitor
take its next step as long as this yields an extension β such that αβ is supervalent and x ∈ W (αβ).
Such extension β cannot be infinite, because if so, there is a finite prefix β ′ of β such that more than x
operations of a single competitor are completed in αβ ′ , due to wait-freedom, and decide() ∈     / L(αβ ′ ),
                                                                                         ′
by Proposition 16(5). As L is a linearization function, there is no extension of αβ in which decide()
returns x, contradicting that x ∈ W (αβ ′ ). Pick any such finite extension β. Thus, x ∈ W (αβ), and
                                         / W (αβq). By Proposition 16(4), there is a competitor q ′ such
for any competitor q, αβq is closed or x ∈
          ′
that αβq is supervalent. Hence, x ∈  / W (αβq ′ ). Proposition 16(2) implies that there is a competitor
q≠ q such that x ∈ W (αβq). Then, αβq is closed. Lemma 21 implies that W (αβq ′ ) = {x}, and
      ′

hence, W (αβq) ∩ W (αβq ′ ) = ∅. This contradicts Lemma 20.                                              ◀


▶ Lemma 23. Let α be an execution such that αp is closed and, for a competitor q, it is not the
case that at the end of α, the referee p is poised to read a register and q is poised to write to the
same register. Then, W (αp) ∩ W (αqp) ̸= ∅.

Proof. We analyze the steps p and q are poised to take at the end of α, in all cases concluding that
W (αp) ∩ W (αqp) ̸= ∅:
14   Impossibility Results for Strong Linearizability


         q reads. Consider a competitor q ′ ̸= q. Then, p and q ′ cannot distinguish between αp and αqp.
         By Lemma 17, W (αp) ∩ W (αqp) ̸= ∅.
         q and p apply primitives to distinct registers. Then, p and q cannot distinguish between αpq
         and αqp. Proposition 16(3) implies that αpq is closed. By Lemma 17, W (αpq) ∩ W (αqp) ̸= ∅.
         Since W (αpq) ⊆ W (αp), by Proposition 16(2), we have W (αp) ∩ W (αqp) ̸= ∅.
         p and q write to the same register. For every competitor q ′ = ̸ q, p and q ′ cannot distinguish
         between αp and αqp. By Lemma 17, W (αp) ∩ W (αqp) ̸= ∅.                                        ◀

         By Lemma 19, there is a helping supervalent execution α, namely, for every competitors-only
     extension β, αβp is closed. For the rest of the proof, fix any such execution α.

     ▶ Lemma 24. There is a finite competitors-only extension β of α such that, for every competitor q,
     1. W (αβp) ∩ W (αβqp) = ∅, and
     2. for every competitor q ′ ̸= q, there is a k ≥ 0 such that W (αβqpq ′k+1 ) ∩ W (αβq ′k qpq ′ ) = ∅ and
        W (αβq ′k+1 qp) ∩ W (αβq ′k qpq ′ ) = ∅.

     Proof. Let β be any competitors-only extension of α. By Lemma 21, |W (αβp)| = 1. By Lemma 22,
     W (α) = ∅, and hence, by the definition of valency, decide() ∈        / L(αβ). Let W (αp) = {x}. We
     extend α as follows: we let a competitor take its next step as long as this yields a competitors-only
     extension β such that W (αβp) = {x}. Such extension β cannot be infinite, because if so, there is a
     finite prefix β ′ of β such that W (αβ ′ p) = {x}, decide() ∈
                                                                 / L(αβ ′ ) and a competitor completes more
     than x operations in αβ ; and as L is a linearization function, there is no extension of αβ ′ p in which
                                ′

     decide() returns x, contradicting that W (αβ ′ p) = {x}. Pick any such finite extension β. Thus, we
     have W (αβp) = {x}, and for every competitor q, W (αβqp) ̸= {x}. By Lemma 21, |W (αβqp)| = 1,
     hence W (αβp) ∩ W (αβqp) = ∅, showing (1).
          To prove (2), let W (αβqp) = {y}. Let ℓ ≥ 0. Proposition 16(3) implies that αβqpq ′ℓ+1 is closed,
     and Proposition 16(2) and Lemma 21 that W (αβqpq ′ℓ+1 ) = {y}. By Lemma 21, |W (αβq ′ℓ qp)| = 1.
     Let W (αβq ′ℓ qp) = {z}. It was observed too that decide() ∈  / L(αβq ′ℓ q). Due to wait-freedom, there
     are values of ℓ such that q completes more than y operations in αβq ′ℓ q. Pick any such ℓ, and consider
                                  ′

     any k ≥ ℓ. Due to the specification of long-lived contest and since L is a linearization function,
     there is no extension of αβq ′k q in which decide() outputs y. Thus, y =    ̸ z. By Proposition 16(2),
     W (αβq ′k qpq ′ ) = W (αβq ′k qp), and hence

                                      W (αβqpq ′k+1 ) ∩ W (αβq ′k qpq ′ ) = ∅,

     for any k ≥ ℓ. Using similar reasoning, we can argue that it is not true that

                                         W (αβq ′k qp) = W (αβq ′k+1 qp),

     for every k ≥ ℓ. Thus, there is a k ≥ ℓ such that W (αβq ′k qp) ̸= W (αβq ′k+1 qp), and more-
     over W (αβq ′k qp) ∩ W (αβq ′k+1 qp) = ∅. Finally, Proposition 16(2) and Lemma 21 imply that
     W (αβq ′k qpq ′ ) = W (αβq ′k qp).                                                         ◀

         To reach a contradiction, consider a competitors-only extension β of α as stated in Lemma 24.
     We have that αβp is closed. Otherwise, if at the end of αβ all competitors are poised to write to a
     register R and the referee is poised to read R, then by Lemma 23, W (αβqpq ′k+1 )∩W (αβq ′k qpq ′ ) = ∅,
     contradicting Lemma 24(1). Thus, it must be that all competitors are poised to write to a register
     R and the referee is poised to read R, at the end of αβ. We use the properties of β stated in
     Lemma 24(2) to reach a contradiction.
         First, we use W (αβqpq ′k+1 ) ∩ W (αβq ′k qpq ′ ) = ∅. Observe that, at the end of αβqpq ′k+1 and
     αβq ′k qpq ′ , q is in the same state as it only writes to R after αβ, and p is in the same state too
     as it reads from R what q writes. As after αβ, q ′ is poised to write to R, its state and the state
     of the shared memory is the same at the end of αβqpq ′k and αβq ′k . For the time being, suppose
     that q ′ is poised to write to R at the end of αβq ′k ; this implies that q ′ is poised to write to R at
     the end of αβqpq ′k too. Then, the state of the shared memory is the same at the end of the two
Attiya, Castañeda and Enea                                                                                    15


executions (and the state of q ′ too), and thus p and q cannot distinguish between the executions.
Since αβqpq ′k+1 is closed, this contradicts Lemma 17.
    We complete the proof by arguing that it is actually the case that q ′ is poised to write to R at
the end of αβq ′k . We now use that W (αβq ′k+1 qp) ∩ W (αβq ′k qpq ′ ) = ∅. Using a similar reasoning
as in the paragraph above, we can see that if q ′ is poised to read R or access a register R′ ̸= R,
then p and q cannot distinguish between αβq ′k+1 qp and αβq ′k qpq ′ , which contradicts Lemma 17.
Therefore we have:

▶ Theorem 25. There is no wait-free strongly linearizable long-lived contest implementation from
only read and write primitives, for n ≥ 3 processes.

    Lemma 14 and the previous theorem imply:

▶ Corollary 26. If n ≥ 3, there is no wait-free strongly linearizable implementation of snapshot, max
register, counter, fetch&increment or fetch&add that uses only read/write registers.

5.2     The case of window registers and test&set
Suppose that A uses w-window registers and test&set objects. The next extends the arguments in
Section 5.1, with a slightly different structure. Lemmas 27 and 28 show that competitors valency
has properties similar to those in Lemmas 21 and 22 above.

▶ Lemma 27. Suppose that n ≥ 4 and w ≤ n − 2. If α is closed, then |W (α)| = 1.

Proof. By contradiction, suppose that |W (α)| ≥ 2. We extend α as follows: we let a competitor take
its next step as long as this yields an extension β with |W (αβ)| ≥ 2. Observe that such extension
β cannot be infinite, because if so, for every finite prefix β ′ of β we have that decide() ∈
                                                                                            / L(αβ ′ ),
by Proposition 16(1), hence contradicting that α is closed. Pick any such finite extension β. Thus,
|W (αβ)| ≥ 2, and for every competitor q, |W (αβq)| = 1. By Proposition 16(3), αβ is closed.
Proposition 16(2) implies that there are competitors q and q ′ such that W (αβq) ∩ W (αβq ′ ) = ∅.
We complete the proof by analyzing the steps q and q ′ are poised to take at the end of αβ.

   q or q ′ reads. Suppose, without loss of generality, that q ′ is poised to read. Then, αβq and
   αβq ′ q are indistinguishable to p and q. We have that αβq is closed, by Proposition 16(3), and
   W (αβq) ∩ W (αβq ′ q) = ∅, by Proposition 16(2). This contradicts Lemma 17.
   q and q ′ access distinct base objects. Thus, αβqq ′ and αβq ′ q are indistinguishable to p and
   q (and q ′ ). Proposition 16(3) implies that αβqq ′ is closed, and Proposition 16(2) gives that
   W (αβqq ′ ) ∩ W (αβq ′ q) = ∅. This contradicts Lemma 17.
   q and q ′ T &S() to the same test&set object. Consider any competitor q ′′ ̸= q, q ′ (which exists as
   n ≥ 4). Then, αβq and αβq ′ are indistinguishable to p and q ′′ . Proposition 16(3) implies that
   αβq and αβq ′ are closed. As already said, W (αβq) ∩ W (αβq ′ ) = ∅, which contradicts Lemma 17.
   q and q ′ write to the same register R. Let q ′′ be any competitor distinct to q and q ′ . Since
   |W (αβq ′′ )| = 1, it must be that W (αβ q̄) ∩ W (αβq ′′ ) = ∅, for q̄ equal to q or q ′ . Thus, the
   analysis so far for q̄ and q ′′ shows that, at the end of αβ, q ′′ must be poised to write to R
   (otherwise we reach a contradiction). Then, all competitors are poised to write to R, at the end
   of αβ. Since w ≤ n − 2, for any sequence γ with all the n − 3 competitors distinct to q and
   q ′ , αβqγ and αβq ′ qγ are indistinguishable to p and q. Proposition 16(2) and Proposition 16(3)
   imply that both executions αβqγ and αβq ′ qγ are closed with W (αβqγ) ∩ W (αβq ′ qγ) = ∅. This
   contradicts Lemma 17.                                                                              ◀


▶ Lemma 28. Suppose that n ≥ 4 and w ≤ n − 2. If α is supervalent, then |W (α)| = 0.

Proof. Suppose otherwise, and consider any x ∈ W (α). We extend α as follows: we let a competitor
take its next step as long as this yields an extension β such that αβ is supervalent and x ∈ W (αβ).
Such extension β cannot be infinite, because if so, there is a finite prefix β ′ of β such that more than x
16   Impossibility Results for Strong Linearizability


     operations of a single competitor are completed in αβ ′ , due to wait-freedom, and decide() ∈ / L(αβ ′ ),
                                                                                                 ′
     by Proposition 16(5); and as L is a linearization function, there is no extension of αβ in which
     decide() returns x, contradicting that x ∈ W (αβ ′ ). Pick any such finite extension β. Thus,
     x ∈ W (αβ), and for any competitor q, αβq is closed or x ∈   / W (αβq). By Proposition 16(4), there
     is a competitor q ′ such that αβq ′ is supervalent. Hence, x ∈ / W (αβq ′ ). Proposition 16(2) implies
                                      ′
                                  ̸ q such that x ∈ W (αβq). Then, αβq is closed. Lemma 27 gives that
     that there is a competitor q =
     actually W (αβq) = {x}, which implies that W (αβq) ∩ W (αβq ′ ) = ∅. We complete the proof by
     analyzing the steps q and q ′ are poised to take at the end of αβ.

         q or q ′ reads. Suppose first that q ′ is poised to read. Then, αβq and αβq ′ q are indistinguishable
         to p and q. We have that αβq is closed, as already claimed, and W (αβq) ∩ W (αβq ′ q) = ∅, by
         Proposition 16(2). This contradicts Lemma 17. Now suppose that q is poised to read. Then,
         αβq ′ and αβqq ′ are indistinguishable to p and q ′ . By Proposition 16(3), αβqq ′ is closed, and by
         Proposition 16(2), W (αβqq ′ ) ∩ W (αβq ′ ) = ∅. This contradicts Lemma 17.
         q and q ′ access distinct base objects. Thus, αβqq ′ and αβq ′ q are indistinguishable to p and
         q (and q ′ ). Proposition 16(3) implies that αβqq ′ is closed, and Proposition 16(2) gives that
         W (αβqq ′ ) ∩ W (αβq ′ q) = ∅. This contradicts Lemma 17.
         q and q ′ T &S() to the same test&set object. Consider any competitor q ′′ ̸= q, q ′ (which exists as
         n ≥ 4). Then, αβq and αβq ′ are indistinguishable to p and q ′′ . Proposition 16(3) implies that
         αβq and αβq ′ are closed. As already said, W (αβq) ∩ W (αβq ′ ) = ∅, which contradicts Lemma 17.
         q and q ′ write to the same register R. Let q ′′ be any competitor distinct to q and q ′ . If
         x ∈/ W (αβq ′′ ), then the analysis above for q and q ′′ shows that q ′′ is poised to write to R
         (otherwise we reach a contradiction). If x ∈ W (αβq ′′ ), then we have have that αβq ′′ is closed,
         hence W (αβq ′′ ) = {x}, by Lemma 27, from which follows that W (αβq ′′ ) ∩ W (αβq ′ ) = ∅. Again,
         the analysis above for q ′′ and q ′ gives that q ′′ is poised to write to R. Thus, all competitors
         are poised to write to R, at the end of αβ. Since w ≤ n − 2, for any sequence γ with all the
         n − 3 competitors distinct to q and q ′ , αβqγ and αβq ′ qγ are indistinguishable to p and q. We
         have that αβq is closed, as already mentioned, hence αβqγ is closed, by Proposition 16(3), and
         furthermore W (αβqγ) ∩ W (αβq ′ qγ) = ∅, by Proposition 16(2). This contradicts Lemma 17. ◀

         By Lemma 19, there is a helping supervalent execution α, namely, for every competitors-only
     extension β, αβp is closed. For the rest of the proof, fix such an execution α. We remark that this
     is the only place where the restriction on the size of the window register, w, is required.

     ▶ Lemma 29. Suppose that n ≥ 4 and 3w ≤ n. There is a finite competitors-only extension β such
     that, for every competitor q,
      1. W (αβp) ∩ W (αβqp) = ∅, and
      2. for every competitor q ′ ̸= q, there is a k ≥ 0, and sequences γ, γ1′ , γ2′ of competitors with
         |γ| = |γ1′ | = |γ2′ | = w, γ = qλ, γ1′ = q ′ λ′1 , γ2′ = q ′ λ′2 , and λ, λ′1 , λ′2 being competitor-disjoint, such
         that W (αβγpγ1′ q ′k γ2′ ) ∩ W (αβγ1′ q ′k γpγ2′ ) = ∅ and W (αβγ1′ q ′k+1 γp) ∩ W (αβγ1′ q ′k γpq ′ ) = ∅.

     Proof. Let β be any competitors-only extension of α. By Lemma 27, |W (αβp)| = 1. By Lemma 28,
     W (α) = ∅, and hence, by the definition of valency, decide() ∈            / L(αβ). Let W (αp) = {x}. We
     extend α as follows: we let a competitor take its next step as long as this yields a competitors-only
     extension β such that W (αβp) = {x}. Such extension β cannot be infinite, because if so, there is a
     finite prefix β ′ of β such that W (αβ ′ p) = {x}, decide() ∈   / L(αβ ′ ) and a competitor completes more
     than x operations in αβ ; and as L is a linearization function, there is no extension of αβ ′ p in which
                                ′

     decide() returns x, contradicting that W (αβ ′ p) = {x}. Pick any such finite extension β. Thus, we
     have W (αβp) = {x}, and for every competitor q, W (αβqp) ̸= {x}. As already said, |W (αβqp)| = 1,
     hence W (αβp) ∩ W (αβqp) = ∅.
          To prove the second claim, first note the assumption 3w ≤ n implies that there are sequences
     γ, γ1′ , γ2′ of competitors satisfying that |γ| = |γ1′ | = |γ2′ | = w, γ = qλ, γ1′ = q ′ λ′1 , γ2′ = q ′ λ′2 , and
     λ, λ′1 , λ′2 being competitor-disjoint. Pick any such sequences. Let W (αβγp) = {y}. Let ℓ ≥ 0.
     Proposition 16(3) implies that αβγpγ1′ q ′ℓ γ2′ is closed, and Proposition 16(2) and Lemma 27 that
Attiya, Castañeda and Enea                                                                                        17


W (αβγpγ1′ q ′ℓ γ2′ ) = {y}. As already observed, |W (αβγ1′ q ′ℓ γpγ2′ )| = 1. Let W (αβγ1′ q ′ℓ γpγ2′ ) = {z}.
It was observed too that decide() ∈  / L(αβγ1′ q ′ℓ γ). Due to wait-freedom, there are values of ℓ such that
q completes more than y operations in αβγ1′ q ′ℓ γ. Pick any such ℓ, and consider any k ≥ ℓ. Since L is
 ′

a linearization function, there is no extension of αβγ1′ q ′k γ in which decide() outputs y. Thus, y ̸= z,
and hence W (αβγpγ1′ q ′k γ2′ ) ∩ W (αβγ1′ q ′k γpγ2′ ) = ∅, for any k ≥ ℓ. Using similar reasoning, we can
argue that it is not true W (αβγ1′ q ′k γp) = W (αβγ1′ q ′k+1 γp), for every k ≥ ℓ. Thus, there is a k ≥ ℓ
such that W (αβγ1′ q ′k γp) ̸= W (αβγ1′ q ′k+1 γp), and moreover W (αβγ1′ q ′k γp) ∩ W (αβγ1′ q ′k+1 γp) = ∅.
Finally, by Proposition 16(2) and Lemma 21, W (αβγ1′ q ′k γpq ′ ) = W (αβγ1′ q ′k γp).                       ◀

    To reach a contradiction, assume that n ≥ 4 and 3w ≤ n, and consider a competitors-only
extension β of α as stated in Lemma 29. We complete the proof by analyzing the steps processes are
poised to take at the end of αβ, in each case reaching a contradiction using Lemma 17. In the first
three cases we use the property of β stated in Lemma 29(1), and in last two cases we additionally
use the property stated in Lemma 29(2).

    A competitor is poised to read. Let q and q ′ be competitors such that q is poised to read and
    q ′ ̸= q. Then, p and q ′ cannot distinguish between αβp and αβqp, which contradicts Lemma 17,
    as αβp is closed and W (αβp) ∩ W (αβqp) = ∅.
    A competitor q and the referee p access distinct base objects. No process can distinguish between
    αβpq and αβqp. Proposition 16(3) implies that αβpq is closed, and Proposition 16(2) gives that
    W (αβpq) ∩ W (αβqp) = ∅. This contradicts Lemma 17.
    All processes write to the same register. For every pair of distinct competitors q and q ′ , p and
    q ′ cannot distinguish between αβpγ and αβqpγ, where γ is any sequence with all the n − 3
    competitors distinct to q and q ′ . Propositions 16(2-3) imply that αβpγ and αβqpγ are closed
    and W (αβpγ) ∩ W (αβqpγ) = ∅, which contradicts Lemma 17.
    All processes T &S() the same test&set base object R. By Lemma 29(2), we have W (αβγpγ1′ q ′k γ2′ )∩
    W (αβγ1′ q ′k γpγ2′ ) = ∅. At the end executions αβγpγ1′ q ′k γ2′ and αβγ1′ q ′k γpγ2′ , p is in the same
    state, as in both of them it obtains f alse from its R.T &S(). Note that the state of the shared
    memory is the same at the end of both executions. Moreover, the executions are indistinguishable
    to any competitor q ′′ ̸= q, q ′ , which exists since n ≥ 4. Since the two executions are closed, this
    contradicts Lemma 17.
    All competitors write to R, and the referee reads R. Consider again executions αβγpγ1′ q ′k γ2′ and
    αβγ1′ q ′k γpγ2′ . Observe that, at the end of both executions, q is in the same state as it only writes
    to R after αβ, and p is in the same state too as it reads from R what the processes in γ write.
    As after αβ, the competitors in γ1′ are poised to write to R, their state and the state of the
    shared memory is the same at the end of αβγpγ1′ q ′k and αβγ1′ q ′k . For the time being, suppose
    that q ′ is poised to write to R at the end of αβγ1′ q ′k ; this implies that q ′ is poised to write to
    R at the end of αβγpγ1′ q ′k too. Then, the state of the shared memory is the same at the end
    of αβγpγ1′ q ′k γ2′ and αβγ1′ q ′k γpγ2′ (and the state of q ′ too), and thus p and q cannot distinguish
    between the executions. Since both executions are closed, which contradicts Lemma 17.
    We complete the proof of this case by arguing that indeed it is the case that q ′ is poised to
    write to R at the end of αβγ1′ q ′k . We now use that W (αβγ1′ q ′k+1 γp) ∩ W (αβγ1′ q ′k γpq ′ ) = ∅,
    by Lemma 29(2). Using a similar line of reasoning as in the paragraph above, we can see that
    if q ′ is poised to read R or access an object R′ ̸= R, then p and q cannot distinguish between
    αβγ1′ q ′k+1 γp and αβγ1′ q ′k γpq ′ , which contradicts Lemma 17.
    In all cases we reach a contradiction. Thus, we have:
▶ Theorem 30. If n ≥ 4 and 3w ≤ n, the implementation A cannot use only w-window registers
and test&set objects.
    Lemma 14 and Theorem 30 imply:
▶ Corollary 31. If n ≥ 4 and 3w ≤ n, there is no wait-free strongly linearizable implementation of
snapshot, max register, counter, fetch&inc-rement or fetch&add that uses only w-window registers
and test&set objects.
18   Impossibility Results for Strong Linearizability


      6      Discussion
     We introduced two variants of a contest object, one-shot and long-lived, which allow us to prove
     impossibility results for lock-free and wait-free strongly linearizable concurrent objects, respectively.
     Although these objects are strictly weaker than consensus, they suffice to capture the coordination
     constraints imposed by strong linearizability.
         Our results extend prior impossibility results in several directions. In particular, for lock-free
     implementations, they apply not only to read/write and window registers, but also to executions
     that use atomic stacks as base objects. Unlike interfering primitives, stack operations neither
     commute nor overwrite, yet stacks still do not suffice to support lock-free strongly linearizable
     implementations. Moreover, unlike earlier reduction-based arguments, our proofs do not rely on
     readability assumptions.
         Beyond the individual results, the contest objects help clarify why strong linearizability for
     some concurrent objects is difficult to obtain. Informally, strong linearizability requires that once a
     competition among concurrent operations is resolved, its outcome remains fixed in all extensions of
     the execution. The results show that enforcing such consistent refereeing already requires substantial
     coordination power, even when only a single distinguished process observes the outcome.
         The proofs are based on valency-style arguments that apply across different progress conditions
     and classes of base objects. They indicate that strong linearizability enforces irrevocable resolution
     of concurrency, even in settings where no agreement among processes is required.
         Several directions remain open. One is whether contest objects, or variants thereof, can be
     used as building blocks in strongly linearizable implementations that are lock-free or wait-free
     when stronger primitives are available. Another is to extend Theorem 30 to window registers with
     w ≤ n − 1. We remark that the restriction 3w ≤ n (required for Lemma 29(2)) stems from the need
     to maintain several disjoint sets of competitors whose actions cannot be simultaneously observed
     through a w-window register. Finally, it would be interesting to identify a variant of the contest
     object that captures the impossibility of lock-free strongly linearizable stacks from window registers
     and interfering primitives. Our results already show that such variant, if it exists, has to be strictly
     weaker than the contest object.


           References
      1    Yehuda Afek, Eli Gafni, and Adam Morrison. Common2 extended to stacks and unbounded
           concurrency. Distributed Comput., 20(4):239–252, 2007.
      2    Yehuda Afek and Eytan Weisberger. The instancy of snapshots and commuting objects.
           Journal of Algorithms, 30(1):68–105, 1999.
      3    Yehuda Afek, Eytan Weisberger, and Hanan Weisman. A completeness theorem for a class of
           synchronization objects. In Proceedings of the twelfth annual ACM symposium on Principles
           of distributed computing, pages 159–170, 1993.
      4    Hagit Attiya, Armando Castaneda, and Constantin Enea. Strong linearizability using primitives
           with consensus number 2. In Proceedings of the 43rd ACM Symposium on Principles of
           Distributed Computing, page 432–442, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing
           Machinery.
      5    Hagit Attiya, Armando Castañeda, and Danny Hendler. Nontrivial and universal helping for
           wait-free queues and stacks. J. Parallel Distributed Comput., 121:1–14, 2018.
      6    Hagit Attiya and Faith Ellen. Impossibility results for distributed computing. Morgan &
           Claypool Publishers, 2014.
      7    Hagit Attiya and Constantin Enea. Putting strong linearizability in context: Preserving
           hyperproperties in programs that use concurrent objects. In 33rd International Symposium on
           Distributed Computing, DISC, pages 2:1–2:17, 2019.
      8    Yoav Ben Shimon, Ori Lahav, and Sharon Shoham. Hyperproperty-preserving register
           specifications. In 38th International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC), volume
           319 of LIPIcs, pages 8:1–8:19. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
Attiya, Castañeda and Enea                                                                           19


9    Tushar Deepak Chandra. Polylog randomized wait-free consensus. In Proceedings of the
     Fifteenth Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), page
     166–175, New York, NY, USA, 1996. Association for Computing Machinery.
10   Michael R. Clarkson and Fred B. Schneider. Hyperproperties. Journal of Computer Security,
     18(6):1157–1210, 2010.
11   Oksana Denysyuk and Philipp Woelfel. Wait-freedom is harder than lock-freedom under strong
     linearizability. In Distributed Computing - 29th International Symposium (DISC), pages 60–74.
     Springer, 2015.
12   Brijesh Dongol, Gerhard Schellhorn, and Heike Wehrheim. Weak Progressive Forward Simula-
     tion Is Necessary and Sufficient for Strong Observational Refinement. In 33rd International
     Conference on Concurrency Theory (CONCUR 2022), 2022.
13   Wojciech Golab, Lisa Higham, and Philipp Woelfel. Linearizable implementations do not
     suffice for randomized distributed computation. In STOC, page 373–382, 2011.
14   Vassos Hadzilacos, Xing Hu, and Sam Toueg. On linearizability and the termination of
     randomized algorithms. CoRR, abs/2010.15210, 2020.
15   Maryam Helmi, Lisa Higham, and Philipp Woelfel. Strongly linearizable implementations:
     possibilities and impossibilities. In ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing
     (PODC), pages 385–394, New York, NY, USA, 2012. ACM.
16   Maurice Herlihy. Wait-free synchronization. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst., 13(1):124–149,
     1991.
17   Maurice P. Herlihy and Jeannette M. Wing. Linearizability: A correctness condition for
     concurrent objects. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst., 12(3):463–492, July 1990.
18   Steven Munsu Hwang and Philipp Woelfel. Strongly Linearizable Linked List and Queue. In
     25th International Conference on Principles of Distributed Systems (OPODIS 2021), 2022.
19   Achour Mostéfaoui, Matthieu Perrin, and Michel Raynal. A simple object that spans the
     whole consensus hierarchy. Parallel Process. Lett., 28(2):1850006:1–1850006:9, 2018.
20   Sean Ovens and Philipp Woelfel. Strongly linearizable implementations of snapshots and other
     types. In PODC, pages 197–206, 2019.
