                                        Synthesis from Weighted Specifications
                                        with Partial Domains over Finite Words
                                              Emmanuel Filiota                       Christof Lödingb                    Sarah Wintera
                                                                         a
                                                                             Université libre de Bruxelles, Belgium
                                                                          b
                                                                             RWTH Aachen University, Germany
arXiv:2103.05550v1 [cs.FL] 9 Mar 2021




                                                In this paper, we investigate the synthesis problem of terminating reactive
                                              systems from quantitative speciﬁcations. Such systems are modeled as ﬁnite
                                              transducers whose executions are represented as ﬁnite words in (Σi ×Σo)∗ , where
                                              Σi, Σo are ﬁnite sets of input and output symbols, respectively. A weighted
                                              speciﬁcation S assigns a rational value (or −∞) to words in (Σi × Σo)∗ , and
                                              we consider three kinds of objectives for synthesis, namely threshold objectives
                                              where the system’s executions are required to be above some given threshold,
                                              best-value and approximate objectives where the system is required to perform
                                              as best as it can by providing output symbols that yield the best value and ε-best
                                              value respectively w.r.t. S. We establish a landscape of decidability results for
                                              these three objectives and weighted speciﬁcations with partial domain over ﬁnite
                                              words given by deterministic weighted automata equipped with sum, discounted-
                                              sum and average measures. The resulting objectives are not regular in general
                                              and we develop an inﬁnite game framework to solve the corresponding synthesis
                                              problems, namely the class of (weighted) critical preﬁx games.


                                        1. Introduction
                                        Reactive synthesis. The goal of automatic synthesis is to automatically construct pro-
                                        grams from speciﬁcations of correct pairs of input and output. The goal is to liberate the
                                        developer from low-level implementation details, and to automatically generate programs
                                        which are correct by construction. In the automata-based approach to synthesis [14, 20],
                                        the programs to be synthesized are ﬁnite-state reactive programs, which react continuously
                                        to stimuli received from an environment. Such systems are not assumed to terminate and
                                        their executions are modeled as ω-words in (ΣiΣo)ω , alternating between input symbols in
                                        Σi and output symbols in Σo. Speciﬁcations of such systems are then languages S ⊆ (ΣiΣo)ω
                                        representing the set of acceptable executions. The synthesis problem asks to check whether
                                        there exists a total synchronous1 function f : Σiω → Σoω such that for all input sequences
                                        u = i0 i1 . . . , there exists an output sequence v = o0 o1 . . . such that f (u) = v and the convo-
                                        lution u ⊗ v = i0 o0 i1 o1 . . . belongs to S. The function f is called a realizer of S. Automatic
                                        synthesis of non-terminating reactive systems has ﬁrst been introduced by Church [19], and
                                        a ﬁrst solution has been given by Büchi and Landweber [14] when the speciﬁcation S is
                                        ω-regular. In this setting, when a realizer exists, there is always one which can be computed
                                        by a ﬁnite-state sequential transducer, a ﬁnite-state automaton which alternates between
                                        reading one input symbol and producing one output symbol. This result has sparked much
                                         1 f : Σω → Σω                                                        +
                                               i         o is synchronous if it is induced by a strategy s : Σi → Σo in the sense that f (i0 i1 . . . ) =
                                           s(i0 )s(i0 i1 )s(i0 i1 i2 ) . . . for all i0 i1 · · · ∈ Σω




                                        This is the full version of [28].                                                             March 10, 2021
further work to make synthesis feasible in practice, see e.g., [33, 27, 7]. The synthesis prob-
lem is classically modeled as an inﬁnite-duration game on a graph, played by two players,
alternatively picking input and output symbols. One player, representing the system, must
enforce an objective that corresponds to the speciﬁcation. Finite-memory winning strate-
gies are in turn systems that realize the speciﬁcation. This game metaphor has triggered
a lot of research on graph games [20, Chapter 27]. There has also been a recent eﬀort to
increase the quality of the automatically generated systems by enhancing Boolean speci-
ﬁcations with quantitative constraints, e.g., [5, 16, 12, 2]. This has also triggered a lot
of research on quantitative extensions of inﬁnite-duration games, for example mean-payoﬀ,
energy, and discounted-sum games, see, e.g., [24, 36, 22, 10, 11, 4, 30].

Partial-domain specifications. In the classical formulation of the synthesis problem, it
is required that a realizer f meets the speciﬁcation for all possible input sequences. In
particular, if there is a single input sequence u such that u ⊗ v 6∈ S for all output sequences
v, then S admits no realizer. In other words, when the domain of S is partial, then S
is unrealizable. Formally, the domain of S is dom(S) = {u ∈ Σiω | ∃v : u ⊗ v ∈ S}. As
noticed recently and independently in [1], asking that the realizer meets the speciﬁcation
for all input sequences is often too strong and a more realistic setting is to make some
assumptions on the environment’s behaviour, namely, that the environment plays an input
sequence in the domain of the speciﬁcation. This problem is called good-enough synthesis
in [1] and can be formulated as follows: given a speciﬁcation S, check whether there exists
a partial synchronous function f : Σiω → Σω  o whose domain is dom(S), and such that for all
input sequence u ∈ dom(S) = dom(f ), u ⊗ f (u) ∈ S. Decidability of the latter problem is
entailed by decidability of the classical synthesis problem when the speciﬁcation formalism
used to describe S is closed under expressing the assumption that the environment provides
inputs in dom(S). It is the case for instance when S is ω-regular, because the speciﬁcation
S ∪ dom(S) ⊗ Σω   o has total domain and is eﬀectively ω-regular. [1] investigates the more
challenging setting of S being expressed by a multi-valued (in contrast to Boolean) LTL
logic. More generally, there is a series of works on solving games under assumptions on the
behaviour of the environment [18, 6, 32, 21, 13, 2].

Our setting: Partial-domain weighted specifications. In this paper, motivated by the line
of work on quantitative extensions of synthesis and the latter more realistic setting of partial-
domain speciﬁcations, we investigate synthesis problems from partial-domain weighted speci-
ﬁcations (hereafter just called weighted speciﬁcations). We conduct this investigation in the
setting of terminating reactive systems, and accordingly our speciﬁcations are over ﬁnite
words. Formally, a speciﬁcation is a mapping S : (Σi.Σo)∗ →          Q∪ {−∞}. The domain
dom(S) of S is deﬁned as all the input sequences u ∈ Σ∗i such that S(u ⊗ v) ∈             Q   for
some v ∈ Σo∗ . We consider three quantitative synthesis problems, which all consists in
checking whether there exists a function f computable by a ﬁnite transducer such that
dom(f ) = dom(S) and which satisﬁes respectively the following conditions:
   • for all u ∈ dom(S) it holds that S(u ⊗ f (u)) ⊲ t for a given threshold t ∈         Q and
     ⊲ ∈ {>, ≥}, called threshold synthesis, or
   • S(u ⊗ f (u)) = bestValS (u), that is, the maximal value that can be achieved for the
     input u, i.e., bestValS (u) = sup{S(u ⊗ v) | v ∈ Σ∗o }, called best-value synthesis, or
   • bestValS (u) − S(u ⊗ f (u)) ⊳ r for a given threshold r ∈      Q and ⊳ ∈ {<, ≤}, called
     approximate synthesis.
   Following the game metaphor explained before, those quantitative synthesis problems
can be formulated as two-player games in which Adam (environment) and Eve (system)
alternatively pick symbols in Σi and Σo respectively. Additionally, Adam has the power to



                                               2
Table 1.: Complexity results for weighted speciﬁcations. Here, D stands for decidable, the
          suﬃx -c for complete, λ for discount factor, and n for a natural number.
                       Spec    Sum-automata       Avg-automata       Dsum-automata
      Problem
           strict threshold     NP ∩ coNP          NP ∩ coNP              NP
      non-strict threshold      NP ∩ coNP          NP ∩ coNP          NP ∩ coNP
                 best-value      Ptime [3]          Ptime [3]         NP ∩ coNP
       strict approximate     EXPtime-c [26]           D           NEXPtime for λ = 1/n
        non-strict approx.    EXPtime-c [26]           D            EXPtime for λ = 1/n



stop the game. If it does not, then Eve wins the game. Otherwise, a ﬁnite play spells a
word u ⊗ v. For the Boolean synthesis problem, Eve has won if either u 6∈ dom(S) where
S is the speciﬁcation, or u ⊗ v ∈ S. Additionally, for the threshold synthesis problem,
the value S(u ⊗ v) must be greater than the given threshold; for the best-value synthesis
problem, it must be equal to bestValS (u) and for approximate synthesis it must be r-close
to bestValS (u).

Contributions. Our main contribution is a clear picture about decidability of threshold
synthesis, best-value synthesis and approximate synthesis for weighted speciﬁcations over
ﬁnite words deﬁned by deterministic weighted ﬁnite automata [23], equipped with either sum,
average or discounted-sum measure. Such automata extend ﬁnite automata with integer
weights on their transitions, computing a value through a payoﬀ function that combines
those integers, with sum, average, or discounted-sum. The results (presented in Section 4)
are summarized in Table 1. We also give an application of our results to the decidability
of quantitative extensions of the Church synthesis problem over inﬁnite words, for some
classes of weighted safety speciﬁcations, which intuitively require that all preﬁxes satisfy a
quantitative requirement (being above a threshold, equal to the best-value, or close to it).
   As we explain in the related works section, some of our results are obtained via reduc-
tion to solving known quantitative games or to the notions of r-regret determinization for
weighted automata. We develop new techniques to solve the strict threshold synthesis prob-
lem for discounted-sum speciﬁcations in NP (Theorem 9), the best-value synthesis problem
for discounted-sum speciﬁcations in NP ∩ coNP (Theorem 12) and approximate synthesis
for average speciﬁcations (Theorem 13), which are to the best of our knowledge new results.
   Moreover, as our main tool to obtain our synthesis results, we introduce in Section 3
a new kind of (weighted) games called critical prefix games tailored to handle weighted
speciﬁcations with partial domain of finite words. We believe these kind of games are
interesting on their own and are described below in more detail.

Critical prefix games. Following the classical game metaphor of synthesis, we design
weighted games into which some of our synthesis problems can be directly encoded. Those
games still have inﬁnite-duration, but account for the fact that speciﬁcations are on ﬁnite
words and have partial domains. In particular, the quantitative constraints must be checked
only for play preﬁxes that correspond to input words of the environment which are in the
domain of the speciﬁcation. So, a critical preﬁx game is deﬁned as a two-player turn-based
weighted game with some of the vertices being declared as critical. When the play enters
a critical vertex, a quantitative requirement must be fulﬁlled, otherwise Eve loses. For in-
stance, critical preﬁx threshold games require that the payoﬀ value when entering a critical
vertex is at least or above a certain threshold. We show that these threshold games are
all decidable for sum, average, and discounted-sum payoﬀs, see Theorems 3 and 4. For
solving approximate average synthesis, we use a reduction to critical preﬁx energy games
of imperfect information starting with ﬁxed initial credit (the energy level must be at least



                                              3
zero whenever the play is in a critical vertex). Without critical vertices (where the energy
level must be at least zero all the time) these games are known to be decidable [22]. We
show that adding critical vertices makes these games undecidable, in general, see Theorem 7.
However, a large subclass of imperfect information critical preﬁx energy games, suﬃcient
for our synthesis problems, is shown to be decidable, see Theorem 8.

Domain-safe weighted specifications. Most of our quantitative synthesis problems reduce
to two-player games. While we need games of diﬀerent natures, they all model the fact that
Eve constructs a run of the (deterministic) automaton, given the input symbols provided by
Adam so far. By choosing outputs, Eve must make sure that this run is accepting whenever
the input word played by Adam so far is in the domain of S. Otherwise Adam can stop and
Eve loses. While this condition can be encoded in the game by enriching the vertices with
subsets of states (in which Eve could have been by choosing alternative output symbols),
this would result in an exponential blow-up of the game. We instead show that the weighted
automaton can be preprocessed in polynomial-time into a so called domain-safe automaton,
in which there is no need to monitor the input domain when playing, see Theorem 2.

Related works. Boolean synthesis problems for ﬁnite words have been considered in [35, 34]
where the speciﬁcation is given as an LTL formula over ﬁnite traces. In the quantitative
setting, it has also been considered in [25] for weighted speciﬁcations given by deterministic
weighted automata. In these works however, it is the role of Eve to eventually stop the game.
While this makes sense for reachability objectives and planning problems, this setting does
not accurately model a synthesis scenario where the system has no control over the provided
input sequence. Our setting is diﬀerent and needs new technical developments.
   Threshold problems in quantitative inﬁnite-duration two-player games with discounted-
and mean-payoﬀ measures are known to be solvable in NP ∩ coNP [4, 36]. Our threshold
synthesis problems all directly reduce to critical preﬁx threshold games with corresponding
payoﬀ functions. The latter games, for sum and average, are shown to reduce to mean-payoﬀ
games, so our NP ∩ coNP upper-bound follows from [36]. For critical preﬁx discounted-sum
games with a non-strict threshold, we show a polynomial time reduction to inﬁnite-duration
discounted sum games and hence our result follows from [4]. Such a reduction fails for
a strict threshold and we develop new techniques to solve critical preﬁx discounted-sum
games with strict threshold, by ﬁrst showing that memoryless strategies suﬃce for Eve to
win, and then by showing how to check in PTime whether a memoryless strategy is winning
for Eve. The latter result actually shows how to test in PTime whether there exists, in
a weighted graph, a path from a source to a target vertex of discounted-sum greater or
equal to some given threshold. This result entails that the non-emptiness problem for non-
deterministic discounted-sum max-automata2 is solvable in PTime (Theorem 6). To the
best of our knowledge, up to now this problem is only known to be in PSpace for the
subcase of functional discounted-sum automata [25, 9].
   As we show, the best-value synthesis problems correspond to zero-regret determinization
problems for non-deterministic weighted automata, i.e., deciding whether there is a non-
determinism resolving strategy for Eve that guarantees the same value as the maximal
value of an accepting run in the non-deterministic weighted automaton. Such a problem
is in PTime for sum-automata [3] and the average case easily reduces to the sum-case.
For discounted-sum, zero-regret determinization is known to be decidable in NP for dsum-
automata over inﬁnite words [30]. We improve this bound to NP ∩ coNP for ﬁnite words.
   Finally, approximate synthesis corresponds to a problem known as r-regret determiniza-
tion of non-deterministic weighted automata. For sum-automata, it is known to be Ex-
pTime-complete [26]. For average-automata, there is no immediate reduction to the sum
 2 i.e., checking whether there exists a word with value greater or equal to some threshold, where the value

   is defined by taking the max over all accepting runs.




                                                     4
case, because the sum value computed by an r-regret determinizer can be arbitrarily far-
away from the best sum, while its averaged value remains close to the best average. Instead,
we show a reduction to the new class of partial observation critical preﬁx energy games.
For dsum-automata over inﬁnite words, total domain and integral discount factor, r-regret
determinization is known to be decidable [30]. Our setting does not directly reduce to this
setting, but we use similar ideas.


2. Preliminaries
Languages and relations. Let             N
                                      be the set of non-negative integers. Let Σ be a ﬁnite
alphabet. We denote by Σ∗ , respectively Σω , the set of ﬁnite, respectively inﬁnite, words
over Σ, and Σ+ the set of non-empty ﬁnite words over Σ. The empty word is denoted by ε.
A language over Σ is a set of words over Σ. A (binary) relation R is a subset of Σi∗ × Σ∗o, i.e.,
a set of pairs of words. Its domain is the set dom(R) = {u | ∃v : (u, v) ∈ R}. Given a pair of
words, we refer to the ﬁrst (resp. second) component as input (resp. output) component, the
alphabets Σi and Σo are referred to as input resp. output alphabet. We let Σio = Σi ∪ Σo.

Automata. A nondeterministic finite state automaton (NFA) is a tuple A = (Q, qi , Σ, ∆, F ),
where Q is a ﬁnite state set, qi ∈ Q is the initial state, Σ is a ﬁnite alphabet, ∆ ⊆ Q × Σ × Q
is a transition relation, and F ⊆ Q is a set of ﬁnal states. A run of the automaton on a word
w = a1 . . . an is a sequence ρ = τ1 . . . τn of transitions such that there exist q0 , . . . , qn ∈ Q
such that τj = (qj−1 , aj , qj ) for all j. A run on ε is a single state. A run is accepting
if it begins in the initial state and ends in a ﬁnal state. The language recognized by the
automaton is deﬁned as L(A) = {w | there is an accepting run of A on w}. The automaton
is deterministic (a DFA) if ∆ is given as a partial function δ : Q × Σ → Q.

Transducers. A transducer is a tuple T = (Q, qi , Σi, Σo, δ, F ), where Q is a ﬁnite state
set, qi ∈ Q is the initial state, Σi and Σo are ﬁnite alphabets, δ : Q × Σi → Σo × Q
is a transition function, and F ⊆ Q is a set of ﬁnal states. A transition is also de-
noted as a tuple for convenience. A run is either a non-empty sequence of transitions
ρ = (q0 , u1 , v1 , q1 )(q1 , u2 , v2 , q2 ) . . . (qn−1 , un , vn , qn ) or a single state. The input (resp. out-
put) of ρ is u = u1 . . . un (resp. v = v1 . . . vn ) if ρ ∈ ∆+ , both are ε if ρ ∈ Q. We denote by
   u|v
p −−→ q that there exists a run from p to q with input u and output v. A run is accepting
if it starts in the initial and ends in a ﬁnal state. The partial function recognized by the
transducer is fT : Σi∗ → Σ∗o deﬁned as fT (u) = v if there is an accepting run of the form
  u|v
p −−→ q.

Weighted automata. Let n > 0. Given a ﬁnite sequence φ = j1 . . . jn of integers,
and a discount factor λ ∈
              Pn
                                   Q
                                 such that 0 < λ < 1, we deﬁne the following functions:
                                    Sum(φ)                      Pn     i
Sum(φ) =        i=1 ji , Avg(φ)  =     n      , Dsum(φ) =         i=1 λ ji if φ is non-empty and
Sum(φ) = Avg(φ) = Dsum(φ) = 0 otherwise. Let V ∈ {Sum, Avg, Dsum}. A weighted
V -automaton (WFA) is a tuple A = (Q, Σ, qi , ∆, F, γ), where (Q, Σ, qi , ∆, F ) is a classical
deterministic ﬁnite state automaton, and γ : δ →                Z
                                                             is a weight function. Its recognized
language, etc., is deﬁned as for classical ﬁnite state automata. The value V (ρ) of a run
ρ = τ1 . . . τn is deﬁned as V (γ(τ1 ) . . . γ(τn )) if ρ is accepting and −∞ otherwise. The
value A(w) of a word w is given by the total function, called the function recognized by A,
            Q
A : Σ∗ → ∪ {−∞} deﬁned as w 7→ V (ρ), where ρ is the run of A on w, that is, the value
of a word is the value of its accepting run, or −∞ if there exists none.

Weighted specifications. A weighted specification is a total function S : (ΣiΣo)∗ → ∪                       Q
{−∞} recognized by a WFA A. Note that by our deﬁnition, A is deterministic by default.



                                                        5
Given u = u1 . . . un ∈ Σi∗ and v = v1 . . . un ∈ Σo∗ , u⊗v denotes its convolution u1 v1 . . . un vn ∈
(ΣiΣo)∗ . We usually write S(u ⊗ v) instead of S(u1 v1 . . . un vn ). The relation (or Boolean
speciﬁcation) of S, denoted by R(S), is given by the set of pairs that are mapped to a
rational number, i.e., R(S) = {(u, v) | S(u ⊗ v) > −∞}. We usually write u ⊗ v ∈ S instead
of (u, v) ∈ R(S). The domain of S, denoted by dom(S), is deﬁned as {u ∈ Σ∗i | ∃v ∈
Σ∗o : u ⊗ v ∈ S}. If a weighted speciﬁcation is given by some V -automaton, we refer to it as
V -speciﬁcation.

Quantitative synthesis problems. The (Boolean) synthesis problem asks, given a weighted
speciﬁcation S, whether there exists a partial function f : Σ∗i → Σ∗o deﬁned by a transducer
with dom(f ) = dom(S) such that u ⊗ f (u) ∈ S for all u ∈ dom(f ).
  We deﬁne three quantitative synthesis problems that pose additional conditions, we only
state the additions. The threshold synthesis problem additionally asks, given a threshold
    Q
ν ∈ , and ⊲ ∈ {>, ≥}, that S(u ⊗ f (u)) ⊲ ν for all u ∈ dom(f ). The best-value synthesis
problem additionally asks that S(u⊗f (u)) = bestValS (u), where bestValS (u) = sup{S(u⊗v) |
u ⊗ v ∈ S} for all u ∈ dom(f ). The approximate synthesis problem additionally asks, given
                  Q
a threshold ν ∈ , and ⊳ ∈ {<, ≤}, that bestValS (u) − S(u ⊗ f (u)) ⊳ ν for all u ∈ dom(f ).
  In these settings, if such a function f exists, it is called S-realization, a transducer that
deﬁnes f is called S-realizer, and is said to implement an S-realization. A transducer whose
implemented function f only satisﬁes the Boolean condition is called Boolean S-realizer.
Example 1. Let Σi = {a, b} and Σo = {c, d}, and consider the weighted speciﬁcation S
deﬁned by the following automaton A.

                                             c| − 2      b|0       d|12

                                      d|2      a|0
                                    d|2        b|0       d|4

                                    a|0

Clearly, S has a Boolean realizer (inﬁnitely many, in fact). First, we view A as a Sum-
automaton. There exists a realizer that ensures a value of at least 6, for example, the
transducer that always outputs d. There exists no best-value realizer. To see this, we look
at the maximal values. We have bestVal(b) = 12, bestVal(ab) = 10, and bestVal(ai b) = 2i + 4
for i > 1. The maximal value for ab is achieved with cd and the maximal value for aaab
with dddd. So, the ﬁrst output symbol depends on the length of the input word, which is
unknown to a transducer when producing the ﬁrst output symbol. However, there exists an
approximate realizer for the non-strict threshold 4: the transducer that outputs c solely for
the ﬁrst a. The diﬀerence to the maximal value is 0 for the inputs b and ab, and 4 for all
other inputs. Secondly, we view A as an Avg-automaton. With the same argumentation as
for Sum, it is easy to see that there exists no best-value realizer, there exists an approximate
realizer for the non-strict threshold 32 : the transducer that outputs c solely for the ﬁrst a.
                                                                             2
The diﬀerence to the maximal value is 0 for the inputs b and ab, and i+1         for inputs of the
       i
form a b for i > 1. Note that the diﬀerence decreases with the input length unlike for Sum.

Boolean synthesis and domain-safe automata. The quantitative synthesis problems that
we have deﬁned, ask for Boolean realizers that additionally satisfy a quantitative condition.
We start by showing that a weighted speciﬁcation A can be preprocessed in polynomial time
such that dealing with the Boolean part becomes very simple. Basically, we remove all parts
of A that cannot be used by a Boolean realizer. We call the result of this preprocessing




                                                     6
a domain-safe weighted specification, to be deﬁned formally below. In Section 4 we use
domain-safe speciﬁcations.
   Denote by dom(A) ⊆ Σi∗ the domain of the weighted speciﬁcation deﬁned by A. We can
easily obtain an NFA (with ε-transitions) for dom(A) by removing the weights and turning
all transitions that are labelled by an output letter into an ε-transition. We call the resulting
NFA the domain automaton of A, and denote it by Adom . For a state q of A, we denote
by L(Adom , q) the language of Adom accepted by runs starting in q. An output transition
(q, a, q ′ ) of A is called domain-safe if L(Adom , q) = L(Adom , q ′ ), i.e., it does not restrict
the language of input words that can be accepted by Adom . Otherwise, such a transition is
called domain-unsafe. We call a weighted speciﬁcation A domain-safe if it is trim, i.e., all
states are accessible and co-accessible, and all its output transitions are domain-safe.
   A transducer that produces an input/output pair whose run in A uses a domain-unsafe
transition of A cannot be a Boolean realizer of A because it cannot complete all inputs
in the domain with an output in the relation R(A). We now show that we can compute
in polynomial time for a given weighted speciﬁcation A a sub-automaton A′ of A that is
domain-safe and has the same Boolean realizers as A. We would like to mention that there
is a tight connection between domain-safe automata and the problem of “determinization
by pruning” (DBP) as it is studied in [3]. The following result can also be derived from the
proof of [3, Theorem 4.1]. Furthermore, the proof of Theorem 2 directly yields an alternative
game-based proof of the “determinization by pruning” problem.
Theorem 2. There is a polynomial time procedure that takes as input a weighted specification
A, and either returns “no realizer” if A does not have Boolean realizers, or, otherwise, returns
a sub-automaton A′ of A that is domain-safe, has the same domain as A, and has the same
Boolean realizers as A.
  A direct consequence of the above theorem is that the Boolean synthesis problem is
decidable in polynomial time.


3. Critical prefix games
In this section we introduce the necessary deﬁnitions and notations regarding games. More-
over, we introduce critical preﬁx games and establish our results for these kind of games.

Games. A weighted game with imperfect information is an inﬁnite-duration two-player
game played on a game arena G = (V, v0 , A, E, O, w), where V is a ﬁnite set of vertices,
v0 ∈ V is the initial vertex, A is a ﬁnite set of actions, E ⊆ V × A × V is a labeled transition
relation, O ⊆ 2V is a set of observations that partition V , and w : E →            Z    is a weight
function. Without loss of generality, we assume that the arena has no dead ends, i.e., for
all v ∈ V there exists a ∈ A and v ′ ∈ V such that (v, a, v ′ ) ∈ E. The unique observation
containing a vertex v is denoted obs(v). A game with perfect information is such that
O = {{v} | v ∈ V }. In that case we omit O from the tuple G.
   Games are played in rounds in which Eve chooses an action a ∈ A, and Adam chooses
an a-successor of the current vertex. The ﬁrst round starts in the initial vertex v0 . A play
                                                                                           N
π in G is an inﬁnite sequence v0 a0 v1 a1 . . . such that (vi , ai , vi+1 ) ∈ E for all i ∈ . The
preﬁx of π up to vn is denoted π(n), its last element vn is denoted by last(π(n)). The set of
all plays resp. preﬁxes of plays in G is denoted by Plays(G) resp. Prefs(G). The observation
sequence of the play π is deﬁned as obs(π) = obs(v0 )a0 obs(v1 )a1 . . . and the ﬁnite observation
sequence of the play preﬁx π(n) is obs(π(n)) = obs(v0 )a0 . . . obs(vn ). Naturally, obs extends
to sets of (preﬁxes of) plays.
   A game is deﬁned by an arena G and an objective Win ⊆ Plays(G) describing a set of
good plays in G for Eve. A strategy for Eve in G is a mapping σ : Prefs(G) → A, it is
called observation-based if for all play preﬁxes ρ, ρ′ ∈ Prefs(G), if obs(ρ) = obs(ρ′ ), then



                                                 7
σ(ρ) = σ(ρ′ ). Equivalently, an observation-based strategy is a mapping σ : obs(Prefs(G)) →
A. We do not formally introduce strategies for Adam, intuitively, given a play preﬁx and
an action a, a strategy of Adam selects an a-successor of its last vertex. Given a strategy
σ, let Playsσ (G) denote the set of plays compatible with σ in G, and Prefsσ (G) denote the
set of play preﬁxes of Playsσ (G). An Eve’s strategy σ in G is winning if Playsσ (G) ⊆ Win.
   We now deﬁne
              Pn     quantitative objectives. The energy level of P     the play preﬁx π(n) is
                                                                           n
EL(π(n)) = i=1 w((vi−1 , ai−1 , vi )), the sum value is Sum(π(n)) = i=1 w((vi−1 , ai−1 , vi )),
                                    1
the average value is Avg(π(n)) = n Sum(π(n)), and P
P                                                     the discounted-sum value is Dsum(π(n)) =
   n    i                                               ∞     i
   i=1 λ  w((v   , a
              i−1 i−1 i, v )), and we let Dsum(π) =     i=1 λ w((vi−1 , ai−1 , vi )) (we do not ex-
plicitly mention the discount factor λ in this notation because it is always clear from the
context).
   The energy objective in G is parameterized by an initial credit c0 ∈       N     and is given by
                                         N
PosEnG (c0 ) = {π ∈ Plays(G) | ∀i ∈ : c0 + EL(π(i)) ≥ 0}. It requires that the energy
level of a play never drops below zero when starting with initial energy level c0 . The
fixed initial credit problem for imperfect information games asks whether there exists an
observation-based winning strategy for Eve for the objective PosEnG (c0 ). The discounted-
                                                               Q
sum objective in G is parameterized by a threshold ν ∈ , and ⊲ ∈ {>, ≥}. It is given
by DS⊲G (ν) = {π ∈ Plays(G) | Dsum(π) ⊲ ν} and requires that the discounted-sum value of a
play is greater than resp. at least ν. The discounted-sum game problem asks whether there
exists a winning strategy for Eve for the objective DS⊲G (ν).
   A game with perfect information is a special case of an imperfect information game.
Classically, instead of using the above model with full observation, a (weighted) perfect
information game, simply called game, is deﬁned over an arena (V, V∃ , v0 , E, w), where the
set of vertices V is partitioned into V∃ and V \ V∃ , the vertices belonging to Eve and Adam,
respectively, v0 ∈ V is the initial vertex, E ⊆ V × V is a transition relation, and w : E →     Z
is a weight function. In a play on such a game arena, Eve chooses a successor if the current
vertex belongs to her, otherwise Adam chooses. For games with perfect information the two
models are equivalent and we shall use both.

Critical prefix games. A critical prefix game is a game, where the winning objective is
parameterized by a set C ⊆ V of critical vertices, and a set of play preﬁxes W ⊆ Prefs(G). Its
objective is deﬁned as CritC,W (G) = {π ∈ Plays(G) | ∀i last(π(i)) ∈ C → π(1) . . . π(i) ∈ W }.
The idea of a critical preﬁx game is that the state of a play is only relevant whenever the
play is in a critical vertex. For convenience, in the case of critical preﬁx games, we also refer
to the set W as objective.
   The threshold problem for critical prefix games asks whether there exists a winning strategy
for Eve for the objective CritC,W (G), where W is of the form ThresVG⊲ (ν) = {ϕ ∈ Prefs(G) |
                                                Q
V (ϕ) ⊲ ν} parameterized by a threshold ν ∈ , ⊲ ∈ {>, ≥}, and V ∈ {Sum, Avg, Dsum}.
   The initial credit problem for critical prefix imperfect information energy games asks
whether there exists an observation-based winning strategy for Eve for the objective CritC,W (G),
where W is of the form PrefPosEnG (c0 ) = {ϕ ∈ Prefs(G) | c0 + EL(ϕ) ≥ 0} parameterized
                          N
by an initial credit c0 ∈ .
Theorem 3. The threshold problem for critical prefix games for V ∈ {Sum, Avg} and a
strict or non-strict threshold is decidable in NP ∩ coNP. Moreover, positional strategies are
sufficient for Eve to win such games.

Proof sketch. For Sum and Avg and a strict or non-strict threshold, the critical preﬁx thresh-
old games reduce to mean-payoﬀ games which are solvable in NP ∩ coNP [36]. Positional
strategies suﬃce for mean-payoﬀ games, a winning strategy in the constructed mean-payoﬀ
game directly yields a positional winning strategy in the critical preﬁx threshold game.




                                                8
Theorem 4. The threshold problem for critical prefix games for Dsum and a strict resp.
non-strict threshold is decidable in NP resp. NP ∩ coNP. Moreover, positional strategies
are sufficient for Eve to win such games.
  To prove the above theorem, we ﬁrst show a result on weighted graphs which is interesting
in itself.
Lemma 5. Given a weighted graph G, a source vertex v0 ∈ V , a target set T ⊆ V and a
                Q
threshold ν ∈ , checking whether there exists a path π from v0 to some vertex v ∈ T such
that Dsum(π) ≤ ν can be done in Ptime.
   Lemma 5 can be used to show that the ≥ ν-non-emptiness problem for nondeterminis-
tic discounted-sum automata3 can be checked in Ptime, a result which is, to the best of
our knowledge, new. It was known to be in PSpace for unambiguous discounted-sum au-
tomata [25, 9]. This problem asks for the existence of a word of value greater or equal than
a given threshold ν. Since the value of a word is the maximal value amongst its accepting
runs, it suﬃces to check for the existence of a run from the initial state to an accepting state
of discounted-sum value ≥ ν. By inverting the weights, the latter is equivalent to checking
whether there exists a run from the initial state to an accepting state of discounted-sum
value ≤ −ν. By seeing the (inverted) discounted-sum automaton as a weighted graph, the
latter property can be checked in Ptime by Lemma 5, thus proving the following theorem.
Theorem 6. The ≥ ν non-emptiness problem is decidable in PTime for nondeterministic
discounted-sum automata.
  We now go back to the proof of Theorem 4.
Proof sketch of Theorem 4. For Dsum, and a non-strict threshold, the problem can be di-
rectly reduced to discounted-sum games which are solvable in NP ∩ coNP [4].
  For Dsum, and a strict threshold, such a reduction fails. To solve the problem, we ﬁrst
show that positional strategies are suﬃcient for Eve to win in a critical preﬁx threshold
discounted-sum game (for strict and non-strict thresholds). The NP-algorithm guesses a
positional strategy σ for Eve, and then veriﬁes in polynomial time whether σ is winning.
Let G′ be the game restricted to Eve’s σ-edges, seen as a weighted graph. The strategy σ is
not winning iﬀ Adam can form a path in G′ from the initial vertex to a critical vertex that
has weight ≤ ν. This property can be checked in Ptime thanks to Lemma 5 (by taking as
target set the set of critical vertices).
  The following is shown by reduction from the halting problem for 2-counter machines.
Theorem 7. The fixed initial credit problem for imperfect information critical prefix energy
games is undecidable.
  The above result contrasts the ﬁxed initial credit problem for imperfect information energy
games which is decidable [22].
Theorem 8. The fixed initial credit problem for imperfect information critical prefix energy
games is decidable if from each vertex Adam has a strategy to reach a critical vertex against
observation based strategies. Moreover, finite-memory strategies are sufficient for Eve to
win.
Proof sketch. This problem is reduced to the ﬁxed initial credit problem for imperfect infor-
mation energy games which is decidable [22]. In classical energy games, Eve loses as soon as
the energy goes below zero. The idea of the reduction is that if in the critical preﬁx energy
 3 In contrast to deterministic weighted automata, there might be serveral accepting runs on an input and

   the value of the word is defined as the maximal value of its accepting runs [25, 29].




                                                     9
game the initial credit is c0 , then in the classical energy game we start the game with an
additional buﬀer, i.e., with c0 + B, for some computable bound B. In the critical preﬁx
energy game, if the energy level drops below −B Adam can force to visit a critical vertex
such that the energy level can rise by at most B, ensuring that a critical vertex is visited
with energy level below zero. Thus, the additional buﬀer B suﬃces in the classical energy
game.


4. Synthesis problems
Here, we solve the quantitative synthesis problems deﬁned in Section 2. Recall that weighted
speciﬁcations are given by weighted automata that alternate between reading one input and
one output symbol. In other words, we prove the decidability results of Table 1. We then
show consequences of these results to quantitative synthesis problems over inﬁnite words.

Threshold synthesis problems. Since weighted speciﬁcations S are given by weighted au-
tomata, the synthesis problem naturally reduces to a game played on the automaton. In
order to solve threshold synthesis problems, in contrast to best-value and approximate syn-
thesis problems, it is not necessary to compare the values of runs of the speciﬁcation au-
tomaton that have the same input sequence. Hence, it is relatively straightforward to reduce
threshold synthesis problems to critical preﬁx threshold games. An important point needs
to be taken care of due to the fact the domain of S might be partial, and therefore lead
Eve into the following bad situation (⋆): Eve must choose her outputs in such a way that
she does not go in a state of the automaton which is non-accepting, while the input word
played by Adam so far is in the domain of S. Otherwise, the pair of input and output word
formed would not even be in S, something which is required by the deﬁnition of synthesis
problems. So, Eve has to monitor the domain, which is easy if the domain is total, but
more involved if it is partial. Thanks to Theorem 2, this can be done in polynomial time.
More precisely, we ﬁrst run the algorithm of Theorem 2 which either returns that there is
no Boolean realizer, or returns a domain-safe deterministic weighted automaton A′ which
has the same Boolean realizers as S. By the very deﬁnition of domain-safe automata, the
bad situation (⋆) described above cannot happen. Hence, Eve can freely play on A′ without
taking care of the domain constraint. Only the quantitative constraint matters, and it has
to be enforced whenever Eve is in an accepting state of A′ (this corresponds to the situation
where Adam has chosen an input word in the domain of S). Hence, only accepting states
of A′ matter for the quantitative constraint and these are declared as critical. To conclude,
by projecting away the symbols of A′ and by declaring its accepting states to be critical,
we obtain a critical preﬁx game. For the threshold synthesis problem, decidability follows
directly from the decidability of the threshold problem for critical preﬁx games (Theorems 3
and 4). For Sum- and Avg-speciﬁcations, this can be done in NP ∩ coNP. We leave open
whether it is solvable in Ptime and show that this would also solve the long standing open
problem of whether mean-payoﬀ games are solvable in Ptime.
Theorem 9. The threshold synthesis problem for a V -specification with V ∈ {Sum, Avg}
and a strict or non-strict threshold is decidable in NP ∩ coNP and PTIME-equivalent to
mean-payoff games. The threshold synthesis problem for a Dsum-specification and a strict
resp. non-strict threshold is decidable in NP resp. in NP ∩ coNP.

Synthesis and regret determinization. Before we prove our results about best-value and
approximate synthesis, we highlight the tight connection between the approximate synthesis
problem and the so-called regret determinization problem for nondeterministic weighted




                                             10
automata4 . This problem has for instance been studied in [26] for Sum-automata and in [30]
for Dsum-automata. We formalize this connection here. Given r ∈                    Q
                                                                                 and ⊳ ∈ {<, ≤}, a
nondeterministic WFA A = (Q, Σ, qi , ∆, F, γ) is called r⊳ -regret determinizable if there exists
a ﬁnite set of memory states M and a deterministic WFA Ar = (Q × M, Σ, qir , ∆r , Fr , γr ),
where qir = (qi , m) for some m ∈ M ,     Fr ⊆ F × M , (q, m), a, (q, m′ ) ∈ ∆r implies that
(q, a, q ′ ) ∈ ∆, and γr (q, m), a, (q, m′ ) = γ((q, a, q ′ )) for all m, m′ ∈ M , such that L(A) =
L(Ar ) and A(w) − Ar (w) ⊳ r for all w ∈ dom(L(A)). The regret determinization problem
asks, given a nondeterministic weighted automaton A, a threshold r ∈ , and ⊳ ∈ {<, ≤}, Q
whether A is r⊳ -regret determinizable.
Lemma 10. The approx. synthesis problem for weighted specifications reduces in linear time
to the regret determinization problem for nondet. weighted automata (with the same thresh-
old). The converse is true (in linear time and with the same threshold) for Sum-automata.
   Lemma 10 is independent from any payoﬀ function. Regarding the converse direction,
when going from the regret determinization problem to the approximate synthesis problem,
a transition (for an input symbol) must be translated into two transitions (adding an output
symbol). This step can cause diﬃculties depending on the used payoﬀ function, e.g., Dsum.

Best-value synthesis problems. Best-value synthesis is equivalent to zero-regret synthesis,
which is, by Lemma 10, equivalent to zero-regret determinization of weighted automata.
In [9], the authors showed that if a Sum-automaton is zero-regret determinizable, then
no memory states are needed, i.e., a sub-automaton suﬃces. We give general suﬃcient
conditions on weighted ﬁnite automata (which hold for Sum-, Avg- and Dsum-automata)
under which the latter result can be generalized.
           Z      Q
     Let V : ∗ → be a payoﬀ function. A V -automaton deﬁning a V -speciﬁcation, where V
is applied to runs as usual, is called ≤-stable if for all runs ρ, ρ′ , ρ′′ such that the end state
of ρ is the beginning state of ρ′ and ρ′′ , w′ = u ⊗ v ′ , and w′′ = u ⊗ v ′′ for some u ∈ Σi∗ and
v ′ , v ′′ ∈ Σ∗o, where w′ and w′′ are the words associated to ρ′ and ρ′′ , respectively, holds that
if V (ρ′ ) ≤ V (ρ′′ ) then V (ρρ′ ) ≤ V (ρρ′′ ).
Lemma 11. Given a weighted specification S by a ≤-stable weighted automaton A, if there
exists a transducer that implements a best-value S-realization, then there exists a transducer
that implements a best-value S-realization that is defined as a sub-automaton of A.
  While the above lemma can be used to obtain our decidability results for best-value
synthesis, we use other techniques to obtain the complexity results stated below.
Theorem 12. The best-value synthesis problem is decidable in Ptime for Sum-specifications
and Avg-specifications, and in NP∩coNP for Dsum-specifications.
Proof sketch. For Sum, the problem reduces to the zero-regret determinization problem
for Sum-automata, see Lemma 10, aka the determinization by pruning problem for Sum-
automata, known to be decidable in Ptime in [3]. For Avg, it easily reduces to Sum by
interpreting the Avg-speciﬁcation as a Sum-speciﬁcation. For Dsum, we show that the prob-
lem reduces in Ptime to a critical preﬁx threshold game, for non-strict threshold, which is
solvable in NP∩coNP by Theorem 4.
  Alternatively, decidability for Dsum can be obtained by reduction to the zero-regret deter-
minization problem for Dsum-automata over inﬁnite words which was shown to be decidable
in NP in [30, Theorem 6]. However, our techniques allow us to get NP∩coNP.


 4 In contrast to deterministic weighted automata, there might be serveral accepting runs on an input and

   the value of the word is defined as the maximal value of its accepting runs [25, 29].




                                                    11
Approximate synthesis problems. We now turn to the approximate synthesis problems
and show its decidability for Sum and Avg. We leave the decidability status open for Dsum,
but nevertheless show decidability for a large class, namely when the discount factor is of
                     N
the form n1 for n ∈ . Nondeterministic Dsum-automata in this class have been considered
in [8] and shown to be determinizable.

Theorem 13. The approximate synthesis problem is
   • EXPtime-complete for Sum-specifications and strict or non-strict thresholds;
   • decidable and EXPtime-hard for Avg-specifications and strict or non-strict thresholds;
   • in NEXPtime (resp. EXPtime) for Dsum-specifications with a discount factor λ of
                            N
     the form n1 with n ∈ and strict (resp. non-strict) thresholds.
Proof sketch. For Sum, we reduce the problem to r-regret determinization of Sum-automata,
known to be EXPtime-complete, using the back-and-forth connection given by Lemma 10.
   For an Avg-speciﬁcations S, it is worth noting that even though r-approximate synthe-
sis reduces to r-approximate synthesis for Sum when r = 0, interpreting S as a Sum-
speciﬁcation, this reduction is wrong for r > 0 in general. It is because in an Avg-
speciﬁcation, Eve can deviate more and more from the best sum, while the average of
this diﬀerence can stay low. We instead rely on a reduction to critical preﬁx energy games
of imperfect information and ﬁxed initial credit (which falls into the decidable subclass of
Theorem 8). Intuitively, in this game, Adam constructs a run ρ on a pair of words (u, v)
and Eve constructs a run ρ′ on some (u, v ′ ). She only sees u and not ρ. The energy level
of such a play is set to Sum(ρ′ ) + |uv| · r − Sum(ρ) and must be positive whenever Adam
reaches an accepting state. ExpTime-hardness is perhaps the most technical result of the
paper, and is a non-trivial adaptation of reduction from countdown games used to show
ExpTime-hardness of the regret determinization of Sum-automata [26].
   Finally, for Dsum, we use that by projecting away the output in the Dsum-automaton
deﬁning the speciﬁcation, we obtain a nondeterministic weighted automaton which is deter-
minizable by [8]. This allows us to reduce the problem to the threshold synthesis problem
for Dsum, which is decidable by Theorem 9. To obtain the complexity results, we ﬁrst an-
alyze the determinization procedure. It yields an automaton whose states are exponential
in the number of states and polynomial in the weights of the nondeterministic one. Its
weights are polynomial in the weights of the nondeterministic one. For a strict threshold,
the claimed complexity bound follows directly from Theorem 9. For a non-strict threshold,
we use that critical preﬁx threshold games are reduced in polynomial time to discounted-
sum games. Using value iteration [36] to solve discounted-sum games yields the claimed
complexity bound, because it runs in polynomial time in the size of the arena, logarithmic
in the absolute maximal weight of the arena, and exponential in the representation of the
discount factor, i.e., polynomial in the discount factor.

Infinite words and Church synthesis. An ω-speciﬁcation is a subset S ⊆ (Σi.Σo)ω . The
(Church) synthesis problem asks to decide whether there exists a strategy to pick a correct
output sequence given longer and longer preﬁxes of an inﬁnite input sequence. Formally, an
ω-speciﬁcation S is said to be realizable if there exists a function λ : Σi∗ → Σo such that for
all i1 i2 · · · ∈ Σiω , it holds that i1 λ(i1 )i2 λ(i1 i2 )i3 λ(i1 i2 i3 ) · · · ∈ S.
   Strategies of interest are those which can be represented by a ﬁnite-state machine, and in
particular a Mealy machine, that is, roughly, a transducer running on ω-words and without
acceptance condition. Formally, it is a tuple M = (P, p0 , δ) such that P is a ﬁnite set of
states with initial state p0 , and δ : P × Σi → Σo × P is a (total) transition function. The
function δ can be extended to δ ∗ : P × Σ+         i → Σo × P as usual. Then, M deﬁnes the strategy
λM such that for all u ∈ Σi∗ , λM (u) = π1 (δ ∗ (p0 , u)), where π1 is the ﬁrst projection. It



                                                12
is well-known that when S is ω-regular (given e.g. as a parity automaton), it is decidable
whether S is realizable [14]. Moreover, realizability implies realizability by a Mealy machine.

Weighted safety specifications. In this paper, we go beyond ω-regular speciﬁcations, by
considering safety ω-speciﬁcations induced by weighted speciﬁcations of ﬁnite words deﬁned
                                                                    Q
by deterministic weighted automata. Let W : (ΣiΣo)∗ → ∪ {−∞} be a weighted speciﬁ-
cation. For a threshold t ∈
                       ω
                                 Qand ⊲ ∈ {>, ≥}, we deﬁne the ω-speciﬁcation Thres⊲t (W ) =
{i1 o1 · · · ∈ (Σi.Σo) | ∀k ≥ 0, i1 . . . ik ∈ dom(W ) → W (i1 o1 . . . ik ok ) ⊲ t}. In words, an
ω-word w is in Thres⊲t (W ) iﬀ for all ﬁnite preﬁxes u = i1 o1 . . . ik ok of w, either i1 . . . ik 6∈
dom(W ) or W (u) ⊲ t. So, the quantitative condition is checked only for preﬁxes whose input
belongs to dom(W ). The ω-speciﬁcation Thres⊲t (W ) is a safety speciﬁcation 5 . More gener-
ally, any set S ⊆ (Σi.Σo)∗ induces a safety ω-speciﬁcation Safe(S) = {i1 o1 · · · ∈ (Σi.Σo)ω |
∀k ≥ 0, i1 . . . ik ∈ dom(S) → i1 o1 . . . ik ok ∈ S}.
   For example, we have the equality Thres⊲t (W ) = Safe({u ∈ (Σi.Σo)∗ | W (u) ⊲ t}). Like-
wise, we deﬁne best-value and approximate safety ω-speciﬁcations. Formally, given a ﬁnite
word i1 . . . ik ∈ Σi∗ and ⊳ ∈ {<, ≤}, we let BestVal(W ) = Approx≤ (W, 0) where for all
    Q
r ∈ ≥0 we have Approx⊳ (W, r) = Safe({u = i1 o1 . . . ik ok | bestValW (i1 . . . ik ) − W (u) ⊳ r}.
Note that the three notions of safety ω-speciﬁcations we have deﬁned are not necessarily
ω-regular, even if W is given by a deterministic weighted automaton. Nevertheless, an
immediate consequence of the results we have obtained previously on ﬁnite words is that
Theorem 14. The synthesis problem for an ω-specification O ⊆ (Σi.Σo)ω is decidable when
O is given by a deterministic V -automaton defining a weighted V -specification of finite
words W s.t. O ∈ {Thres>t (W ), Thres≥t (W ), BestVal(W ), Approx< (W, r), Approx≤ (W, r)}
and V = Sum, V = Avg or V = Dsum with discount factor 1/n for n ∈ . Moreover, if O   N
is realizable, it is realizable by a Mealy machine.


5. Future work
In this paper, weighted speciﬁcations are deﬁned by deterministic weighted automata. Non-
deterministic, even unambiguous, weighted automata, are strictly more expressive than their
deterministic variant in general, and in particular for Sum, Avg and Dsum. An interesting
direction is to revisit our quantitative synthesis problems for speciﬁcations deﬁned by non-
deterministic weighted automata. Using similar ideas as the undecidability of critical preﬁx
energy games of imperfect information, it can be shown that threshold synthesis becomes un-
decidable for unambiguous sum- and avg-speciﬁcations. The problem is open for best-value
and approximate synthesis, and we plan to investigate it.
   Two other directions seem interesting as future work, both in the setting of inﬁnite words.
First, natural measures in this setting are discounted-sum and mean-payoﬀ. While the
threshold synthesis problems directly reduce to known results and best-value/approximate
synthesis for dsum has been studied in [30], nothing is known to the best of our knowledge
about best-value/approximate synthesis for mean-payoﬀ. We expect the techniques to be
diﬀerent because such a measure is preﬁx-independent, unlike our measures in the setting
of ﬁnite words. As a second direction, we have seen how our results apply to synthesis on
inﬁnite words through weighted safety conditions. An interesting direction is to consider
such weighted requirements in conjunction with ω-regular conditions such as parity, in the
line of [17] that combines energy and parity objectives in games.




 5 A language of ω-words S is a safety language if any ω-word w whose finite prefixes u are such that uv ∈ S
                                                                                                        u
   for some ω-word vu , belongs to S [15].




                                                    13
References
 [1] Shaull Almagor and Orna Kupferman. Good-enough synthesis. In International Con-
     ference on Computer Aided Verification, pages 541–563. Springer, 2020.
 [2] Shaull Almagor, Orna Kupferman, Jan Oliver Ringert, and Yaron Velner. Quantitative
     assume guarantee synthesis. In International Conference on Computer Aided Verifica-
     tion, pages 353–374. Springer, 2017.
 [3] Benjamin Aminof, Orna Kupferman, and Robby Lampert. Reasoning about online
     algorithms with weighted automata. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 6(2):28:1–28:36, 2010.
 [4] Daniel Andersson. An improved algorithm for discounted payoﬀ games. In ESSLLI
     Student Session, pages 91–98, 2006.
 [5] Roderick Bloem, Krishnendu Chatterjee, Thomas A Henzinger, and Barbara Jobst-
     mann. Better quality in synthesis through quantitative objectives. In International
     Conference on Computer Aided Verification, pages 140–156. Springer, 2009.
 [6] Roderick Bloem, Rüdiger Ehlers, and Robert Könighofer. Cooperative reactive synthe-
     sis. In Bernd Finkbeiner, Geguang Pu, and Lijun Zhang, editors, Automated Technology
     for Verification and Analysis - 13th International Symposium, ATVA 2015, Shanghai,
     China, October 12-15, 2015, Proceedings, volume 9364 of Lecture Notes in Computer
     Science, pages 394–410. Springer, 2015.
 [7] Roderick Bloem, Barbara Jobstmann, Nir Piterman, Amir Pnueli, and Yaniv Sa’ar.
     Synthesis of reactive(1) designs. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 78(3):911–938, 2012.
 [8] Udi Boker and Thomas A. Henzinger. Exact and approximate determinization of
     discounted-sum automata. Logical Methods in Computer Science, 10(1), 2014.
 [9] Udi Boker, Thomas A. Henzinger, and Jan Otop. The target discounted-sum problem.
     In 30th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2015,
     Kyoto, Japan, July 6-10, 2015, pages 750–761. IEEE Computer Society, 2015.
[10] Patricia Bouyer, Uli Fahrenberg, Kim G Larsen, and Nicolas Markey. Timed automata
     with observers under energy constraints. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM international
     conference on Hybrid systems: computation and control, pages 61–70, 2010.
[11] Tomáš Brázdil, Petr Jančar, and Antonín Kučera. Reachability games on extended vec-
     tor addition systems with states. In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages,
     and Programming, pages 478–489. Springer, 2010.
[12] Romain Brenguier, Lorenzo Clemente, Paul Hunter, Guillermo A Pérez, Mickael Ran-
     dour, Jean-François Raskin, Ocan Sankur, and Mathieu Sassolas. Non-zero sum games
     for reactive synthesis. In Language and Automata Theory and Applications, pages 3–23.
     Springer, 2016.
[13] Romain Brenguier, Jean-François Raskin, and Ocan Sankur. Assume-admissible syn-
     thesis. Acta Informatica, 54(1):41–83, 2017.
[14] J Richard Büchi and Lawrence H Landweber. Solving sequential conditions ﬁnite-state
     strategies. Trans. Ameri. Math. Soc., 138:295–311, 1969.
[15] Edward Chang, Zohar Manna, and Amir Pnueli. The safety-progress classiﬁcation. In
     Logic and Algebra of Specification, pages 143–202. Springer, 1993.




                                           14
[16] Krishnendu Chatterjee and Laurent Doyen. Energy parity games. Theoretical Computer
     Science, 458, 2012.
[17] Krishnendu Chatterjee and Laurent Doyen. Energy parity games. Theor. Comput. Sci.,
     458:49–60, 2012.
[18] Krishnendu Chatterjee and Thomas A. Henzinger. Assume-guarantee synthesis. In
     Orna Grumberg and Michael Huth, editors, Tools and Algorithms for the Construction
     and Analysis of Systems, 13th International Conference, TACAS 2007, Held as Part
     of the Joint European Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS 2007
     Braga, Portugal, March 24 - April 1, 2007, Proceedings, volume 4424 of Lecture Notes
     in Computer Science, pages 261–275. Springer, 2007.

[19] A Church. Applications of recursive arithmetic to the problem of circuit synthesis–
     summaries of talks. Institute for Symbolic Logic, Cornell University, 1957.
[20] Edmund M Clarke, Thomas A Henzinger, Helmut Veith, and Roderick Bloem. Handbook
     of model checking, volume 10. Springer, 2018.
[21] Rodica Condurache, Emmanuel Filiot, Raﬀaella Gentilini, and Jean-François Raskin.
     The complexity of rational synthesis. In Ioannis Chatzigiannakis, Michael Mitzen-
     macher, Yuval Rabani, and Davide Sangiorgi, editors, 43rd International Colloquium
     on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2016, July 11-15, 2016, Rome,
     Italy, volume 55 of LIPIcs, pages 121:1–121:15. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
     Informatik, 2016.
[22] Aldric Degorre, Laurent Doyen, Raﬀaella Gentilini, Jean-François Raskin, and Szymon
     Toruńczyk. Energy and mean-payoﬀ games with imperfect information. In International
     Workshop on Computer Science Logic, pages 260–274. Springer, 2010.
[23] Manfred Droste, Werner Kuich, and Heiko Vogler. Handbook of weighted automata.
     Springer Science & Business Media, 2009.
[24] Andrzej Ehrenfeucht and Jan Mycielski. Positional strategies for mean payoﬀ games.
     International Journal of Game Theory, 8(2):109–113, 1979.
[25] Emmanuel Filiot, Raﬀaella Gentilini, and Jean-François Raskin. Quantitative lan-
     guages deﬁned by functional automata. In CONCUR, volume 7454 of Lecture Notes in
     Computer Science, pages 132–146. Springer, 2012.
[26] Emmanuel Filiot, Ismaël Jecker, Nathan Lhote, Guillermo A. Pérez, and Jean-François
     Raskin. On delay and regret determinization of max-plus automata. In LICS, pages
     1–12. IEEE Computer Society, 2017.
[27] Emmanuel Filiot, Naiyong Jin, and Jean-François Raskin. Antichains and compositional
     algorithms for LTL synthesis. Formal Methods in System Design, 39(3):261–296, 2011.
[28] Emmanuel Filiot, Christof Löding, and Sarah Winter. Synthesis from weighted spec-
     iﬁcations with partial domains over ﬁnite words. In FSTTCS, volume 182 of LIPIcs,
     pages 46:1–46:16. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020.
[29] Axel Haddad and Benjamin Monmege. Why value iteration runs in pseudo-polynomial
     time for discounted-payoﬀ games. Technical note, Université libre de Bruxelles, 2015.
[30] Paul Hunter, Guillermo A. Pérez, and Jean-François Raskin. Minimizing regret in
     discounted-sum games. In CSL, volume 62 of LIPIcs, pages 30:1–30:17. Schloss Dagstuhl
     - Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2016.



                                            15
[31] Marcin Jurdziński, François Laroussinie, and Jeremy Sproston. Model checking proba-
     bilistic timed automata with one or two clocks. In International Conference on Tools
     and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, pages 170–184. Springer,
     2007.
[32] Orna Kupferman, Giuseppe Perelli, and Moshe Y. Vardi. Synthesis with rational envi-
     ronments. Ann. Math. Artif. Intell., 78(1):3–20, 2016.
[33] Orna Kupferman, Nir Piterman, and Moshe Y. Vardi. Safraless compositional synthesis.
     In Computer Aided Verification, 18th International Conference, CAV 2006, volume
     4144 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 31–44. Springer, 2006.
[34] Jianwen Li, Kristin Y. Rozier, Geguang Pu, Yueling Zhang, and Moshe Y. Vardi. Sat-
     based explicit ltlf satisﬁability checking. In The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on
     Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2019, The Thirty-First Innovative Applications of Artifi-
     cial Intelligence Conference, IAAI 2019, The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational
     Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2019, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, January 27 -
     February 1, 2019, pages 2946–2953. AAAI Press, 2019.
[35] Shufang Zhu, Lucas M. Tabajara, Jianwen Li, Geguang Pu, and Moshe Y. Vardi. Sym-
     bolic ltlf synthesis. In Carles Sierra, editor, Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Interna-
     tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2017, Melbourne, Australia,
     August 19-25, 2017, pages 1362–1369. ijcai.org, 2017.
[36] Uri Zwick and Mike Paterson. The complexity of mean payoﬀ games on graphs. Theo-
     retical Computer Science, 158(1-2):343–359, 1996.


A. Proofs of Section 2 (Domain-Safe automata)
A.1. Proof of Lemma 15
Intuitively, the following lemma implies that if the speciﬁcation A is domain-safe, then for
an input u it suﬃces to follow some run in A in order to produce an output v such that
(u, v) ∈ R(A).
Lemma 15. If A is a domain-safe weighted specification, then each run of A on u ⊗ v with
u ∈ dom(A) ends in a final state.
Proof. Let (x, y) be a pair of input/output words of equal length, such that A has a run on
x ⊗ y ending in some state q. By induction on |x| one can easily show that L(Adom , q) =
x−1 dom(A) = {x′ | xx′ ∈ dom(A)}: For (x, y) = (ε, ε) the claim is obvious because
L(Adom , q0 ) = dom(A). If (x, y) = (x′ a, y ′ b), let the run of A on x′ ⊗ y ′ end in q ′ . By
induction, L(Adom , q ′ ) = (x′ )−1 dom(A). With q ′′ = δ(q ′ , a), we obtain L(Adom , q ′′ ) =
a−1 L(Adom , q ′ ) = a−1 ((x′ )−1 dom(A)) = (x′ a)−1 dom(A). The last transition of the run on
x′ a ⊗ y ′ b is (q ′′ , b, q). Since A is domain-safe, L(Adom , q) = L(Adom , q ′′ ) = (x′ a)−1 dom(A).
This ﬁnishes the induction.
   For x ∈ dom(A), we obtain ε ∈ x−1 dom(A) = L(Adom , q). Thus, q has to be a ﬁnal
state.

A.2. Proof of Theorem 2
Theorem 2. There is a polynomial time procedure that takes as input a weighted specification
A, and either returns “no realizer” if A does not have Boolean realizers, or, otherwise, returns
a sub-automaton A′ of A that is domain-safe, has the same domain as A, and has the same
Boolean realizers as A.



                                                  16
Proof. Consider the following game between Adam and Eve that tracks two runs of A
(formalized below). The input word of the two runs is the same, and chosen by Adam.
For the ﬁrst run, the output sequence is played by Eve, and for the second run, the output
sequence is played by Adam, who makes in each round his choice after the choice of Eve.
Adam wins if his run is accepting while Eve’s run is not accepting.
   Since A alternatively reads input and output symbols, we assume that the set of states is
partitioned into a set of input states Qi from which only input symbols are read, and set of
output states Qo. Note that qi ∈ Qi.
   Formally, the vertex set of Adam is (Qi × Qi) ∪ (Qi × Qo), and the vertex set of Eve is
Qo × Qo. The initial vertex is (q0 , q0 ) ∈ Qi × Qi. A vertex (q, q ′ ) has the following outgoing
edges:
   • If (q, q ′ ) ∈ Qi × Qi, there are edges to (δ(q, a), δ(q ′ , a)) ∈ Qo × Qo for each a ∈ Σi
     (Adam chooses next input letter).
   • If (q, q ′ ) ∈ Qo × Qo, then there is an edge to (δ(q, a), q ′ ) ∈ Qi × Qo for each letter
     a ∈ Σo (Eve chooses her next output letter).
   • If (q, q ′ ) ∈ Qi × Qo, then there is an edge to (q, δ(q ′ , a)) ∈ Qi × Qi for each letter
     a ∈ Σo (Adam chooses his next output letter).
   We only consider vertices that are reachable from the initial vertex (q0 , q0 ) by these edges.
   Adam wins if the play is in a vertex from (Q \ F ) × F (since F is a subset of Qi, this
means that such a vertex is from Qi × Qi).
   If (q0 , q0 ) is not in the winning region of Eve, then A has no Boolean realizers. To see this,
take a transducer T . This transducer induces a strategy σ for Eve in which she always plays
the next output as determined by the transducer (independent of the outputs chosen by
Adam). Since (q0 , q0 ) is not in the winning region of the game, Adam has a strategy against
σ to reach a conﬁguration (q, q ′ ) such that q ′ ∈ F and q ∈     / F . The unique play resulting
from the two strategies corresponds to an input word u chosen by Adam, an output word v
chosen by Eve (according to the transducer), and an output word v ′ chosen by Adam. The
run on u ⊗ v ends in q ∈     / F , and the run on u ⊗ v ′ ends in q ′ ∈ F . Thus, u is in the domain
of A but the transducer produces an output v such that (u, v) ∈          / R(A). Hence, T is not a
Boolean realizer of A.
   If (q0 , q0 ) is in the winning region of Eve, then obtain A′ as follows: Remove all states q
from A such that (q, q) is not in the winning region of Eve. Among the remaining states,
remove those transitions (p, a, q) from A such that (q, p) exists in the game and is not in the
winning region of Eve. Finally, make the resulting automaton trim.
   We ﬁrst show that all transitions (p, a, q) that are domain-unsafe in A are removed.
In Adom , the transition (p, a, q) corresponds to an ε-transition (p, ε, q). This means that
L(Adom , q) ⊆ L(Adom , p). Since (p, a, q) is domain-unsafe, there is a word u ∈ L(Adom , p) \
L(Adom , q). Consider the vertex (q, p) in the game. If Adam plays the input sequence u
from this vertex, Eve cannot reach an accepting state since u ∈        / L(Adom , q). But Adam can
make his moves corresponding to an accepting run of L(Adom ) starting in p. Hence, (q, p) is
not in the winning region of Eve, and the transition (p, a, q) is removed in the construction
of A′ .
   We now show that the states remaining in A′ have the same domain as in A. This implies
that A′ has the same domain as A, and that A′ is domain-safe because any transition that
is domain-unsafe in A′ would then also be domain-unsafe in A.
   Let p be a state of A′ . Clearly, L(A′dom , p) ⊆ L(Adom , p) because A′ is a subautomaton of
A. We show by induction of the length of input words u that u ∈ L(Adom , p) implies that
u ∈ L(A′dom , p), implying that L(A′dom , p) = L(Adom , p). We distinguish the cases of p ∈ Qi
and p ∈ Qo.




                                                17
   For u = ε and p ∈ Qi, the claim is clear because from input states p there are no ε-
transitions, and p is ﬁnal in A iﬀ it is ﬁnal in A′ . Assume the inductive claim is true for
words of length at most n ≥ 0 at input states, and consider the case p ∈ Qo. Since p is in
A′ , (p, p) is in the winning region of Eve, and thus there must be an edge from (p, p) to some
(q, p) that is also in the winning region of Eve. The move from (p, p) to (q, p) corresponds to
some output transition (p, a, q). Since Adam can move from (q, p) to (q, q) by just imitating
Eve’s last move, we obtain that also (q, q) is in the winning region of Eve. Hence, the
transition (p, a, q) also exists in A′ . The state q is an input state and thus accepts the same
input words of length at most n in Adom and A′dom by our assumption. We have seen earlier
that all domain-unsafe transitions of A are removed in A′ . Thus, L(Adom , p) = L(Adom , q).
Now let u be an input word of length at most n with u ∈ L(Adom , p). Then u ∈ L(Adom , q),
and by assumption also u ∈ L(A′dom , q). In A′dom there is an ε-transition (p, ε, q), and thus
u ∈ L(A′dom , p), as we wanted to show.
   Now consider the inductive step for an input state p and for u = au′ ∈ L(Adom , p) of
length n + 1. There is a unique transition (p, a, q) in Adom , and thus u′ ∈ L(Adom , q). Since
p exists in A′ , the vertex (p, p) is in the winning region of Eve. Since Adam can move from
(p, p) to (q, q), also (q, q) must be in the winning region of Eve. Hence, the transition (p, a, q)
exists in A′ . By induction, u′ ∈ L(A′dom , q), and thus also u = au′ ∈ L(Adom , p).
   It remains to show that A′ has the same Boolean realizers as A. Clearly, since R(A′ ) ⊆
R(A) and the two relations have the same domain, every realizer of A′ is also a realizer of
A. Let T be a Boolean realizer of A. Eve can use T as a winning strategy in the game by
playing the output sequences generated by T . This ensures that for every input u ∈ dom(A)
that is played by Adam, she answers with an output sequence v such that u ⊗ v is accepted
by A. Hence, the run that she plays in the game ends in an accepting state of A for each
such u ∈ dom(A). Since she never leaves her winning region, all transitions used by A in
the run on u ⊗ v also exist in A′ . Thus u ⊗ v is also accepted by A′ , and therefore T is also
a realizer of A′ .
   Since the winning region of Eve can be computed in polynomial time (because safety
games are solvable in polynomial time), we obtain a polynomial time procedure as claimed
in the statement of the theorem.


B. Proofs of Section 3 (Critical prefix games)
B.1. Proof of Theorem 3
Before we prove the result, we formally introduce mean-payoﬀ games.
   The mean-payoff values of the play π are MP(π) = lim supn→∞ n1 Sum(π(n)) and MP(π) =
lim inf n→∞ n1 Sum(π(n)). A mean-payoff objective in G is parameterized by a threshold
      Q
ν ∈ , and ⊲ ∈ {>, ≥}. They are given by MPsup⊲G (ν) = {π ∈ Plays(G) | MP(π) ⊲ ν}
and MPinf ⊲G (ν) = {π ∈ Plays(G) | MP(π) ⊲ ν} and require that the mean-payoﬀ value of
a play is at least resp. greater then ν. The mean-payoff game problem asks whether there
exists a winning strategy for Eve for the objective MPsup⊲G (ν) or MPinf ⊲G (ν). Note that the
objectives are equivalent for games with perfect information [24].
Theorem 3. The threshold problem for critical prefix games for V ∈ {Sum, Avg} and a
strict or non-strict threshold is decidable in NP ∩ coNP. Moreover, positional strategies are
sufficient for Eve to win such games.
Proof. First, we show that for Sum the threshold problems reduce to mean-payoﬀ games. We
begin with the non-strict case. Let G be the arena of a critical preﬁx threshold game, let G′
denote the arena that is obtained from G by removing all vertices from where Adam can not
force a visit to a critical vertex against Eve’s strategies. It is a reachability game property,
hence this step can be done in polynomial time. If the initial vertex is removed, then clearly



                                                18
Eve has a winning strategy by always avoiding a critical vertex. Otherwise, we keep only the
connected component to which the initial vertex belongs. Since the original game arena is
assumed to be deadlock-free, this results in a graph with no deadlocks, because a deadlock
would imply that every previously possible transition leads to a vertex from where Eve can
avoid critical vertices. Furthermore, from every critical vertex add an edge to the initial
vertex with weight −ν, where ν denotes the threshold. We assume that all critical vertices
belong to Adam, if not, for a critical vertex v that belongs to Eve we add a non-critical copy
v ′ of this vertex that belongs to Eve, the original vertex v then belongs to Adam. From the
original vertex v Adam can either go with weight zero to its copy v ′ or with weight −ν to
the initial vertex. In her copy, Eve can make the moves that were previously possible from
the original vertex v.
    We prove that Eve has a winning strategy for the objective ThresSum≥  G   (ν) in the critical
preﬁx threshold game if, and only if, she has a winning strategy for the objective MPsup≥   G′ (0)
in the mean-payoﬀ game. Assume that Eve has a winning strategy σ in G. Consider that σ
guarantees that critical vertices are avoided. Then G′ is empty. There is nothing to show.
Consider that σ can not avoid seeing critical vertices, G′ is not empty and contains the
initial vertex. We deﬁne a strategy σ ′ in G′ that behaves like σ if possible and arbitrary
otherwise and show that it is winning. We explain that Playsσ (G′ ) ⊆ Playsσ (G). Assume
that it is not the case, then in a play according to σ ′ Eve’s next move from some vertex v in
G′ is not equal to Eve’s next move according to σ from v in G. This is only the case if the
target chosen in G does not exist in G′ , but this means that from v Eve can avoid critical
vertices, thus v is not in G′ which is a contradiction. Playing according to σ guarantees that
every path from the initial vertex to a critical vertex has value ≥ ν. This means that every
cycle that uses an edge from a critical vertex to the initial vertex has value ≥ 0. Thus, all
plays according to σ ′ that inﬁnitely often see such edges have value ≥ 0. Consider plays
according to σ ′ that only ﬁnitely often see such edges. We argue that these plays also have
value ≥ 0. Pick such a play π, towards a contradiction, we assume that MP(π) < 0. Let i
be the index of last time that an edge from a critical vertex to the initial vertex was used,
and let π ′ such that π = π(i)π ′ . We have MP(π ′ ) < 0, meaning that we can pick some j
such that Sum(π ′ (j)) is lower than some arbitrary negative value. The preﬁx π ′ (j) is a valid
play preﬁx according to σ in G (we assume that moves from a critical vertex to its copy
are removed). Since Sum(π ′ (j)) is suﬃciently low and from last(π ′ (j)) Adam can force the
play into a critical vertex, the sum reached in the critical vertex is less than the threshold
ν. This contradicts that σ is winning in G.
    For the other direction, assume that σ ′ is a winning strategy for Eve in G′ , we can assume
σ to be positional [24]. Remove from G′ all edges belonging to Eve that are not chosen by
  ′

σ ′ , let G′σ′ denote the result. Since σ ′ guarantees that the value of each play according to
the strategy is ≥ 0, we know that G′σ′ does not contain a negative cycle. This implies that
the sum of every path from the initial vertex to a critical vertex is ≥ ν. The strategy σ ′
is easily translated into a positional strategy σ in G which is clearly winning. Regarding
the strict case, given a play π, it is easy to see that Sum(π(i)) > x for some x implies that
                                                          Z
Sum(π(i)) ≥ x − 1, because the weights in G are from . Thus, deciding whether a winning
strategy for the objective ThresSum>
                                   G    (ν) exists is equivalent to deciding whether a winning
strategy for the objective ThresSum≥
                                   G    (ν  − 1) exists. Since mean-payoﬀ games can be solved
in NP ∩ coNP [36] the complexity bound follows.
    Secondly, we show that for Avg the threshold problems reduce to threshold problems for
critical preﬁx games for Sum. Let G be the arena of a critical preﬁx threshold game, and let
G′ be the arena obtained from G by subtracting ν from every weight. Given a play preﬁx
ϕ, we have that Avg(ϕ) ⊲ ν ⇔ Sum(ϕ) − ν|ϕ| ⊲ 0. Thus, given a strategy σ for Eve, for all
ϕ ∈ Prefsσ (G) = Prefsσ (G′ ) holds ϕ ∈ ThresAvg⊲
                                                G   (ν) ⇔ ϕ ∈ ThresSum⊲
                                                                     G′ (0).




                                               19
B.2. Proof of Theorem 4
Theorem 4. The threshold problem for critical prefix games for Dsum and a strict resp.
non-strict threshold is decidable in NP resp. NP ∩ coNP. Moreover, positional strategies
are sufficient for Eve to win such games.
  We split the proof of the above theorem into several theorems. First, Theorem 19 shows
the decidability of discounted-sum critical preﬁx threshold games for a strict threshold.
Secondly, Theorem 18 shows that positional strategies suﬃce for discounted-sum critical
preﬁx threshold games (for strict and non-strict thresholds). Lastly, Theorem 19 shows the
decidability of discounted-sum critical preﬁx threshold games for a strict threshold using
Theorem 18.

B.3. Proof of Theorem 4: Discounted-sum with a non-strict threshold
Theorem 16. The threshold problem for critical prefix games for Dsum and a non-strict
threshold is decidable in NP ∩ coNP.
Proof. We show that for Dsum the non-strict threshold problem reduces to discounted-sum
games. Let G be the arena of a critical preﬁx threshold game, we remove all vertices from
where Adam can not force a visit to a critical vertex against all strategies of Eve. If the
initial vertex was removed, Eve has a winning strategy in the critical preﬁx threshold game
that avoids critical vertices. Let G′ denote the resulting game arena, to make the arena
deadlock-free, we add a new sink vertex q⊥ that has a self-loop with weight zero. From each
deadlock an edge with weight zero leads to q⊥ .
   In the reduction we want to achieve that every time a critical vertex is entered, Adam
can decide whether he wants to stop the game. This should be achieved by going to the
sink vertex q⊥ with weight zero. However, in the original game, a critical vertex can belong
to Eve, so for these vertices we have to give Adam the choice without introducing a copy
vertex as intermediate vertex as done, e.g., in the proof of Theorem 3, to not change the
discounted-sum value of corresponding plays by introducing longer paths.
   Towards this, for each critical vertex v and edge e with source v that belongs to Eve, we
add a vertex (v, e) that belongs to Adam which has two outgoing edges, one that has weight
zero to the sink q⊥ , and one that has weight w(e) and the same target as e. For each critical
vertex that belongs to Adam, we add an edge with weight zero to the sink q⊥ .
   Let v be a critical vertex that belongs to Eve, and e be an edge with target v and source
u. If u belongs to Adam, we add an edge with weight w(e) from u to q⊥ . If u belongs to
Eve, for each edge e′ with source v, we add an edge with weight w(e) to (v, e′ ). Then, the
original edge e is removed.
   We show that Eve has a winning strategy in the critical preﬁx threshold game for the
objective ThresDsum,≥
                 G     (ν) if, and only if, she has a winning strategy in the discounted-sum
game for the objective DS≥  G′ (ν).
   Let σ ′ be a winning strategy for Eve in G′ , we transform σ ′ into a strategy σ for Eve in
G. Moves that go from a vertex u to a vertex (v, e) are transformed into a move from u to
v, in v the next edge that is chosen is e. It is easy to see that σ is a winning strategy for
Eve in G.
   For the other direction, let σ be a winning strategy for Eve in G, we transform σ into a
strategy σ ′ in G′ . According to σ, if Eves moves from u to a critical vertex v that belongs
to Eve and subsequently takes an edge e, then σ ′ deﬁnes a move from u to (v, e). We prove
that σ ′ is winning in G′ . Assume the contrary, let α′ be a play according to σ ′ that Eve
loses. We distinguish whether α′ contains a move to q⊥ .
   First, assume that α′ contains such a move, let π ′ denote the play preﬁx such that α′ =
π e⊥ , where e⊥ is the self-loop in q⊥ . The preﬁx π ′ is translated back into a play preﬁx
  ′ ω

π in G, π is play preﬁx according to σ. Since Dsum(α′ ) = Dsum(π ′ ) = Dsum(π), and



                                             20
Dsum(α) < ν, we directly obtain that σ is not a winning strategy for Eve in G′ , which is a
contradiction.
   Secondly, assume that α′ does not contain a move to the sink. The play α′ is translated
back into a play α in G, α is a play according to σ. Let wmax denote the largest weight.
Since Dsum(α′ ) = Dsum(α), and Dsum(α′ ) < ν, we can pick an i such that Dsum(α(i)) < ν
                    i+n j
and Dsum(α(i)) + Σj=i  λ wmax < ν, where n is the number of vertices in G. Now consider
a play that begins with α(i) in G, and then Adam forces the play into a critical vertex in
at most n steps. This play is a play according to σ but is not winning for Eve, which is a
contradiction.
   Since discounted-sum games can be solved in NP ∩ coNP [4] the complexity bound
follows.
  The following remark shows that the above reduction fails for strict thresholds.
Remark 17. Consider the following critical preﬁx threshold game G with discounted-sum
measure and discount factor λ = 12 and objective ThresDsum,>
                                                        G    (1), all vertices belong to
Adam, v0 is the initial and v1 is a critical vertex.

                                            1             0
                                                      3
                                            v0            v1

Eve wins this game. If Adam stays in v0 , the discounted-sum value converges to 1, if Adam
proceeds to the critical vertex v1 , the value is (and stays) higher than 1, i.e., Eve has won;
the critical vertex is either not seen or always with a value > 1.
   Now, consider the obtained discounted-sum game G′ with objective DS>         G′ (1) as in the
proof of Theorem 16. The value of the initial vertex c0 is 1 (Adam stays in v0 ), thus, our
reduction would wrongly yield that Eve can not win the critical preﬁx game.
   There seems to be no reduction to a discounted-sum game (using the same or another
threshold) that correctly handles strategies of Adam which avoid critical vertices.
   In the above correctness proof for the presented reduction regarding ≥-thresholds, we
have shown that if the value of the initial vertex in the constructed discounted-sum game is
≥ ν, then Eve has a winning strategy the critical preﬁx game. Alternatively, we could have
shown that if the value is < ν, then Adam has a winning strategy in the critical preﬁx game.
We argue intuitively why in these cases, the situation as shown in the example for strict
thresholds, is not problematic. Assume the value is < ν and is achieved by Adam never
visiting a critical vertex. This implies that Adam can stay long enough away from critical
vertices to ensure that the desired threshold becomes unreachable. Since in the constructed
discounted-sum game, Adam can force to see a critical vertex, there exists also a strategy
of Adam that reaches a critical vertex with a value < ν.

B.4. Proof of Theorem 4: Positional strategies for discounted-sum
Theorem 18. If Eve has a winning strategy in a critical prefix games for Dsum and a strict
or non-strict threshold, then she also has a positional winning strategy.
Proof. Let σ be a winning strategy for Eve in the game. For each vertex v of Eve, we deﬁne
a positional choice by comparing the σ-play preﬁxes that reach v. For each such σ-play
preﬁx ending in v, we measure how “diﬃcult” it is for Eve to win with this given preﬁx of
the play. Intuitively, the positional strategy σp picks a move that is chosen by σ in the most
diﬃcult situations. We then show that this positional strategy σp is at least as good as σ.
  We ﬁrst explain how to compare play preﬁxes. Consider a play preﬁx π ending in vertex v.
Then σ ensures that for each continuation ππ2 of π that ends in a critical vertex, the threshold
condition Dsum(ππ2 ) ⊲ ν is satisﬁed (for ⊲ ∈ {>, ≥}, depending on whether we consider a



                                                 21
strict or non-strict threshold). Using the equality Dsum(ππ2 ) = Dsum(π)+λ|π| Dsum(π2 ), we
                                                                                            1
can rewrite Dsum(ππ2 )⊲ν into a property that π2 must satisfy: Dsum(π2 )⊲(ν −Dsum(π)) λ|π|    .
Therefore, the larger the value on the right-hand side of this second inequation is, the harder
it is for a strategy of Eve to ensure the threshold condition. We call it the relative gap for
π and ν. Since ν is ﬁxed, we just denote it by rg(π).
                                                          1
                                   rg(π) := (ν − Dsum(π)) |π| .
                                                         λ
Let us note two simple but important properties of this value, which are routine to check
using the deﬁnition of rg(.):
(A) Dsum(π) ⊲ ν iﬀ 0 ⊲ rg(π).
    Proof of (A): Clearly, (rg(π) = 0 iﬀ Dsum(π) = ν), and (rg(π) < 0 iﬀ Dsum(π) > ν)

(B) Let π ′ be a play preﬁx ending in v ′ , and assume there is an edge from v ′ to v with
                                                                                          j
     weight j. Let π be the play preﬁx π ′ extended by this edge, denoted by π ′ v ′ −
                                                                                     → v. Then
     rg(π) = λ1 rg(π ′ ) − j.
                                                                   ′
                                          1
     Proof of (B): rg(π) = (ν−Dsum(π)) λ|π|  = (ν−(Dsum(π ′ )+λ|π | λj)) λ|π1′ |+1 = λ1 rg(π ′ )−j.
We now explain how to deﬁne the positional strategy σp . Denote the σ-play preﬁxes ending
in v by Prefs(σ, v). If v belongs to Eve, we deﬁne the move σp (v) of the positional strategy
to be a move that satisﬁes

           ∀π ∈ Prefs(σ, v)∃π ′ ∈ Prefs(σ, v) : rg(π ′ ) ≥ rg(π) and σ(π ′ ) = σp (v).(∗)

Such a move always exists. Either, there is a “most diﬃcult” π ′ ∈ Prefs(σ, v) with rg(π ′ ) =
sup{rg(π) | π ∈ Prefs(σ, v)}. Then we can choose σp (v) = σ(π ′ ), which satisﬁes (∗). Now
consider the case that there is no such most diﬃcult π ′ ∈ Prefs(σ, v), and let x := sup{rg(π) |
π ∈ Prefs(σ, v)}. Consider a sequence π1 , π2 , . . . of play preﬁxes from Prefs(σ, v) whose rg-
values converge to x, that is, limi→∞ rg(πi ) = x. Since there are only ﬁnitely many moves
from vertex v, there must be one move that is chosen by σ for inﬁnitely many of the πi . We
choose such a move for σp (v), which then satisﬁes property (∗).
   It remains to show that σp is a winning strategy. Let πp ∈ Prefs(σp , v) be a σp -play preﬁx
ending in v. We show the following claim: there is a σ-play preﬁx π ∈ Prefs(σ, v) with
rg(π) ≥ rg(πp ). When we have shown this claim, we can conclude that σp is a winning
strategy as follows. If v is a critical vertex, then π satisﬁes the threshold condition. Using
property (A) from above, we obtain that πp also satisﬁes the threshold condition.
   To ﬁnish the proof, we show the claim by induction on the length of πp . For length 0 the
claim is clear because then v has to be the starting vertex, and the empty play is also in
Prefs(σ, v). Now assume that πp′ ∈ Prefs(σp , v ′ ) and πp ∈ Prefs(σp , v) is obtained from πp′
by one move from v to v ′ with weight j. We now deﬁne a play preﬁx π ′ ∈ Prefs(σ, v ′ ) with
                                          j
rg(π ′ ) ≥ rg(πp′ ) such that π := π ′ v ′ −
                                           → v ∈ Prefs(σ, v). With property (B) from above we
then obtain
                                    1              1
                           rg(π) = rg(π ′ ) − j ≥ rg(πp′ ) − j = rg(πp )
                                    λ              λ
as in the claim.
  For deﬁning π ′ , ﬁrst note that by induction, there is π̂ ∈ Prefs(σ, v ′ ) with rg(π̂) ≥ rg(πp′ ).
  If v ′ is a vertex of Adam, we let π ′ := π̂ because extending π̂ by the edge from v ′ to v
yields a play preﬁx from Prefs(σ, v).
  If v ′ is a vertex of Eve, then by (∗) from the deﬁnition of σp , there is some π ′ ∈ Prefs(σ, v ′ )
                                                                 j
with rg(π ′ ) ≥ rg(π̂) and σ(π ′ ) = σp (v ′ ). Hence π := π ′ v ′ −
                                                                   → v ∈ Prefs(σ, v).




                                                  22
B.5. Proof of Theorem 4: Discounted-sum with a strict threshold
Theorem 19. The threshold problem for critical prefix games for Dsum and a strict threshold
is decidable in NP.
  To prove this theorem, we ﬁrst show a result on weighted graphs G = (V, E, γ : E →               Z)
which is interesting in itself.
Lemma 5. Given a weighted graph G, a source vertex v0 ∈ V , a target set T ⊆ V and a
               Q
threshold ν ∈ , checking whether there exists a path π from v0 to some vertex v ∈ T such
that Dsum(π) ≤ ν can be done in Ptime.
Proof. We remove from G all the vertices from which there is no path to a target vertex.
Let G′ be the resulting subgraph of G. If G′ is empty, then we can return that there is no
path π as in the statement of the lemma. Otherwise, we make use of the notion of relative
gap from the proof of Theorem 18, which is deﬁned for a ﬁnite path π by
                                                          1
                                   rg(π) := (ν − Dsum(π)) |π| .
                                                         λ
In the proof of Theorem 18 we have already used the properties (A) and (B) below. We add
two properties (C) and (D) about the relative gaps for the concatenation of paths. In all
the statements below π, π1 , π2 , π3 are ﬁnite paths.
(A) Dsum(π) > ν iﬀ 0 > rg(π).
(B) Let π ′ be a path ending in v ′ , and assume there is an edge from v ′ to v with weight
                                                                                j
     j = γ(v ′ , v). Let π be π ′ extended by this edge, denoted by π ′ v ′ −
                                                                            → v. Then rg(π) =
     1      ′
     λ rg(π   ) − j.
(C) rg(π1 π2 ) = λ|π1 2 | (rg(π1 ) − Dsum(π2 )).
    Proof of (C): rg(π1 π2 ) = (ν−Dsum(π1 π2 )) λ|π11 π2 | = (ν−Dsum(π1 )−λ|π1 | Dsum(π2 ))) λ|π11 π2 |
    = λ|π12 | (rg(π1 ) − Dsum(π2 )).
(D) if rg(π1 ) ≥ rg(π1 π2 ) and π2 is a loop, then rg(π1 π3 ) ≥ rg(π1 π2 π3 ).
    Proof of (D): by (C), rg(π1 π3 ) = λ|π13 | (rg(π1 )−Dsum(π3 )) and rg(π1 π2 π3 ) = λ|π13 | (rg(π1 π2 )−
    Dsum(π3 )). So, rg(π1 π3 ) − rg(π1 π2 π3 ) = λ|π13 | (rg(π1 ) − rg(π1 π2 )) ≥ 0.

From (A) we obtain that there exists a path π from v0 to T such that Dsum(π) ≤ ν iﬀ there
exists a path π from v0 to T such that rg(π) ≥ 0.
   Our algorithm computes for each vertex v the maximal relative gap mrgi (v) of paths of
lengths at most i ending at v (and starting at the initial vertex v0 ). For i = 0, we obtain
that                                      (
                                            ν     if v = v0
                               mrg0 (v) =
                                            −∞ otherwise
where mrgi (v) = −∞ indicates that there is no path of length at most i to v. We use (B)
to compute mrgi (v) from the mrgi−1 values by
                                                                             
                           1         ′       ′      ′        ′
        mrgi (v) = max { mrgi−1 (v ) − γ(v , v) | (v , v) ∈ E } ∪ {mrgi−1 (v)} .
                           λ

Let n > 0 be the number of vertices of G′ . The algorithm computes the values mrgi (v) for
all i ≤ n, which can be done in polynomial time, using the above formula. By deﬁnition of
mrgi (v), we obtain that mrgi (v) ≤ mrgi+1 (v).
   We claim that there is no path π from v0 to T such that Dsum(π) ≤ ν (⋆) iﬀ



                                                 23
 (i) mrgn (v) < 0 for all v ∈ T , and
 (ii) mrgn−1 (v) = mrgn (v) for all vertices v of G′ .
Clearly, if (i) does not hold, there is a path to a target vertex v that has relative gap ≥ 0,
and hence (⋆) does not hold. So assume now that (i) is satisﬁed.
   If (ii) is satisﬁed, then mrgj (v) = mrgn (v) for all j ≥ n because the values do not change
anymore once a ﬁxpoint is reached. We can conclude that there is no path of any length to
a target vertex with relative gap ≥ 0.
   It remains to show that (⋆) does not hold if (ii) is not satisﬁed. So let v be such that
mrgn−1 (v) < mrgn (v). Any shortest path π ending in v such that rg(π) = mrgn (v) has
length n necessarily, otherwise we would have mrgn−1 (v) = mrgn (v). By the choice of n,
there is a repetition of vertices vj = vk in π with j < k. So we can write π = π1 π2 π3 for a
loop π2 , that is, π1 = v0 · · · vj and π2 = vj+1 · · · vk . Let u = vj .
   We have rg(π1 ) < rg(π1 π2 ), otherwise by (D), we would obtain rg(π1 π3 ) ≥ rg(π1 π2 π3 ) =
mrgn (v) which contradicts that π = π1 π2 π3 is a shortest path witnessing mrgn (v).
   Now, deﬁne z := rg(π1 π2 ) − rg(π1 ) > 0. We show that pumping the loop π2 gives paths
to u with arbitrarily large relative gaps. We prove that each additional loop increases the
relative gap by at least z, and hence

                                       rg(π1 π2ℓ ) ≥ ℓ · z + rg(π1 ).

So we formally show that for ℓ ≥ 1:

                                      rg(π1 π2ℓ ) − rg(π1 π2ℓ−1 ) ≥ z.

For ℓ = 1 this is satisﬁed by deﬁnition of z. For ℓ > 1 we obtain with (C):

 rg(π1 π2ℓ ) − rg(π1 π2ℓ−1 )   = λ|π12 | (rg(π1 π2ℓ−1 ) − Dsum(π2 )) − λ|π12 | (rg(π1 π2ℓ−2 ) − Dsum(π2 ))
                               = λ|π12 | ((rg(π1 π2ℓ−1 ) − rg(π1 π2ℓ−2 ))
     (by induction)            ≥ λ|π12 | z ≥ z.

Now let π4 be a path from u to a target vertex. Then we can choose ℓ such that ℓ·z+rg(π1 ) ≥
Dsum(π4 ) and obtain:
                          1                                 1
     rg(π1 π2ℓ π4 ) =          (rg(π1 π2ℓ ) − Dsum(π4 )) ≥ |π | (ℓ · z + rg(π1 ) − Dsum(π4 )) ≥ 0,
                        λ|π4 |                            λ 4
and therefore (⋆) does not hold, as we wanted to show.
Proof of Theorem 19. By Theorem 18, Eve has a positional winning strategy if she has one
at all. The NP-algorithm guesses a positional strategy σ for Eve, and then veriﬁes in
polynomial time whether σ is winning. Let G′ be the game restricted to Eve’s σ-edges, seen
as a weighted graph. The strategy σ is not winning iﬀ Adam can form a path in G′ from
the initial vertex to a critical vertex that has weight ≤ ν. This property can be checked in
Ptime thanks to Lemma 5 (by taking as target set the set of critical vertices).

B.6. Proof of Theorem 7
Theorem 7. The fixed initial credit problem for imperfect information critical prefix energy
games is undecidable.
Proof. We give a reduction that constructs from a given 2-counter machine M a game GM
such that Eve has an observation-based winning strategy in GM iﬀ M does not halt. We
assume that in M no decrement operation is applied to a counter with value 0 (before each
decrement we can test if the counter is 0).



                                                     24
   The idea for the reduction is as follows. The initial credit is 0. The game uses four copies
of the machine that cannot be distinguished by Eve. At the beginning, Adam picks one
of these copies. The vertices in each copy correspond to the instruction numbers of the
machine. Let c1 , c2 be the counters of the machine. We also use c1 , c2 to denote the values
of the counters. In the four diﬀerent copies, the energy level is supposed to correspond to
c1 , −c1 , c2 , and −c2 .
   At vertices corresponding to increment or decrement operations, there is no choice for the
players. There is a unique transition moving to the next instruction. The weight of this
edge is chosen to track the desired energy level. For an increment on c1 , it is 1, −1, 0, 0 in
the four copies, respectively. Similarly for the other increment and decrement instructions.
   At vertices corresponding to an instruction of the form “IF(ci = 0) THEN GOTO m”, Eve
can choose between two actions 0 and > 0, where 0 means that Eve claims the counter is 0,
and > 0 means that Eve claims that the counter is not 0. In every copy, Adam can choose
to execute the instruction corresponding to Eve’s claim. That is, if Eve claims 0, then go
to vertex m, and if Eve claims > 0, then go to the next instruction (all these edges have
weight 0).
   Then we also add actions for Adam to ensure that Eve loses if she makes a wrong claim.
If Eve claims 0, then in the copy for −ci , Adam can move to a critical vertex with an edge
of weight 0. So if Eve’s claim was wrong and Adam has chosen the copy for −ci at the
beginning, then she loses the game. If Eve claims > 0, then Adam can move to a critical
vertex from the copy for ci with an edge of weight −1. Again, if Eve’s claim was wrong and
Adam has chosen the copy for ci at the beginning, then she loses the game.
   From this description, it should be clear that Eve can only win with an observation based
strategy if she simulates the machine correctly (always makes correct claims on the counter
values). Now, in all copies, we make the vertices corresponding to the STOP instruction of
the machine critical, and add a self loop for Adam with negative weight on them. So if such
a vertex is reached, Eve loses.
   In summary, if the machine halts, Eve has no observation based winning strategy. If the
machine does not halt, then Eve can go on with the correct simulation forever.

B.7. Proof of Theorem 8
Theorem 8. The fixed initial credit problem for imperfect information critical prefix energy
games is decidable if from each vertex Adam has a strategy to reach a critical vertex against
observation based strategies. Moreover, finite-memory strategies are sufficient for Eve to
win.
Proof. We show that the problem reduces to the ﬁxed initial credit problem for imperfect
information games which is decidable [22].
   Let G be the arena of a critical preﬁx energy game with imperfect information with set
of vertices V . First note that by assumption, from each vertex of the game, Adam has a
strategy to reach a critical vertex, and since it is a reachability objective, it is well-known
that he can do so in at most |V | steps (against any strategy, and against observation based
strategies in particular).
   Let B = |V |wmax , where wmax is the maximal weight in G. We construct a critical preﬁx
energy game with imperfect information. Let G′ denote it’s game arena obtained from G as
follows. For each critical vertex v and action a, add a transition with label a to a new sink
vertex vB with weight −B. Every outgoing transition from vB leads back to it with weight
zero. The observation of vB is {vB }.
   We show that Eve has an observation-based winning strategy in the critical preﬁx en-
ergy game G with imperfect information with initial credit c0 if, and only if, Eve has an
observation-based winning strategy in the energy game G′ with imperfect information with
initial credit c0 + B.



                                              25
   Let σ be an observation-based strategy for Eve in G. The strategy σ naturally deﬁnes
a strategy σ ′ in G′ , which consists of playing as σ as long as the play is not in the sink
vB . Towards a contradiction, assume that σ is winning in G, but σ ′ is not winning in
G′ . Then there exists a (ﬁnite) preﬁx π of a play in G′ compatible with σ ′ such that
c0 + B + ELG′ (π) < 0. Note that last(π) is either some vertex v from G or the new sink vB .
In the ﬁrst case, π is also a valid play preﬁx according to σ in G, and ELG′ (π) = ELG (π).
Adam can force the play from v in at most |V | steps into a critical vertex, by assumption
and since v 6= vB , which rises the energy level by at most B. Thus, there exists a ﬁnite
play continuation α according to σ such that πα ∈ C and c0 + ELG (πα) < 0, because
c0 + ELG (π) < −B. This contradicts that σ is winning in G. In the second case, let π ′
be the shortest preﬁx of π such that π ′ does not contain the sink state, i.e., π = π ′ avB for
some action a, and π ′ is compatible with σ in G. By deﬁnition of G′ , last(π ′ ) is critical, and
since the loop on the sink has weight 0, we have ELG′ (π) = ELG′ (π ′ ) − B = ELG (π ′ ) − B.
Therefore, c0 + ELG (π ′ ) = c0 + ELG′ (π) + B < 0, which contradicts that σ is winning in G.
   For the other direction, let σ ′ be an observation based strategy for Eve in G′ . Consider the
restriction σ of σ ′ to the play preﬁxes in G. It is an observation based strategy of G. Towards
a contradiction, assume that σ ′ is winning in G′ , but σ is not winning in G. Then there
exists a play preﬁx π in G compatible with σ such that last(π) ∈ C and c0 + ELG (π) < 0.
The preﬁx π is also compatible with σ ′ in G′ . In G′ , from last(π), whatever action Eve
picks, Adam can force the play to the sink, with weight −B. In particular, the preﬁx
ρ = π.σ ′ (π).vB is compatible with σ ′ and satisﬁes ELG′ (ρ) = ELG′ (π) − B = ELG (π) − B.
Therefore, c0 + B + ELG′ (ρ) = c0 + ELG (π) < 0, which contradicts that σ ′ is winning in G′ .
   By [22], ﬁnite-memory strategies are suﬃcient for Eve to win energy games of imperfect
information and ﬁxed initial credit. Our translation of winning strategies in G′ to winning
strategies in G preserves ﬁnite-memoryness, entailing the second statement of the theorem.



C. Proofs of Section 4 (Synthesis problems)
C.1. Threshold synthesis
C.1.1. Proof of Theorem 9
Theorem 9. The threshold synthesis problem for a V -specification with V ∈ {Sum, Avg}
and a strict or non-strict threshold is decidable in NP ∩ coNP and PTIME-equivalent to
mean-payoff games. The threshold synthesis problem for a Dsum-specification and a strict
resp. non-strict threshold is decidable in NP resp. in NP ∩ coNP.
Proof. Let A be the V -automaton with V ∈ {Sum, Avg, Dsum} that deﬁnes the weighted
speciﬁcation, ν be the threshold, and ⊲ ∈ {≥, >}. Let A′ be a domain safe variant of A
which can be obtained in polynomial time, see Theorem 2. We interpret A′ as a weighted
game arena, to make the arena deadlock free, we add a new sink state q⊥ that has a self-loop
with weight zero and from each deadlock the sink state is entered with weight zero. Let the
critical vertices correspond to the ﬁnal states of A′ .
   It is easy to see that the threshold synthesis problem with the given parameters reduces
to deciding whether Eve has a winning strategy in the critical preﬁx game played on A′ with
objective ThresVA′⊲ (ν). The decidability and complexity results follow from Theorems 3, 16
and 19.
   It is left to show that the threshold synthesis problems for Sum and Avg are PTime-
equivalent to mean-payoﬀ games. The direction from threshold synthesis to mean-payoﬀ
games follows directly from the reduction to critical preﬁx games which are reduced to
mean-payoﬀ games (see proof of Theorem 3).




                                               26
   For the other direction, consider a mean-payoﬀ game G and the non-strict threshold zero,
i.e., the objective is MPsup≥   G (0). Wlog., we assume that moves of Adam and Eve alternate
in G, this can be easily achieved by introducing extra vertices and edges with weight zero if
necessary. Let m resp. n be the maximal out-degree of a vertex that belongs to Adam resp.
Eve in G. We deﬁne Σi = {a1 , . . . , am , ⊥} and Σo = {b1 , . . . , bn }.
   First, we reduce the problem to the synthesis problem for Sum and the non-strict threshold
zero. We construct a weighted ﬁnite automaton A = (V ∪ {qi , q, q⊥ , qf }, Σio, qi , ∆, {qf }, γ)
deﬁning a Sum-speciﬁcation S from G as follows. The arena of G is used as the transition
graph of A, the labels of a transition is ai resp. bi if its source belongs to Adam resp. Eve
in G and the transition corresponds to the ith outgoing edge, the weights are as in G. Such
an edge always exists as G is deadlock-free.
   Mean-payoﬀ games do not have a notion that corresponds to a domain, so we need to make
sure that for the speciﬁcation that we construct realizability does not depend on the domain.
To achieve this, in the automaton we add a transition (v, ai , v ′ ) with weight γ (v, a1 , v ′ )
for all i ∈ {2, . . . , m} such that i ≥ outdeg(v) and v belongs to Adam in G.
   From the new initial state qi there is a transition with label a1 and weight zero to the
new state q, from q there is a transition with label b1 and weight N to vi , where N is the
sum of all absolute values of weights that appear in G and vi is the initial vertex of G.
   From every state that belongs to Adam in G, there is a transition with label ⊥ to the
new state q⊥ with weight zero, and from q⊥ a transition with label b1 to the new (and only)
ﬁnal state qf with weight zero.
   We show that there exists an S-realizer that ensures a value ≥ 0 for each pair if, and only
if, Eve has a winning strategy in the mean-payoﬀ game G for the objective MPsup≥         G (0).
   Assume Adam has a winning strategy in G, then there exists also a positional one [24],
say τ . Thus, all cycles seen in plays according to τ are negative. Towards a contradiction,
assume that there exists a transducer that is an S-realizer that ensures a value of at least
zero. Consider an input sequence that is long enough that corresponds to a play according
to τ . Eventually, enough negative cycles have been seen to make the current value of the
run according to A negative. Then, if the next input is ⊥, the transducer can not ensure a
value of at least zero which is a contradiction.
   Assume Eve has a winning strategy in G, then there exists also a positional one, say σ.
Thus, all cycles seen in plays according to σ are non-negative. Let Tσ be transducer that
produces output according to σ. Note that for inputs that do not directly correspond to
plays in G according to σ, the transducer works as if the input has been a1 , then σ can be
applied. We argue that Tσ is an S-realizer that ensures a value of at least zero. After the
ﬁrst output symbol, the value of the current run according to A is N and the state is vi .
For every continuation according to the outputs that Tσ produces holds that the ﬁnal state
qf is reached with value at least zero. Assume otherwise, then there exists a path inside of
V according to σ such that its sum is smaller than −N . Since the sum of all absolute values
of weights in G is N , this implies that there has been a cycle according to σ with a negative
value, which is a contradiction.
   It is left to show the reduction for Sum with a strict threshold, and for Avg with a strict
and a non-strict threshold.
   Regarding Sum with a strict threshold, it is easy to see that the above mean-payoﬀ game
with non-strict threshold zero can also be reduced to the same Sum-speciﬁcation S deﬁned
by A and asking to ensure a value > −1 instead of ≥ 0, because the weights in A are
integers.
   Regarding Avg with a non-strict threshold, it suﬃces to interpret the weighted speciﬁcation
deﬁned by A as an Avg-speciﬁcation and ask to ensure a value ≥ 0.
   Regarding Avg and a strict threshold, we interpret the speciﬁcation deﬁned by A as an
Avg-speciﬁcation and ask to ensure a value > −1     ℓ , where ℓ is chosen as follows. In case that
Adam has a winning strategy in the mean-payoﬀ game, he has a positional winning strategy,




                                               27
and can enforce a negative cycle. To show that there is no realizer that ensures threshold
> −1  ℓ , the number ℓ should reﬂect the number of input and output symbols that it takes
(at most) to go to a negative cycle, take it a suﬃcient number of times in order to bring the
sum of the current run suﬃciently into the negative, and end the computation.
    Therefore, consider all simple cycles with a negative sum in G, and for each of these cycles
c1 , . . . , ci compute ℓ1 , . . . , ℓi , where ℓj = |cj | · xj is the smallest multiple of the length of cj
such that |xj · Sum(cj )| > 2N ; recall N is the sum of all absolute values of weights that
appear in G. Let ℓmax be the maximal value of the ℓj s.
    Then, let ℓ = ℓmax + |V | + 4. In the automaton, 2 computation steps are needed to reach
vi , the initial vertex of the game, and 2 steps are needed to go from a vertex in V to the
ﬁnal state qf . At most |V | computation steps are needed to arrive at a negative cycle. At
most ℓmax computation steps (inside some cycle) are needed to bring the value of the run
below zero, because the sum up to reaching the cycle is at most 2N . Thus, if Adam has a
winning strategy, for any realizer, there exists a computation of length at most ℓ according
to this realizer that arrives at qf with a negative sum. This negative sum is ≤ −1, thus the
value of the run is ≤ −1                                             −1
                              ℓ , i.e., the desired value of > ℓ can not be ensured.
    If Eve has a winning strategy, we argued above that there is a realizer that ensures a sum
of at least zero for each run according to this realizer, thus the average value is also at least
zero, which makes it > −1         ℓ .


C.2. Synthesis and regret determinization
C.2.1. Proof of Lemma 10
Lemma 10. The approx. synthesis problem for weighted specifications reduces in linear time
to the regret determinization problem for nondet. weighted automata (with the same thresh-
old). The converse is true (in linear time and with the same threshold) for Sum-automata.
  The proof of the above lemma is split into the two lemmas below, Lemmas 20 and 21.
Lemma 20. The approximate synthesis problem for weighted specifications reduces in linear
time to the regret determinization problem for nondeterministic weighted automata (with the
same threshold).
Proof. We start with the direction from left to right. Let S be a weighted speciﬁcation
deﬁned by a WFA A = (Q, Σio, qi , ∆, F, γ). We construct a nondeterministic WFA A′ from
A as follows, we pick an output symbol, say b ∈ Σo, and replace every output label with b.
The language of A′ is {a1 b . . . an b | a1 . . . an ∈ dom(S)}.
                             Q
   Given a threshold r ∈ , and ⊳ ∈ {<, ≤}, we show that there exists a transducer T that
implements an r⊳ -approximate S-realization if, and only if, A′ is r⊳ -determinizable.
   Let T be a transducer that implements an r⊳ -approximate S-realization. The state space
QT of T and QT ×Σi serves as the set of memory states to construct an r⊳ -regret determinis-
                                                 σ|σ′                                                 
tic variant of A′ . If T has
                           a transition s −−−→ t, then     A′r has transitions (p, s), σ, (q, (s, σ))
and (q, (s, σ)), b, (q, t) if (p, σ, q) ∈ ∆ and (q, σ ′ , r) ∈ ∆. It is easy to see that A′r is an
r⊳ -regret deterministic variant of A′ .
   For the other direction, let A′r be an r⊳ -regret deterministic variant of A′ . We con-
struct a transducer T from A′r with the following transitions. If A′r has a transitions
                                                                                      σ|σ′
 (p, m1 ), σ, (q, m2 ) and (q, m2 ), b, (r, m3 ) , then T has a transition (p, m1 ) −−−→ (r, m3 ),
where σ ′ ∈ Σo is an output symbol such that (q, σ ′ , r) ∈ ∆. If there are more than one
output symbols that lead from q to r, chose one that yields the maximal transition weight.
It is easy to see that T implements an r⊳ -approximate S-realizer.
  The converse of this result, for Sum-automata, is shown in Lemma 21 below.




                                                    28
Lemma 21. The regret determinization problem for nondeterministic Sum-automata reduces
in linear time to the approximate synthesis problem for Sum-specifications (with the same
threshold).
Proof. Let A = (Q, Σ, qi , ∆, F, γ) be a nondeterministic Sum-automaton. We construct a
(deterministic) Sum-automaton B = (Q′ , Σ′ , qi , ∆′ , F, γ ′ ) with Q′ = Q ∪ {qa | q ∈ Q, a ∈ Σ},
Σ′ = Σi ∪ Σo, where Σi = Σ and Σo = {τ | τ ∈ ∆}, ∆′ = {(p, a, pa ) | p ∈ Q and a ∈
Σi} ∪ {(pa , τ, q) | (p, a, q) = τ }, γ ′ (pa , τ, q) = γ(τ ) and γ ′ (p, a, pa ) = 0. Let S denote the
Sum-speciﬁcation deﬁned by B.
                           Q
  Given a threshold r ∈ , and ⊳ ∈ {<, ≤}, it is easy to show that there exists a transducer
T that implements an r⊳ -approximate S-realization if, and only if, A is r⊳ -determinizable.


C.3. Best-value synthesis
C.3.1. Proof of Lemma 11
Lemma 11. Given a weighted specification S by a ≤-stable weighted automaton A, if there
exists a transducer that implements a best-value S-realization, then there exists a transducer
that implements a best-value S-realization that is defined as a sub-automaton of A.
                Z      Q
Proof. Let V : ∗ → be a payoﬀ function, and let A be a ≤-stable V -automaton deﬁning
a speciﬁcation S. Let T be a trim transducer that implements a best-value S-realization.
We build the transducer A × T and show that if A × T contains two states of the form
(q, m1 ) and (q, m2 ) then it suﬃces to keep only one of them, e.g., (q, m1 ), and replace every
target (q, m2 ) with (q, m1 ). Repeating this construction eventually leads to a transducer
that is a sub-automaton of A.
   We show the correctness of this construction. Let B denote the transducer A          × T , and
consider two states (q, m1 ) and (q, m2 ). Let fB ((q, mi ), u) = Sq (u ⊗ B(q,mi ) (u)) , where Sq
is the V -speciﬁcation deﬁned by Aq , that is, A with initial state q, and B(q,mi ) denotes the
B with initial state (q, mi ) for i = 1, 2.
   First, we prove that for all u ∈ dom(R(Aq )) holds that fB ((q, m1 ), u) = fB ((q, m2 ), u).
Let (∗) denote this property.
   Towards a contradiction, assume that there is a u such that fB ((q, m1 ), u) < fB ((q, m2 ), u),
let ρ′ resp. ρ′′ denote the corresponding run of B(q,m1 ) resp. B(q,m2 ) with output v ′ resp.
                                                                    x|y
v ′′ . Pick a word x ⊗ y ∈ (ΣiΣo)∗ such that B : (q0 , m0 ) −−→ (q, m2 ), let ρ be the run of A
on x ⊗ y, ρ ends in q. Since A is ≤-stable we obtain that V (ρρ′′ ) < V (ρρ′ ). We have that
B(xu) = yv ′′ , S(xu ⊗ yv ′′ ) = V (ρρ′′ ), and S(xu ⊗ yv ′ ) = V (ρρ′ ), this contradicts that B
implements a best-value S-realizer.
    Secondly, we prove that we can safely remove (q, m2 ) from B. Let B ′ denote the transducer
where (q, m2 ) is removed and the transitions pointing to (q, m2 ) now point to (q, m1 ). For
this, we show that for all u ∈ dom(R(Aq )) it holds that fB ((q, m1 ), u) = fB′ ((q, m1 ), u),
                                    ′
where fB′ ((q, m1 ), u) = Sq (u ⊗ B(q,m   1)
                                             (u)). Towards a contradiction, pick a shortest u ∈
dom(R(Aq )) such that fB ((q, m1 ), u) > fB′ ((q, m1 ), u). Let ρ resp. ρ′ be the run on the
unique u ⊗ v resp. u ⊗ v ′ of B resp. B ′ such that V (ρ) = fB ((q, m1 ), u) and V (ρ′ ) =
fB′ ((q, m1 ), u). Since V (ρ) > V (ρ′ ), ρ must visit (q, m2 ), thus ρ has a factorization ρ1 ρ2
such that the corresponding run of B is of the form
                                             u1 |v1        u2 |v2
                               B : (q, m1 ) −−−→ (q, m2 ) −−−→ (p, m),
                                   |     {z     }|         {z       }
                                        ρ1                  ρ2

where u = u1 u2 , v = v1 v2 and (p, m) is a ﬁnal state of B, and ρ1 does not visit (q, m2 ). By




                                                      29
construction of B ′ , the run ρ′ is of the form ρ1 ρ′2 as follows:

                                                u1 |v1          u2 |v ′
                              B ′ : (q, m1 ) −−−→ (q, m1 ) −−−→2
                                                                 (p′ , m′ ),
                                    |     {z     }|          {z          }
                                           ρ1                     ρ′2


where v ′ = v1 v2′ , and (p′ , m′ ) is a ﬁnal state of B ′ . The property (∗) implies that fB ((q, m1 ), u2 ) =
fB ((q, m2 ), u2 ) = V (ρ2 ). Since A is ≤-stable, it follows that V (ρ2 ) > V (ρ′2 ). Hence,
fB ((q, m1 ), u2 ) > fB′ ((q, m1 ), u2 ), which contradicts the assumption that u is a shortest
counter-example.
  Finally, we show that B ′ is also a best-value S-realizer. Let u ∈ dom(S) and let fB (u)
resp. fB′ (u) be equal to S(u ⊗ B(u)) resp. S(u ⊗ B ′(u)). We show that fB (u) = fB′ (u). Let ρ
be the run of A on (u, B(u)), and ρ′ be the run of A on (u, B ′ (u)). If ρ does not visit (q, m2 )
then ρ = ρ′ and the claim follows. If ρ visits (q, m2 ), then ρ and ρ′ can be decomposed as:

                    u1 |v1        u2 |v2                                       u1 |v1     u2 |v ′
   B : (q0 , m0 ) −−−→ (q, m2 ) −−−→ (p, m)               B ′ : (q0 , m0 ) −−−→ (q, m1 ) −−−→2
                                                                                               (p′ , m′ ) .
       |      {z      }|         {z       }                     |      {z      }|          {z          }
               ρ1                  ρ2                                     ρ1                ρ′2


   By (∗) we have fB ((q, m1 ), u2 ) = fB ((q, m2 ), u2 ) and by the second property we have
shown, we have fB ((q, m1 ), u2 ) = fB′ ((q, m1 ), u2 ). In other words, we get V (ρ2 ) = V (ρ′2 ),
from which we conclude that V (ρ1 ρ2 ) = V (ρ1 ρ′2 ) (because A is V -stable), i.e. fB (u) =
fB′ (u). This concludes the proof, as B is a best-value S-realizer.
  As a consequence of the latter lemma, the fact that V -speciﬁcations are ≤-stable and have
decidable inclusion problem [25] for V ∈ {Sum, Avg, Dsum}, we obtain decidability of the
best-value synthesis problem for those measures. While this technique is general to obtain
decidability results, it does not yield optimal complexities, and in the following theorems,
we use other techniques to obtain better bounds.

C.3.2. Proof of Theorem 12 (continued)
Theorem 12. The best-value synthesis problem is decidable in Ptime for Sum-specifications
and Avg-specifications, and in NP∩coNP for Dsum-specifications.
  It remains to prove Theorem 12 for Avg- and Dsum-speciﬁcations. This is done below in
two separate theorems, Theorem 22 and Theorem 23.

C.3.3. Proof of Theorem 12: Average
Theorem 22. The best-value synthesis problem for an Avg-specification is decidable in Ptime.
Proof. The problem reduces to the best-value synthesis problem for Sum-speciﬁcations.
  Let A be a Avg-automaton deﬁning an Avg-speciﬁcation S, and let ASum be the same
automaton but interpreted as a Sum-automaton deﬁning the Sum-speciﬁcation SSum . We
have that R(S) = R(SSum ).
  Let T be a such that dom(T ) = dom(S) and u ⊗ T (u) ∈ S for all u ∈ dom(S). It is easy
to see that S(u ⊗ T (u)) = bestValS (u) if, and only if, SSum (u, T (u)) = bestValSSum (u) for all
u ∈ dom(S), because bestValSSum (u) = bestValS (u)|uu|.

C.3.4. Proof of Theorem 12: Discounted-sum
Theorem 23. The best-value synthesis problem for a Dsum-specification is decidable in
NP∩coNP.




                                                         30
Proof. Let A = (Q, Σ, q0 , ∆, F, γ) be a Dsum-automaton (with discount factor λ) deﬁning a
weighted speciﬁcation S, for which we want to solve the best-value synthesis problem. We
ﬁrst give a property that characterizes best-value realizers of S, and then use a game to
check this property.
  For a state q ∈ Q we write bestValq for the function bestValSq , where Sq is the weighted
speciﬁcation deﬁned by A with initial state q. Let T be a transducer. Then T is a best-value
realizer of S if, and only if, the following property is satisﬁed:
 (∗) Assume an input u ∈ Σi∗ , T has produced some output v, such that A reaches state q
     on u ⊗ v, and the corresponding transition sequence of A has discounted-sum x. Then
     for each u′ ∈ Σ∗i such that uu′ ∈ dom(S):

                                 x + λ2|u| bestValq (u′ ) = bestValS (uu′ ).

We argue that (∗) indeed characterizes the best-value realizers of S. Clearly, always x +
λ2|u| bestValq (u′ ) ≤ bestValS (uu′ ) because x + λ2|u| bestValq (u′ ) is a possible value for uu′ . So
if (∗) is not satisﬁed, then there is a u′ such that uu′ ∈ dom(S), and x + λ2|u| bestValq (u′ ) <
bestValS (uu′ ). But then T cannot produce the best value for input uu′ . If (∗) is satisﬁed,
then for u ∈ dom(S), we obtain that T produces weight x = bestVal(u) by choosing u′ = ε.
This ﬁnishes the argument that (∗) characterizes the best-value realizers of S.
   We now show how to reduce the problem of checking (∗) to critical preﬁx Dsum non-strict
threshold games in polynomial time, which yields the claimed complexity by Theorem 16.
The idea for the game is the same as for the game used in the proof of Theorem 2 for the
construction of domain-safe automata: Adam and Eve simultaneously build runs of A, both
starting in the initial state. The weights are chosen such that they give the diﬀerence of
the weights of the two runs (run of Eve − run of Adam). Eve’s goal is to ensure that the
diﬀerence is ≥ 0 for inputs that are in the domain.
   In the Boolean case (Theorem 2), the output transitions where chosen in two moves,
ﬁrst by Eve, then by Adam. For Dsum this is problematic because for building the weight
diﬀerence of the two runs, we have to ensure to use the right discount factors. Therefore,
we modify the game a bit to take this into account as follows:
   • In a ﬁrst part of the game, there is only one run. Adam chooses inputs, and Eve
     chooses output transitions. The weights of these moves are 0. This corresponds to the
     part where Adam’s run is the same as Eve’s run (and thus the diﬀerence is 0).
   • Whenever Eve has chosen an output transition, Adam can either follow this output
     transition and pick the next input, staying in the ﬁrst part of the game, or choose
     a diﬀerent output, branching oﬀ another run and going to the second part of the
     game (the idea is that Adam chooses this move the ﬁrst time Eve would reach a state
     violating property (∗)).
   • In the second part, the game traces two runs. Adam always chooses the input and
     his next output at the same time. Then Eve chooses her output. The weights are the
     diﬀerences between the transitions in the two runs. Since the move to the second part
     of the game shifts the number of moves in the game by one w.r.t. the transitions in
     the run, the weights have to be corrected, dividing them by λ.
Since a best-value realizer of S is also a Boolean realizer of S, we also need to take care of
the Boolean condition (the run of Eve is accepting if the run of Adam is accepting). This
could be done by ﬁrst solving a safety condition on the game that we build. However, since
we have already solved the Boolean case in Theorem 2, we can use those results.
   We now turn to the formal deﬁnition of the game. Let As with transitions ∆s ⊆ ∆ be
a domain-safe subautomaton of A according to Theorem 2. Let Qi, Qo be the partition
of the state set of A into input and output states, and let ∆i = ∆ ∩ (Qi × Σi × Qo) and



                                                  31
∆o = ∆ ∩ (Qo × Σo × Qi) be the transitions starting from an input and output states,
respectively. The transitions that Eve can use are the ones in ∆os = ∆o ∩ ∆s .
   • The vertices of Adam are {q0 } ∪ ∆so ∪ (Qi × Qi).
   • The vertices of Eve are Qo ∪ (Qo × Qo × Σo).
   • The critical vertices are Q × F .
   • The edges are
        ◦ q0 → p with weight 0 for all (q0 , a, p) ∈ ∆i (Adam’s very ﬁrst input)
        ◦ For p ∈ Qo:
          p → (p, b, q) with weight 0 for all (p, b, q) ∈ ∆so (Eve’s output in the ﬁrst part of
          the game)
        ◦ For (p, b, q) ∈ ∆so:
          (p, b, q) → p′ with weight 0 for all (q, a, p′ ) ∈ ∆i (Adam follows Eve’s output and
          chooses the next input in the ﬁrst part of the game)
        ◦ For (p, b, q) ∈ ∆so:
                                                 ′ ′
          (p, b, q) → (q, q ′ ) with weight γ(p,b ,q )−γ(p,b,q)
                                                     λ          for each (p, b′ , q ′ ) ∈ ∆o (Adam
          chooses a diﬀerent output than Eve, moving to the second part of the game; the
          length of the game is now one more than the length of the runs, so the weights
          are corrected by λ1 )
        ◦ For (q, q ′ ) ∈ (Qi × Qi):
                                                   ′    ′
          (q, q ′ ) → (p, p′ , b′ ) with weight γ(q ,a,p )−γ(q,a,p)
                                                          λ         for each a ∈ Σi, b′ ∈ Σo, and
                        ′     ′
          (q, a, p), (q , a, p ) ∈ ∆i (Adam chooses next input and his next output in the
          second part of the game)
        ◦ For (p, p′ , b′ ) ∈ Qo × Qo × Σo:
                                                   ′ ′ ′
          (p, p′ , b′ ) → (q, q ′ ) with weight γ(p ,b ,q λ)−γ(p,b,q) for each b ∈ Σo with (p, b, q) ∈ ∆os ,
          and (p′ , b′ , q ′ ) ∈ ∆o (Eve chooses her next output in the second part of the game).
     We claim that Eve has a winning strategy in this critical preﬁx Dsum game with
     threshold ≥ 0 iﬀ there is a best-value realizer of S.
     We view the ﬁrst part of the game as Adam playing the same outputs as Eve. With
     this view, any play ending in a vertex of Adam corresponds to an input word u, two
     output words v, v ′ of the same length as u, a run of As on u ⊗ v, and a run of A on
     u ⊗ v ′ . The weight of such a play is the diﬀerence of the weights of these two runs,
     which can easily be shown by induction on the length of the play.
     If there is a best-value realizer of S, then it only uses transition of As (see Theorem 2).
     Eve can play her moves according to this realizer, ensuring that her run produces the
     best value for each input in the domain of S. Hence, the weight of plays ending in
     Q × F is ≥ 0.
     Now assume that Eve has a winning strategy σ in the game, which can be assumed to
     be positional by Theorem 18.
     On the ﬁrst part of the game, this strategy corresponds to a transducer Tσ . We show
     that Tσ satisﬁes property (∗). Assume that Tσ violates (∗), and pick a shortest word u
     for which (∗) is not satisﬁed. Let v be the output produced by Tσ , and x, q as in (∗).
     If u = v = ε, then x = 0 and q = q0 , and thus the equation from (∗) is satisﬁed.
     Hence, u = a1 · · · an and v = b1 · · · bn with n ≥ 1. Consider the corresponding play π
     in the ﬁrst part of the game, which is of this form (where the ai are not part of the
     game but are added for readability):
                      1a                      2 a                   n    a
              π = q0 −→ p1 → (p1 , b1 , q1 ) −→ p2 → · · · → qn−1 −−→ pn → (pn , bn , qn )



                                                    32
     with q = qn . Let u′ = an+1 · · · an+m be a witness that (∗) is violated, i.e., such that

                                 x + λ2|u| bestValq (u′ ) < bestValS (uu′ ).

     We can conclude that for all bn+1 · · · bn+m :

                             A(a1 b1 · · · an+m bn+m ) < bestValS (uu′ ).(1)

     Since u was chosen as shortest word, property (∗) is satisﬁed for w = a1 · · · an−1 , qn−1 ,
     and the weight y = A(a1 b1 · · · an−1 bn−1 ), i.e.,

                  y + λ2|w| bestValqn−1 (an u′ ) = bestValS (wan u′ ) = bestValS (uu′ ).

     So there are b′n b′n+1 · · · b′n+m such that

              A(a1 b1 · · · an−1 bn−1 an b′n an+1 b′n+1 · · · an+m b′n+m ) = bestValS (uu′ ).(2)

     This means that Adam can continue the play π by ﬁrst playing b′n , taking the play into a
     conﬁguration (qn , qn′ ) in the second part of the game, and then playing an+1 b′n+1 · · · an+m b′n+m ,
     reaching a critical vertex. For all responses of Eve (corresponding to some outputs
     bn+1 · · · bn+m ), the value reached at the end of the play is < 0 because of (1) and (2).



C.4. Approximate synthesis
Theorem 13. The approximate synthesis problem is
   • EXPtime-complete for Sum-specifications and strict or non-strict thresholds;
   • decidable and EXPtime-hard for Avg-specifications and strict or non-strict thresholds;
   • in NEXPtime (resp. EXPtime) for Dsum-specifications with a discount factor λ of
                             N
     the form n1 with n ∈ and strict (resp. non-strict) thresholds.


  We split the proof into several theorems. First, we prove the theorem for sum, see
Theorem 24. Then, we prove the theorem for average, see Theorem 25 for decidability
and Theorem 26 for hardness. Finally, we prove the theorem for discounted-sum, see
Theorem 27.

C.4.1. Proof of Theorem 13: Sum
Theorem 24. The approximate synthesis problem for a Sum-specification and a strict or
non-strict threshold is decidable. The problem is EXPtime-complete.
Proof. The approximate synthesis problem for a Sum-speciﬁcation reduces to the regret
determinization problem for nondeterministic Sum-automata, see Lemma 10. The latter
problem was shown to be EXPtime-complete in [26], so we obtain EXPtime-membership.
We obtain EXPtime-hardness by Lemma 21.

C.4.2. Proof of Theorem 13: Average
Theorem 25. The approximate synthesis problem for an Avg-specification and a strict or
non-strict threshold is decidable.




                                                    33
Proof. Let A = (Q, Σ, qi , ∆, F, γ) be a complete Avg-automaton deﬁning an Avg-speciﬁcation
S. We assume that S has a non-empty domain, otherwise we can directly conclude that
the speciﬁcation is realizable. Since A alternatively reads input and output symbols, we
assume that the set of states is partitioned into a set of input states Qi from which only
input symbols are read, and set of output states Qo. Note that qi ∈ Qi.
   Given a non-strict threshold r, the goal is to decide whether there exists a transducer T
such that dom(T ) = dom(S) and S(u ⊗ T (u)) ≥ bestValS (u) − r for all u ∈ dom(S). The
latter is equivalent to S(u ⊗ T (u))|uT (u)| − bestValS (u)|uT (u)| + |uT (u)|r ≥ 0. Let ρ be the
unique run of A on u⊗v, let v ′ be such that S(u⊗v ′ ) = bestValS (u), and let ρ′ be the unique
run of A on u ⊗ v ′ . We can express the above equation as Sum(ρ) − Sum(ρ′ ) + |ρ|r ≥ 0.
With this formulation in mind, we are ready to present a decision method.
   We reduce the problem to deciding whether Eve has an observation-based winning strategy
in a critical preﬁx energy game with imperfect information with initial credit zero, in which
for all states of the game, Adam has a strategy to enforce a visit to a critical state. Such
games are decidable according to Theorem 8. Intuitively in the game, Adam constructs a
run ρ of A but Eve only sees the input word u of ρ and not the output word nor its states,
using imperfect information. Eve also constructs a run ρ′ of A on input u. The weights are
deﬁned so as to maintain the invariant property that the energy level is Sum(ρ′ ) − Sum(ρ) +
|ρ|r. Moreover, the construction makes sure that Adam has always a strategy to reach an
accepting state, i.e., that the run ρ, if non-accepting, can be continued into an accepting
run. To do so, Adam’s actions are restricted to those which maintain this invariant.
   Let us now describe the construction formally. Consider Qtrim ⊆ Q the subset of states
which are both reachable from the initial state and from which an accepting state can be
reached. Let Qtrim
                 i    = Qtrim ∩ Qi and Qotrim = Qtrim ∩ Qo. Note that qi ∈ Qitrim since we
assume that dom(S) 6= ∅, and F ⊆ Qitrim , since accepted words end with an output symbol.
   The game arena G has the set of vertices (Qi × Qtrim  i   ) ∪ (Qo × Qtrimo    × Σi) ∪ {q⊥ },
and the set of available actions are Σo ∪ {choose}. The arena contains the following edges
   • (p, q) to (δ(p, a), δ(q, a), a) with action choose and weight γ(δ(p, a)) − γ(δ(q, a)) + r for
     all p, q ∈ Q and a ∈ Σi such that δ(q, a) ∈ Qotrim .       This edge indicates that Adam
     chooses the input symbol a.
   • (p, q, a) to (δ(p, b), δ(q, b′ )) with action b and weight γ(δ(p, b)) − γ(δ(q, b′ )) + r for all
     p, q ∈ Q, a ∈ Σi and b, b′ ∈ Σo such that δ(q, b′ ) ∈ Qtrim i . This edge indicates that
     Eve chooses the output symbol b and Adam chooses b′ instead.
   • (p, q) to q⊥ with action choose and weight zero for all p ∈ Q \ F and q ∈ F  This
     edge indicates that Adam has completed a valid input word, but Eve was not able to
     produce a valid output word.
   • q⊥ to q⊥ with action choose and weight −1            This is a sink state used to bring the
     energy level below zero.
   • (p, q) to (p, q) with action choose and weight 0.       This is to make the arena deadlock-
     free.
Note that the arena is deadlock free thanks to the loop on states (p, q) and for states of the
form (p, q, a), there always exist b, b′ such that δ(p, b) is deﬁned (because A is complete) and
δ(p, b′ ) ∈ Qitrim since q ∈ Qtrim
                                 o and F ⊆ Qtrimi .
   The observation of a vertex of the form (p, q) is p, of the form (p, q, a) is (p, a) and of q⊥
is q⊥ . The set of critical vertices contains all vertices of the form (p, q) with q ∈ F and q⊥ .
The initial vertex is (qi , qi ).
   First, let us show that Adam, from any vertex of the game, has a strategy to reach a
critical vertex, an assumption required to apply Theorem 8. Let consider a non-critical
vertex of the form (p, q) or of the form (p, q, a) such that q 6∈ F . Since q ∈ Qtrim , Adam



                                                34
can, in the game, construct a run (correspond to the second components of the vertices) to
an accepting state of A, leading in the game to a critical vertex.
   Second, we show that Eve has an observation-based winning strategy in the constructed
critical preﬁx energy game with imperfect information with initial credit zero, if, and only
if, there exists a transducer T such that dom(T ) = dom(S) and for all u ∈ dom(S), S(u ⊗
T (u)) ≥ bestValS (u) − r.
   Assume that Eve has an observation-based winning strategy with initial credit zero.
Let σ be a ﬁnite-memory observation-based winning strategy, as is guaranteed to exist by
Theorem 8. The strategy can be translated into a transducer Tσ . Indeed, a ﬁnite-memory
observation-based strategy is of type M × O → (choose ∪ Σo) × M , where M is a ﬁnite
set of memory states and O is the set of observations of the game. Note that there, an
observation O is either a pair (p, a), a single state p or q⊥ . Since σ is winning and q⊥ is
losing, q⊥ is never reached. Initially, the transducer is in state (qi , m0 ) where m0 is the initial
memory state of σ. The states of Tσ are pairs (p, m). Let a ∈ Σi be some input symbol and
assume that Eve gets observation (p′ = δ(p, a), a). From this observation, we get the pair
σ(m, (p′ , a)) = (b, m′ ) meaning that she plays b and the memory is updated to m′ . Then,
she can only observes that she is in p′ ∈ Qi and her only possible action is choose. Let m′′
such that σ(m′ , p′ ) = (choose, m′′ ). From state (p, m) and input a, Tσ outputs b and moves
to state (δ(p′ , b), m′ ). The accepting states of Tσ are pairs (p, m) such that p ∈ F .
   We show that Tσ implements an r-approximate S-realization. From the construction of the
game graph it is clear that R(Tσ ) ⊆ R(S), since any accepting run of Tσ can be translated
back to an accepting run of A. We prove that their domains are equivalent. Towards a
contradiction assume otherwise. Then there exists some input word u = u1 . . . un ∈ dom(S)
such that u ∈  / dom(Tσ ). We pick some v = v1 . . . vn such that u ⊗ v ∈ S. Consider the
play π according to σ where Adam chooses the edges that correspond to input u and output
v, eventually the play reaches the vertex (p, q) = (δ(u1 v1′ . . . un vn′ ), δ(u1 v1 . . . un vn )). Since
u ⊗ v ∈ S we have q ∈ F and since u 6∈ dom(Tσ ), p ∈     / F , because by construction of Tσ , the
projection of π on its ﬁrst component corresponds to a run of Tσ . Then, Adam can move
to q⊥ and bring the energy level below zero. Since q⊥ is a critical vertex, Eve loses. This
contradicts that σ is winning.
   It is left to show that for all u ∈ dom(S) holds that S(u ⊗ Tσ (u)) ≥ bestValS (u) − r.
Towards a contradiction assume S(u ⊗ Tσ (u)) < bestValS (u) − r. Let v be an output word
such that u⊗v ∈ S and S(u⊗v) = bestValS (u). Let ρ and ρ′ be the unique runs of A on u⊗v
and u ⊗ Tσ (u), respectively. Now, we consider the play π in G, where Eve plays according
to σ and Adam makes his choices such that they correspond to the input word u and the
run ρ. Eve does not observe ρ. Eve choices of actions spell the run ρ′ . By construction of
the game graph, the play ends up in a critical vertex, say after i steps, because u ∈ dom(S).
Furthermore, the energy level of the play preﬁx is EL(π(i)) = Sum(ρ′ ) − Sum(ρ) + r|ρ|. Since
                          ′
                            )
S(u ⊗ Tσ (u)) = Sum(ρ |ρ|     and S(u ⊗ v) = Sum(ρ)
                                               |ρ|  = bestValS (u), it follows from S(u ⊗ Tσ (u)) <
                                  ′
bestValS (u) − r that Sum(ρ ) + r|ρ| < Sum(ρ). Thus, EL(π(i)) < 0, which contradicts that
σ is an observation-based winning strategy with initial credit zero.
   For the other direction, assume that T is an S-realizer which non-strictly r-approximates
S. The transducer T can be directly translated into an observation-based ﬁnite-state strat-
egy σT for Eve as follows. Let M be the states of T with initial state m0 . The states of σT
are M × {i, o}, with initial state (m0 , i). In state (m, i) and for an observation (p, a), σT
picks action b such that there exists a transition (m, a, b, m′ ) in T , and the strategy moves
to state m′ . From a state (m, o) and for an observation p, Eve can only pick action choose
and the strategy moves to state (m, i).
   We show that σT is winning with initial credit zero. Clearly, plays according to σT
never reach the critical vertex q⊥ . We prove that in the energy level in every other critical
vertex that is reached is not below zero. Consider some play π according to σT and assume
last(π(i)) ∈ C for some i and assume π(i) describes some input word u. Eve has made choices



                                                   35
such that she picks the run ρ′ of A on the pair (u, T (u)). Let ρ denote the alternative run that
Adam has picked which corresponds to some pair (u, v). We have that Sum(ρ)   |ρ|  ≤ bestValS (u).
                                                                    ′
                                                                 )
Since T is an r-approximate S-realizer, we know that Sum(ρ |ρ′ |   + r ≥ bestValS (u). Thus,
                  ′                                    ′
EL(π(i)) = Sum(ρ ) − Sum(ρ) + r|ρ| ≥ 0, since |ρ| = |ρ |.
  Given a strict threshold r, we show that the problem reduces to deciding if Eve has
an observation based winning strategy in a slightly diﬀerent critical preﬁx energy game
with imperfect information with initial credit zero. For all u, v holds that S(u ⊗ v) >
bestValS (u) − r implies that S(u ⊗ v)|uv| ≥ bestValS (u)|uv| − r|uv| + 1 ⇔ S(u ⊗ v)|uv| −
                                                                Z
bestValS (u)|uv| + r|uv| − 1 ≥ 0, because A has weights in . Thus, it easy to see that it
suﬃces to subtract one from the weights of the edges outgoing of the initial state.

C.4.3. Proof of Theorem 13: Average (lower bound)
Theorem 26. The approximate synthesis problem for an Avg-specification and a strict or
non-strict threshold is EXPtime-hard.
Proof. We provide a reduction from countdown games. A countdown game is a weighted
                         N
game with weights over \ {0} with perfect information in which the actions of a transition
are equal to their weight. In this setting an action is called duration and the sum value of
a play preﬁx is called counter value. The countdown objective is parameterized by a bound
N ∈  N   and is given by CountG (N ) = {π ∈ Plays(G) | ∃i ∈     N   : Sum(π(i)) = N }. Deciding
whether Eve has a winning strategy for the objective CountG (N ), where N and all durations
are given in binary, is EXPtime-complete [31].
   Note that Adam has clearly won a play if it is currently in a vertex s and the counter
value is c < N such that for all τ = (s, d, s′ ) ∈ T holds that c + d > N . Let n = ⌊log2 N ⌋ + 2,
         N
let D ⊆ be the set of durations used in the counter game.
   We ﬁrst consider the strict case. We design an Avg-automaton A deﬁning a weighted
speciﬁcation S such that there exists a T that implements a strictly 1-approximate S-
realization if, and only if, Eve has a winning strategy in the countdown game. Recall,
strictly 1-approximate means that S(u ⊗ T (u)) > bestValS (u) − 1 for all u ∈ dom(S).
   The idea behind the automaton is as follows, see Fig. 1 for an overview. The automaton
has three parts, the initial part, the game part and the counter part.
   The initial part is used to force a strictly 1-approximate S-realization to be in the game
part, if there exists one. This is done as follows. Consider the input σ ∈ dom(S), σ is
any input symbol. The possible output combinations are n and y, with S(σ ⊗ n) = 0
and S(σ ⊗ y) = 1. Since the diﬀerence is one, the ﬁrst output must be y in a sequential
transducer in order to be a strictly 1-approximate S-realizer.
   The remainder of the automaton is split into two parts, one part – the game part – is used
to simulate the moves of Eve and Adam in the counter game, the other part – the counter
part – is used to represent the binary encoding of the current sum of durations. It suﬃces to
use an n-bit counter, because if the nth bit is one, the counter represents a value of at least
2n > N . If the counter has reached this value without seeing N , it is no longer possible to
reach the counter value N required for Eve to win the game. In the counter part each bit is
represented by its own gadget.
   We give a brief overview of the weights in these parts and their functions. The game part
is always reached with current value zero, the counter part with value one. The value of a
run while in the game part remains zero, and while in the counter part remains one. In the
end, given a transducer T , for a given input sequence u ∈ dom(S), we compare the run that
was induced by the produced output sequence T (u) to all other runs that could be induced
with the same input sequence u and diﬀerent output sequences v such that u ⊗ v ∈ S. For T
to be a strictly 1-approximate S-realizer, we require that the diﬀerence between S(u ⊗ T (u))
and S(u ⊗ v) is less than one for all v such that u ⊗ v ∈ S. The goal is that runs can exit the




                                               36
                                                                qin

                                     qf in                           i|1                              qf in

                                  |1                                            y|−1             |0
                                                               n|1                             |4
                                     q1,               qn                                qy        q0,
                                                |−3                                                             |0
                                                         i|1                            i|0                             i|0
              |1                                                                                                                qˆ0
                             |0                                                                           |0      q0
                                     0|1                            n|1                                                        o|0
                                                         2|1                            o|0                             ◮ |0
                                                  1|1
        o|1                  x0            x1           x2      ...        xn                        vin            q◮
qˆ1                                                                                            i|0
               q1
  i|1                                                                                                            ◮ |0
                             x0            x1           x2      ...        xn                   Game part
                                  Counter part
                                                                                                     input error |1
          ◮ |0           ◮ |1           ◮ |1                 ◮ |1
                                                                         i|1       counting error |1
                    ◮ |1          ◮ |0          ◮ |0
         qˆ1           qˆ1           qˆ1                 qˆ1               qˆ1

Figure 1.: Overview of the automaton. The initial part is designed to force a strictly 1-
           approximate realization to be in the game part (if it exists). The counter part
           is always entered with average one, and all transitions in the counter part have
           weight one. Each bit of the counter has its own gadget. The counter part is exited
           with weight one when either the nth bit is ﬂipped to one, or a counting error
           occurred, or after seeing the input ◮ where the counter bits do not correspond
           to the bits of N , N is the counter value to be reached in the counter game. This
           ﬁgure shows the example where N corresponds to the little-endian bit sequence
           011. The counter part is exited with weight zero when either the end input  is
           seen, or after seeing the input ◮ where the counter bits correspond to the bits of
           N . These transitions are shown in blue. The game part is always entered with
           average zero. All transitions in the game part have weight zero. The game part
           is exited with weight zero when either the end input  is seen, or the output
           ◮ is seen. The next input then has to be ◮. The output ◮ is intended to be
           taken when the counter value is N . The game part is exited with weight one if
           the input has an error, meaning input does not simulate the game play correctly.
           This transition is shown in blue.


counter part (triggered by the special output ◮ in the game part, explained in detail further
below) with a value slightly less than one when the counter value represents N (the input
sequence can continue after the exit). Also, if the counter represents a value less or equal
to N and the input sequence ends, then the counter part is exited with a value slightly less
than one. In Fig. 1 these transitions correspond to the transitions exiting the counter part
which are shown in blue. Runs exit the counter part with value exactly one if either the nth
bit has ﬂipped to one, which indicates that the value N has been surpassed, or if an error in



                                                                    37
updating the counter has been observed. Moreover, if exiting the counter part was triggered
by the special output ◮ in the game part, then it should not be beneﬁcial if the counter
value is not exactly N . Thus, in these cases the counter part is exited maintaining value
one. The game part is always exited with value zero, unless the exit was caused by an error
in the input sequence, then the value is above zero. The input errors are symbolized by the
blue transition exiting the game part in Fig. 1. These properties ensure that the diﬀerence
between compared runs in these two parts will always be less than one if, and only if, Eve
has a winning strategy in the counter game that is copied by a transducer.
   We are ready to go into more detail. First, we give the alphabet explicitly, the other
components are given implicitly by describing the structure of the automaton.
   The alphabet Σ is the union of the following sets: the set {0, . . . , n}, the number i is used
as output to lead the run into the gadget for the ith bit of the counter; the set of vertices
V , vertices are used as input to choose the successor of a transition; the set of durations D,
durations are used as output to choose a duration; {bi | 0 ≤ i ≤ n} and {ci | 1 ≤ i ≤ n} are
used as input, each bi is used to indicate that the ith bit is one, each ci is used to indicate
that the ith carry bit in an addition is one; {y, n}, for yes and no, are used as output to
indicate whether the next input should set a carry bit or not; {⋄}, ⋄ is used as input for
carry bits that remain zero; ﬁnally, {◮, }, these two symbols are used as both input and
output, ◮ to force the runs into special states and  to end input and output. Let Σi and
Σo denote the subset that is used as input and output, respectively.
   We use the symbol i resp. o to denote any input resp. output symbol that is not ◮ or
. Furthermore, when depicting (parts of) the automaton, we allow to label transitions
with two symbols, one input and one output symbol, e.g., (p, b1 o, q) is used a shorthand
for (p, b1 , r) and (r, o, q) that uses an intermediate state which is not shown to make the
depictions more readable.
   The automaton has special states, q0 , qˆ0 , q0, , q1 , qˆ1 q1, , qf in , and q◮ , see Fig. 1. The
state qf in is a deadlock and the only ﬁnal state of the automaton. From qi , reading one
input (except ) and one output symbol leads back to qi via qˆi with sum i + i for i = 0, 1.
From qi , reading  leads to qi, with weight i, and from qi, , reading  leads to qf in with
weight i for i = 0, 1. The purpose of q◮ is explained further below in the paragraphs that
describe the game part.
   We describe the counter part. Each transition with source and target in this part has
weight one. For each bit of the counter there is one gadget, see Fig. 2. The counter part
is designed to update the counter based on the durations seen in the game part of the
automaton, the addition of bits and carry bits is done in the order b0 c1 b1 . . . bn cn , see the
description of the game part. The outputs play no role in the bit gadgets, the targets of
transitions are determined by the input. We explain the gadget for the ith bit. The design
is such that a run that is in state xi resp. xi indicates that the ith bit of the counter is
currently zero resp. one. In xi , adding a bit or a carry bit (indicated by reading bi resp. ci )
ﬂips the counter, so xi is reached. In xi , reading ci+1 leads to qˆ1 with weight one, because
adding something to the ith bit of the counter while it is zero cannot set the i + 1th carry
bit to one. In Fig. 1 this transition (among others) is symbolized by the transition with
label counting error. Taking this transition ensures that the value of the run can not go
below one anymore. In xi , adding a bit or a carry bit (indicated by reading bi resp. ci ) ﬂips
the counter, however, ci+1 has to be read eventually, because this operation sets the i + 1th
carry bit to one. In Fig. 2 the unnamed states represent states where the counter waists to
see ci+1 , if as input some vertex v ∈ V is seen, we know the addition of a duration to the
counter is ﬁnished, because input has chosen a successor vertex. Thus, the necessary carry
bit was not seen and an error was detected, so seeing v ∈ V leads to qˆ1 . If the ﬁrst waiting
state was reached with ci the input bi might be seen before ci+1 , that is why there is the
second waiting state. Reading ci+1 directly from xi leads to q1 with weight one, because
this would indicate that the i + 1th carry bit was set without adding something to the ith




                                                  38
bit of the counter which is an error.
   Regarding the nth bit, from xn everything goes to qˆ1 with weight one, because this means
the counter has surpassed the value N , see Fig. 1.
   As mentioned above, in the game part, output can trigger to stop the game by the output
symbol ◮, then input has to answer with ◮ as input; seeing the input ◮ in the counter
gadgets triggers to exit the counter gadget, see Fig. 1. The intention is that exiting the
counter gadget with ◮ should only be beneﬁcial, i.e., lead to a run with value less than one,
if the counter value represents exactly N . This is achieved as follows, see also Fig. 1. Let
y0 . . . yn−1 be the little-endian bit encoding of N . If yi is zero resp. one, then from xi resp.
xi a transitions with ◮ leads to qˆ1 with weight zero for each i, ensuring that the value of
the run will be less than one. For all other states (that expect input), reading ◮ leads to qˆ1
with weight one.
   In the bit gadgets, for all inputs that are not  and were not described together with
some output symbol lead back to the same state, e.g., reading b2 o from xi (with i 6= 1) goes
back to xi . From every state (that expects input), reading  leads to q1, with weight zero.
This ensures that the value of the run is less than one, because it does not indicate a counter
value that has surpassed N , nor an error in updating the counter.



                                                         xi                       xn
                        ci+1
                                      ci+1 o


                               v∈V             bi o                bi o, ci o      bn o, cn o
       ...        qˆ1                                                       ...

                         v∈V                              ci+1 o
                                                                                       i
                                       bi o, ci o        xi                       xn       qˆ1
                    ci+1




                    Figure 2.: Counter gadgets. One gadget for each bit.

   We describe the game part. Each transition with source and target in this part has weight
zero. The idea behind the weights in this part is that each run should have value zero, unless
the input stops to faithfully simulate a play in the counter game, in which case it should
have a value greater than zero.
   From a state v ∈ V an output symbol must be read. It is possible to go to a state (v, d)
with output d if there exists a transition of the form (v, d, v ′ ) ∈ T . Furthermore, the output
◮ is possible leading to the state q◮ with weight zero, see Fig. 1. The intention is to use
this output if the counter part of the automaton represents the value N . In q◮ the input
◮ leads to q0 with weight zero, all other inputs (except ) lead to q0 with weight one, 
leads to q0, with weight one. These transitions are not shown in Fig. 1, to not clutter the
ﬁgure further, if inserted this would also be visualized by a blue transition labeled with input
error. As explained before, the automaton is designed such that reading the input ◮ in the
counter part leads to a value less than one if the counter value is indeed N .
   From a state (v, d) the next symbols must ensure that the duration d is added to the
counter, i.e., the sequence read from here in the game part must – when read in the counter
part – update the automaton representation of the bit counter. We show how this is done
for a concrete example, see Fig. 3. We assume that a 4-bit counter is used, that we are in a



                                                    39
state (s, 13) and that the possible successors of s with duration 13 in the counter game are
s1 and s2 . The number 13 is 1011 in little-endian notation, so the next inputs that describe
the duration are b0 , b2 and b3 . When adding 1011 to the 4-bit counter, some carry bits
might become one. The outputs y(es) and n(o) are used to indicate which ones, the input
ci indicates that the ith carry bit becomes one, the input ⋄ is used for the carry bits that
remain zero. Whether the chosen carry bits are correct is checked in the counter part of the
automaton. If it is incorrect, the run in the counter part will have value one and the run in
this adder gadget will have value zero. Eventually, the next input symbol indicates which
successor is picked.
   From a state (v, d), the input  leads to q0, with weight zero. From every other state
(that expects input), the input  leads to q0, with weight one (not pictured in Fig. 1 to save
space). The target of a transition for any state (that expects input) and an input symbol
for which we did not describe a transition leads to qˆ0 with weight one. These transition are
symbolized by the transition labeled with input error in Fig. 1. The ﬁrst input possibility
marks a valid point to stop simulating the game. The latter two input possibilities mark
invalid points to stop simulating the game, so it is ensured that the value of run is not zero.

                                    c2           y c1        y
                                o                                 b0
                                                                        (s, 13)

                                        ⋄        n    ⋄      n
             b2

                                                                                  s1
                  y        c3                         y     c4             s1
                                    o       b3                      o

                  n        ⋄                          n     ⋄              s2
                                                                                  s2

Figure 3.: Adder gadget. Example for the gadget corresponding to transitions (s, 13, s1 )
           and (s, 13, s2 ) with n = 4. The duration 13 is 1011 in little-endian notation.

   We are ready to prove the correctness of our construction. We make three observations.
First, it is easy to see that we have constructed a deterministic automaton with weights, thus,
it deﬁnes a weighted speciﬁcation S. Second, the domain of S is (Σi \ {})+, furthermore,
the domain of both parts of the automaton are the same. Third, we have 0 ≤ S(u ⊗ v) ≤ 1
for all u ⊗ v ∈ S.
   We already established that a strictly 1-approximate S-realizer must lie in the game part
of the automaton if it exists.
   Assume that Eve has a winning strategy in the countdown game. Consider a transducer
that behaves according to a winning strategy.
   We distinguish between input sequences that faithfully simulate a play in the game, and
those that do not.
   In the latter case, the run in the game part has a strictly positive value, all values for
alternative runs with same input sequence have a value of at most one (this property is also
true for all other input sequences). So, the diﬀerence is less than one.
   In the former case, the output indicates to stop counting after the counter has reached
the value N by the output ◮, the run in the game part has value zero. We take a look at all
other output sequences that can be combined with the same input sequence. First, consider
all alternative output sequences such that the run also lies in the game part. All runs in the
game part have a value strictly less than one, so the diﬀerence is less than one. Secondly,



                                                 40
consider all alternative output sequences such that the run lies in the counter part. The
second output symbol ﬁxes in which bit gadget the run lies. Note that after a bit gadget has
been entered, the outputs do not inﬂuence the runs anymore, they depend only on the input.
Thus, no matter which gadget is entered, when the input ◮ is seen, the run is assigned a
value less than one, because the bit value is the same as in N . So, the diﬀerence is less than
one.
   What is left for this direction, is to consider the input sequences that faithfully simulate
the game, but stop before the counter has reached N . The run in the game part induced
by the output sequence provided by the transducer has value zero. All alternative output
sequences that induce runs in the counter part have value less than one, because no counting
error occurs and the nth bit does not ﬂip to one. As argued before, all alternative output
sequences that induce runs in the game part have a value less than one.
   Assume that Eve has no winning strategy. We consider input sequences that faithfully
simulate the game. Consider the outputs of any transducer that is an S-realizer. The
resulting run in the game part has value exactly zero, because the inputs faithfully simulate
the game.
   We consider an input sequence such that the value of the counter eventually surpasses N
if the simulation of the game is faithful.
   If the provided output sequence is faithful, then the nth bit of the counter eventually ﬂips
to one. Considering the run for an alternative output sequence that lies in the gadget of the
nth bit of the counter yields a value of exactly one. The diﬀerence is one, the transducer is
not strictly 1-approximate.
   The other possibility is that the output provided by the transducer contain errors when
updating the carry bits in order to maintain a counter value below N . Since such an error is
detected in the corresponding counter bit, again there exists an alternative output sequence
such that the corresponding run in the counter part witnesses the error and is assigned value
exactly one. The diﬀerence between the run in the game part and the alternative is one,
thus, the transducer is not strictly 1-approximate.
   We turn to the case of a non-strict threshold. We can easily change the described spec-
iﬁcation such that there exists a non-strict 1-approximate realizer if, and only if, Eve has
a winning strategy in the counter game. For this we change the weight of two transitions.
First, the weight of the transition that goes from qy to q0, is changed from 4 to 5, to
ensure that a non-strict 1-approximate realizer has to still lie in the game part. Secondly,
the weight of outgoing transitions from qn for some input that is not  is changed from 1 to
2. This ensures that the runs in the counter part have a value of slightly above one unless
something beneﬁcial for output happens, then the values will be decreased to exactly one.
In the game part the values will be as before, i.e., zero, unless there is an input error, then
the values will be slightly above zero. These changes ensure that the diﬀerence between the
runs will always be exactly one if, and only if, Eve has a winning strategy in the counter
game.

C.4.4. Proof of Theorem 13: Discounted-sum
Theorem 27. The approximate synthesis problem for a Dsum-specification with a discount
                                 N
factor λ of the form n1 with n ∈ and a strict threshold is decidable in NEXPtime and a
non-strict threshold in EXPtime.
Proof. We reduce the problems from the statement to threshold synthesis problems for
Dsum-speciﬁcations.
  In [8], it is shown that Dsum-automata with a discount factor λ of the form 1ℓ with ℓ ∈   N
are determinizable with the same discount factor.
  The idea is to (disregard the labels of output transitions which yields a nondeterministic
speciﬁcation automaton and) construct the product automaton of the speciﬁcation automa-



                                              41
ton (without output labels) and a deterministic version of it. The weights of a transition in
the product is the weight of the transition in the deterministic version subtracted from the
weight of the transition in the speciﬁcation automaton (without output labels).
  We show that there is a transducer that implements an approximate realization of the
speciﬁcation (without output labels) for a threshold r if, and only if, there is a transducer
that implements a realization of the speciﬁcation (without output labels) deﬁned by the
product automaton that ensures a value of −r for each pair.
  Let A = (QA , Σio, qiA , ∆A , FA , γA ) be a complete Dsum-automaton with a discount factor
                           N
λ of the form 1ℓ with ℓ ∈ deﬁning a Dsum-speciﬁcation S. Let B be the nondeterministic
Dsum-automaton that is obtained from A by replacing all transition labels that are output
symbols by the same arbitrary output symbol, let ofix denote this output symbol. Let
D = (QD , Σio, qiD , ∆D , FD , γD ) be a trim version of B.
  Formally, the Dsum-automaton C = (QC , Σio, qiC , ∆C , FC , γC ) is deﬁned as follows. The
state set is QA × QD , the initial state is (qiA , qiD ), the ﬁnal state set is FA × FD , and ∆C
contains the following transitions
   • (p, q) to (p′ , q ′ ) if (p, σ, p′ ) ∈ ∆A and (q, σ, q ′ ) ∈ ∆D for all (p, q) ∈ QA    D
                                                                                       i × Qi , the
     weight of the transition is γA ((p, σ, p′ )) − γD ((q, σ, q ′ )),
   • (p, q) to (p′ , q ′ ) if (p, σ, p′ ) ∈ ∆A and (q, ofix , q ′ ) ∈ ∆D for all (p, q) ∈ QA    D
                                                                                           o × Qo , the
                                                 ′                     ′
     weight of the transition is γA ((p, σ, p )) − γD ((q, ofix , q )).
   Given a threshold r ∈     Q and ⊳ ∈ {<, ≤}, it is easy to see that there is a transducer
that implements a r⊳ -approximate S-realization if, and only if, there is a transducer that
implements a SC -realization that ensures a value ⊲ − r for each pair, where SC is the Dsum-
speciﬁcation deﬁned by C, and ⊲ => if ⊳ =< and ⊲ =≥ otherwise.
   It is left to show the claimed complexity bounds. We assume that the weights are given
in binary and the discount factor λ is given as a pair of binary numbers. Following the
construction presented in [8], D is of size mn = 2n·log m , where n is the number of states of
A and log m is a number in the size of the representation of its weights. Thus, the number
of states of D is exponential in the number of states of A and polynomial in the weights of
A. The weights in D are polynomial (the representation of the weights grows by one bit at
most) in the weights of A. Hence, the size of the game arena is exponential in the number
of states and polynomial in the weights of A, and its weights are polynomial in the weights
of A.
   For a strict threshold, Theorem 9 yields that solving critical preﬁx threshold games is
in NP for discounted-sum. Since the constructed arena is of exponential size, the claimed
complexity bound follows.
   For a non-strict threshold, Theorem 9 yields that solving critical preﬁx threshold games in
NP ∩ coNP for discounted-sum. To obtain our desired complexity bound, we make a more
precise analysis. Threshold synthesis problems for discounted-sum are reduced in polynomial
time to critical preﬁx discounted-sum threshold games which are reduced in polynomial time
to discounted-sum games, see the proof of Theorem 16. Using the value iteration algorithm
from [36] to solve discounted-sum games yields the claimed complexity bound, because it
runs in polynomial time in the size of the arena, logarithmic in the absolute maximal weight
of the arena, and exponential in the representation of the discount factor, i.e., polynomial
in the discount factor. An analysis of the run time of the value iteration algorithm is given
in [29].

C.5. Infinite words and Church synthesis
C.5.1. Some observation on the finite-memory requirement for synthesis problems
In the deﬁnition of synthesis problems of Section 2, we ask for the realizability of the spec-
iﬁcation by a (ﬁnite-state) transducer. This requirement can be relaxed to asking whether



                                                 42
the speciﬁcation is realizable by some sequential function f , i.e. a function of type Σi∗ → Σo
prescribing which output symbol should be produced by Eve, depending on the sequence of
input symbols Adam has provided so far. In other words, we could relax the requirement that
f is computable by a (ﬁnite-state) transducer. First, we impose this requirement because
we are interested in functions which can be ﬁnitely represented and computed. Second, we
claim that realizability in the relaxed sense entails realizability by transducers. To see that,
consider ﬁrst the threshold synthesis problems for all measures V ∈ {Sum, Avg, Dsum}. They
are all solved by reduction to corresponding critical preﬁx games, with back-and-forth trans-
lations from ﬁnite-memory strategies to transducers. For those games, it has been shown
in Section 3 that ﬁnite-memory suﬃce for Eve to win. It entails our claim for threshold
synthesis problems.
   The claim also holds for (strict and non-strict) approximate synthesis (and therefore for
best-value synthesis by taking non-strict threshold 0). Indeed, for Sum-speciﬁcation S, the
approximate synthesis algorithm for S works by reduction to the regret determinization prob-
lem for a nondeterministic Sum-automaton (Theorem 24). The algorithmic solution to the
latter problem itself relies on solving a game whose ﬁnite-memory strategies can be back-
translated into (ﬁnite-state) regret determinizers [26], which in turn are back-translated
into transducers realizing S for the threshold synthesis problem as shown in Lemma 10.
In [26], it is shown that ﬁnite-memory strategies are suﬃcient to win, entailing our claim
for Sum-speciﬁcations. For Avg-speciﬁcations (Theorem 25), the approximate synthesis al-
gorithms work by reduction to some critical preﬁx energy games of imperfect information
with ﬁxed initial credit for which ﬁnite-memory are suﬃcient to win by Theorem 8. Like-
wise for Dsum-speciﬁcations and discount factor 1/n, the approximate synthesis problems
(Theorem 27) reduce to critical preﬁx threshold games for which ﬁnite-memory are known
to suﬃce (Theorem 18).

C.5.2. Proof of Theorem 14
Theorem 14. The synthesis problem for an ω-specification O ⊆ (Σi.Σo)ω is decidable when
O is given by a deterministic V -automaton defining a weighted V -specification of finite
words W s.t. O ∈ {Thres>t (W ), Thres≥t (W ), BestVal(W ), Approx< (W, r), Approx≤ (W, r)}
and V = Sum, V = Avg or V = Dsum with discount factor 1/n for n ∈ . Moreover, if O N
is realizable, it is realizable by a Mealy machine.
  These synthesis problems can be directly reduced to the corresponding synthesis problems
on ﬁnite words. E.g., synthesis problem for Thres>t (W ) reduces to the strict threshold
synthesis problem for W (on ﬁnite words). The main diﬀerence is that our quantitative
synthesis problems on ﬁnite words require realizability by a transducer. This is however
not a problem. Indeed, we could have relaxed this condition to asking for realizability by a
possibly inﬁnite-state transducer or equivalently, a function of type Σ∗i → Σo. However, the
algorithms we provide to solve quantitative synthesis problems over ﬁnite words guarantee
that (ﬁnite-state) transducers are suﬃcient. So we do not need inﬁnite memory.
Proof. We consider the case of threshold speciﬁcations. For best-value and approximate
synthesis, the proof is the same. The proof is also parametric in V . Given a deterministic
V -automaton deﬁning a weighted speciﬁcation W and a threshold t, we reduce the synthesis
problem for Thres⊲t (W ) to the threshold synthesis problem (on ﬁnite words) for W , which
is decidable by Theorem 9. Let us show the correctness of the reduction.
   Assume that Thres⊲t (W ) is realizable by a (total) function λ : Σ∗i → Σo. We con-
struct a function f : dom(W ) → Σ∗o and prove that it realizes W (over ﬁnite words for
the threshold problem). To deﬁne f , let u = i1 . . . ik ∈ dom(W ). Then, let f (u) =
λ(i1 )λ(i1 i2 ) . . . λ(i1 . . . ik ). By deﬁnition of Church synthesis, since λ realizes Thres⊲t (W ),
for any inﬁnite continuation ik+1 · · · ∈ Σω         i , we have for all j ≥ 0, if i1 . . . ij ∈ dom(W ),




                                                   43
then W (i1 λ(i1 )i2 λ(i1 i2 ) . . . ij λ(i1 . . . ij )) ⊲ t. It is true in particular for j = k and therefore,
u ⊗ f (u) ∈ W and W (u ⊗ f (u)) ⊲ t.
   Conversely, assume that W is realizable (for threshold t) by a function f : dom(W ) →
Σo∗ , which can be assumed to be computable by a transducer thanks to the observation
of Appendix C.5.1. We construct a function λ : Σ∗i → Σo and prove that (i) it realizes
Thres⊲t (W ) and (ii) it is computable by a Mealy machine. The function λ has to be deﬁned
by all ﬁnite words over Σi. Let u = i1 . . . ik be such a word and let o0 ∈ Σo be some
arbitrarily chosen output symbol. We consider two cases:
   1. there exists v ∈ Σ∗i such that uv ∈ dom(W ). Then, we let λ(u) be the kth letter of
      f (uv) (since f is computable by a transducer, this deﬁnition is independent from the
      choice of v)
   2. there is no such v. Then, we let λ(u) = o0 .
   (i) Let us show that λ realizes Thres⊲t (W ). Let i1 i2 · · · ∈ Σωi be some input ω-word and for
all j, let oj = λ(i1 . . . ij ). Assume that i1 . . . ik ∈ dom(W ). Then, by the choice of o1 , . . . , ok
(in particular by taking v = ǫ in the deﬁnition of λ above), we have f (i1 . . . ik ) = o1 . . . ok )
and since f realizes W , we get W (i1 o1 . . . ik ok ). It is true for all k, therefore i1 o1 i2 o2 · · · ∈
Thres⊲t (W ).
   (ii) Let T be a transducer computing f . We construct a Mealy machine for λ. Since T is
deﬁned only over dom(W ), we have to extend its domain to any ﬁnite word. To do so, we
just complete T whenever there is a missing transition towards a sink state which outputs
o0 whenever it reads an input letter.
   The reduction (and proof of its correctness) is exactly the same for best-value and ap-
proximate synthesis. The only diﬀerence is the theorems we rely on to get decidability.
For best-value and Sum, decidability is given by Theorem 12, for best-value and Avg, by
Theorem 22, for best-value and Dsum, by Theorem 23. For the approximate synthesis and
Sum it is given by Theorem 24, for Avg by Theorem 25, and for Dsum by Theorem 27.




                                                     44
