                                                    Distributed Triangle Detection is Hard in Few Rounds
                                                                       Sepehr Assadi∗                 Janani Sundaresan†
                                                                    University of Waterloo           University of Waterloo
arXiv:2504.01802v2 [cs.DS] 13 Aug 2025




                                                                                           Abstract

                                                    In the distributed triangle detection problem, we have an n-vertex network G = (V, E)
                                                with one player for each vertex of the graph who sees the edges incident on the vertex. The
                                                players communicate in synchronous rounds using the edges of this network and have a limited
                                                bandwidth of O(log n) bits over each edge. The goal is to detect whether or not G contains a
                                                triangle as a subgraph in a minimal number of rounds.
                                                   We prove that any protocol (deterministic or randomized) for distributed triangle detection
                                                requires Ω(log log n) rounds of communication. Prior to our work, only one-round lower bounds
                                                were known for this problem.
                                                    The primary technique for proving these types of distributed lower bounds is via reductions
                                                from two-party communication complexity. However, it has been known for a while that this
                                                approach is provably incapable of establishing any meaningful lower bounds for distributed
                                                triangle detection. Our main technical contribution is a new information theoretic argument
                                                which combines recent advances on multi-pass graph streaming lower bounds with the point-to-
                                                point communication aspects of distributed models, and can be of independent interest.




                                           ∗
                                             (sepehr@assadi.info) Supported in part by a Sloan Research Fellowship, an NSERC Discovery Grant, and a
                                         Faculty of Math Research Chair grant.
                                            †
                                             (jsundaresan@uwaterloo.ca) Supported in part by a Cheriton Scholarship from the School of Computer Science,
                                         Faculty of Math Graduate Research Excellence Award, and Sepehr Assadi’s NSERC Discovery Grant.



                                                                                                i
Contents

1 Introduction                                                                                             1
  1.1   Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       3

2 Preliminaries                                                                                            4
  2.1   Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     4
  2.2   Model of Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           5

3 Technical Overview                                                                                       6
  3.1   Background I: CONGEST Lower Bounds via Communication Complexity . . . . . .                        6
  3.2   Background II: Round Elimination Arguments in Prior Work . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 8
  3.3   Our Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       9
        3.3.1   A Hard Input Distribution       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9
        3.3.2   First Attempt on Round Elimination: Public Sampling of Messages . . . . . 11
        3.3.3   Second Attempt on Round Elimination: Pair Sampling of Messages . . . . . 11
        3.3.4   Third Attempt on Round Elimination: Public and Pair Sampling of Messages 14
        3.3.5   The Final Attempt: Our Round Elimination Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

4 A Hard Distribution and its Properties                                                                  19
  4.1   Base Case: Hard Distribution for 0-rounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
  4.2   Hard Distribution for r-rounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
  4.3   Another Way of Sampling from Hard Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
  4.4   Distribution of Input and Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
  4.5   Proof of Theorem 1 Barring Round Elimination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

5 Round Elimination: Description                                                                          31
  5.1   Key Steps of the Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
        5.1.1   Public Random Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
        5.1.2   Sampling Messages Between Inner Vertices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
        5.1.3   Sampling Rest of the Input and Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
  5.2   Full Protocol πr−1 and its Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
  5.3   Proof of Lemma 4.16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

6 Round Elimination: Analysis                                                                             36
  6.1   Setting up the Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
  6.2   Proof of Lemma 5.6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
  6.3   Messages from One Vertex have Low Correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
  6.4   Inner Inputs and Public Messages have Low Correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
  6.5   Inner Messages and Inner Inputs have Low Correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50



                                                   ii
Acknowledgements                                                                              54

A CONGEST Lower Bounds and Circuit Complexity Barriers                                        59
  A.1 Background on Expander Decomposition and Routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
       A.1.1 Results on Expander Decomposition in CONGEST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
       A.1.2 Results on Routing Algorithms in CONGEST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
  A.2 From Circuits to CONGEST Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62

B List of Random Variables in the Main Proofs                                                 67

C A Schematic Organization of the Main Proofs                                                 69

D Background on Information Theory                                                            70
  D.1 Useful Properties of Entropy and Mutual Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
  D.2 Measures of Distance Between Distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71




                                              iii
1      Introduction
In the distributed triangle detection problem, we have an n-vertex graph G = (V, E) representing
a distributed network with one player for each vertex of the graph who sees the edges incident on
the vertex. Players communicate in synchronous rounds by sending O(log n) bit messages to each
of their neighbors per round. The goal is to detect if G contains a triangle as a subgraph in a small
number of rounds. Detecting in this problem means that if G contains no triangles, all players
should output No; and, if G contains a triangle, at least some player should output Yes.
    This model of distributed communication is referred to as the CONGEST model [Pel00] to
contrast it with the LOCAL model [Lin92] that ignores bandwidth limitations and focuses solely
on locality, imposed by communicating only over the edges of the graph. Triangle detection can be
trivially solved in a single round of LOCAL by each vertex collecting the neighborhood of its own
neighbors. But, this approach incurs a significant communication bottleneck and misrepresents the
true complexity of this problem in distributed networks. As a result, triangle detection (among
other subgraphs) has been studied extensively in the CONGEST model in recent years, leading to
the following state of affairs (see also Section 1.1 for more on the related work):

    • From the upper bound side, the first algorithm for distributed triangle detection is due to [IG17]
                   e 2/3 ) rounds. This was subsequently improved in [CPZ19] to O(n
      and achieves O(n                                                                  e 1/2 ) rounds
      using expander decompositions, and further refined in [CS19, CPSZ21] to O(n  e   1/3 ) rounds. See
      also [HPZZ21] for an algorithm with guarantees based on maximum degree of the graph. These
      algorithms are randomized and their guarantees hold with high probability. Subsequent work
      [CLV22], building on [CS20], obtained deterministic n1/3+o(1) round algorithms for this prob-
      lem. Plugging in the more recent deterministic expander routing algorithm of [CHS24] in the
                                          e 1/3 ) round deterministic algorithm.
      framework of [CLV22], leads to an O(n
    • On the lower bound side, not much is known about this problem. Basically, the only lower
      bounds for this problem are due to [ACKL20] and [FGKO18] who, respectively, showed that
      deterministic or randomized algorithms cannot solve this problem in a single round.

We refer the reader to the excellent survey of [Cen22] for a detailed overview of the literature.
    The lack of progress on lower bounds can be attributed to two factors: (1) the main lower bound
technique in this model, namely reductions from two-player communication complexity, is provably
incapable of establishing any meaningful lower bounds for triangle detection [ACKL20, FGKO18,
Cen22] (see also Section 3.1); and, (2) there is a provable barrier for establishing strong lower
bounds: [EFF+ 22] shows that a lower bound of nδ rounds for any constant δ > 0 implies circuit
complexity lower bounds that are entirely out of reach of existing techniques (see also Appendix A).
   Given the above challenges, proving any lower bounds for distributed triangle detection has
been considered a challenging task [ACKL20, FGKO18, Cen22], and prior work has only ruled out
one-round algorithms. In this work, we make further progress on this tantalizing open question.

    Result 1. Any algorithm for distributed triangle detection in CONGEST on n-vertex graphs
    requires Ω(log log n) rounds to succeed with high constant probability.

    Result 1 provides a partial answer to the question of determining the round complexity of
distributed triangle detection—from the lower bound side—raised repeatedly in the literature, e.g.,
in [ACKL20, Open Question 1] and [Cen22, Open Problem 2.2], among others.
    To put our main result in perspective, we should highlight other lower bounds for distributed
triangle detection in related models. The lack of lower bounds in CONGEST motivated [ACKL20]

                                                    1
to consider a more limited model of communication wherein each player sends a single bit on each
of its edges per round (simulating a round of CONGEST requires Ω(log n) rounds in this model). In
this model, [ACKL20] proved an Ω(log∗ n) lower bound for deterministic algorithms and [FGKO18]
extended the lower bound to Ω(log n) rounds. Similarly, [DKO14] proved that any deterministic
algorithm that broadcasts the same O(log n)-bit message to all its neighbors in each round, needs
n1−o(1) rounds1 . To our knowledge, for randomized algorithms, even in these computationally
weaker models, no lower bounds better than a single round were known.
Technical perspective. As mentioned earlier, a key bottleneck in proving lower bounds for dis-
tributed triangle detection is the inadequacy of standard applications of communication complexity.
This is reminiscent of another (loosely) related area of research: multi-pass graph streaming lower
bounds, wherein direct applications of communication complexity are often limited (see, [ACK19]
or [A23] for a discussion of this topic). However, recent years have witnessed a flurry of break-
throughs in proving lower bounds in this model, e.g., in [GO16,AR20,CKP+ 21,AKNS24] (see [A23]
for a quick summary) using more direct arguments tailored to the model and problems at hand.
    Our work is inspired by these successes and our conceptual contribution is to draw a connection
between some of these techniques and the distributed triangle detection problem. At a technical
level however, this requires bypassing the inherent difference between the point-to-point communi-
cation aspect of CONGEST model versus the broadcast nature of all these lower bounds in graph
streaming and related models (e.g. [ANRW15, AKZ22]). Our main technical contribution is thus
bridging this gap, which we hope can be of independent interest for proving other distributed lower
bounds in scenarios which are not amenable to standard communication complexity arguments.
Our techniques. We shall go over our techniques in detail in the streamlined overview of our
approach in Section 3. For now, we only mention the high-level bits of our techniques.
    Our proof is based on round elimination, specifically the types introduced in [ANRW15]2 , and
generalized more recently in [AKZ22] and [AKNS24, ABK+ 25] to prove lower bounds in broadcast
CLIQUE and graph streaming models, respectively3 . Prior work employ this technique by creating
“large” r-round hard instances via combining many (r − 1)-round hard “small” instances together,
in a way that solving the large instance, requires solving one or a few of small instances as well. The
construction ensures that the identities of these few small instances are hidden from the players in
the first round. The analysis then shows that the first-round messages can be “eliminated”, leaving
the protocol with solving a hard (small) (r − 1)-instance in (r − 1) rounds, which, inductively, is
impossible. As we will argue later, direct applications of this approach inherently fail for us given
CONGEST allows for a very large communication overall, and the complexity only comes from the
limited and “inconsistent” view of each individual player. We thus show how to implement and
analyze round elimination at a “per player” level instead of “per (small) instance” level.
    It is worth mentioning that graph streaming applications of these techniques in [AKNS24,
ABK+ 25] rely on complex combinatorial constructions to facilitate the lower bound arguments. In
contrast, our hard input distributions are quite elementary from a combinatorial point of view and
all the challenge is in the information-theoretic analysis of these distributions.
   1
     The lower bound of [DKO14] also holds in the more general model of broadcast CLIQUE wherein each player can
send the same message to all vertices of the graph, not only its neighbors.
   2
     Their work addresses the welfare maximization problem in mechanism design and bipartite matching in a broad-
cast communication model between (active) players on one side and (passive) items on the other side.
   3
     We note that while conceptually related, this technique is entirely different from the round elimination in LOCAL
lower bounds; see, e.g., [Suo20] for more details on the LOCAL round elimination technique.




                                                          2
Barriers for improvement. As stated earlier, the barrier identified in [EFF+ 22] suggests that,
modulo breaking notoriously difficult circuit complexity barriers, the best lower bound we can hope
for distributed triangle detection is some no(1) rounds. This is precisely what our Result 1 achieves,
although at the “lower end” of the no(1) range. A natural question now is whether we can improve
our lower bound further to “higher ends” of no(1) ; we provide some context for this question here.
    A slight optimization of the parameters in [EFF+ 22] gives us that even an nΩ(1/ log log n) lower
bound for distributed triangle detection breaks circuit complexity barriers; we present this proof in
Appendix A for completeness. Moreover, the proof of [EFF+ 22] relies on expander decompositions
and routing schemes in CONGEST model. Expander decompositions now run in polylog(n) rounds
[CMGS25] and it is plausible that the current algorithms for expander routings can be improved
dramatically to also run in polylog(n) rounds. If such a fast algorithms for routing exists, even
an Ω(logc (n))-round lower bound for some large constant c > 1 for triangle detection could lead
to breaking circuit complexity barriers (see Remark A.7). In light of all these, we believe that
realistically, the best lower bound one can hope to prove for our problem is an Ω(log n) bound.
We leave closing the gap of Ω(log log n) in our Result 1 to this “realistic target” of Ω(log n) as an
interesting open question.
   Finally, we remark that our techniques, adapted from [AKNS24, ABK+ 25] (and originated
from [ANRW15]), are heavily tailored to proving Ω(log log n) lower bounds – in fact, both prior
lower bounds of [AKNS24, ABK+ 25] are optimal for their respective problems, and as such cannot
be extended beyond these bounds. We believe proving a lower bound of Ω(log n) for triangle
detection in CONGEST likely requires new techniques.
1.1   Related Work
Listing vs detection. A more general version of our problem is triangle listing where the goal
is that every triangle in the network is output by at least one player. All algorithms mentioned
earlier for distributed triangle detection [IG17, CPSZ21, CS20, CLV22, CHS24], with the exception
of [IG17], also solve the listing problem within the same round complexity. As such, this problem
can also be solved in O(ne 1/3 ) rounds of CONGEST [CS19, CHS24]. In addition, [IG17, PRS18]
                      1/3
proved that this Ω(n ) rounds is nearly-optimal for the listing problem. Their proof is based on
                   e
a clever but relatively simple information-theoretic argument on random graphs which shows some
vertex “learns” Ω(n4/3 ) bits about the graph (outside its neighborhood) based solely on the answer;
since each vertex can only receive O(n log n) bits per round, this implies an Ω(n1/3 / log n) round
lower bound. This technique is entirely disjoint from our work for triangle detection.
CONGEST vs CLIQUE models. The lower bounds of [IG17,PRS18] hold in the more general
(Congested) CLIQUE model [LPPP05] wherein every pair of players communicates O(log n) bits
per round. Interestingly, better CLIQUE algorithms are known for triangle detection: [CKK+ 15]
designed an O(n1−2/ω ) rounds algorithm for triangle detection where ω is the matrix multiplication
exponent which currently stands at ω ∼ 2.371339 [ADV+ 25]. Unlike the lower bounds of [IG17,
PRS18] for triangle listing, proving any super-constant round lower bounds for any decision problem
in CLIQUE—so, in particular, triangle detection—is a highly challenging task, as it implies circuit
lower bounds that are beyond the reach of existing techniques [DKO14].
    CONGEST algorithms for triangle listing or detection in [CPSZ21, CS20, CLV22, CHS24] all
work by using expander decompositions and routings, to decompose the graph into well-connected
components and simulate triangle listing algorithms in the CLIQUE model on these components.
The circuit complexity barrier of [EFF+ 22] for proving triangle detection lower bound in CONGEST
follows a similar pattern and relies on earlier work of [DKO14] in the CLIQUE model.


                                                  3
Other subgraphs. There is also a large body of work on distributed subgraph detection beyond
triangles. One example is the 4-clique listing CONGEST algorithm of [EFF+ 22] that runs in
n3/4+o(1) rounds, which was subsequently improved to O(n   e 1−2/p )-round algorithms by [CCGL21,
                                                                                        e 1/2 ) lower
CLV22,CHS24] for all p-cliques for p ⩾ 3. In addition, [CK18] proved a nearly-optimal Ω(n
on the round complexity of detecting 4-cliques in CONGEST. Unlike for triangles, the lower bound
for 4-clique can be proven using the standard two-party communication complexity approach. We
refer the interested reader to the excellent survey of [Cen22] for a thorough review of the literature
on distributed subgraph listing and detection, as well as more details on the uniqueness of triangles
among all other subgraphs when it comes to proving lower bounds.
Multi-pass graph streaming lower bounds. Reviewing the large body of work in this area
is beyond the scope of this paper and we instead refer the reader to [GO16,AKSY20,AR20,CKP+ 21,
KPSY23,CKP+ 23,AS23,AGL+ 24,KN24,AKNS24,AKZ24,ABK+ 25] and references therein (see [A23]
for a short survey). But, we note that most relevant to us are the Ω(log log n) pass lower bounds
of [AKNS24] and [ABK+ 25] for, respectively, maximal independent sets (in insertion-only streams)
and approximate matchings (in dynamic streams), which are both also known to be optimal.
   Two other related results—although not exactly in the streaming model—are the Ω(log log n)
round lower bounds of [ANRW15] for bipartite matching (see Footnote 2) and [AKZ22] for maximal
independent sets and matchings in broadcast CLIQUE models (these results are not known to be
optimal and in fact the former one is improved to Ω(log n) rounds in [BO17]); we discuss similarities
and differences of the techniques in [ANRW15, AKNS24, ABK+ 25] with ours in Section 3.

2     Preliminaries
2.1    Notation
We use [n] to refer to the set {1, 2, . . . , n} for any n ∈ N. For a tuple x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) and i ∈ [n],
we define x<i := (x1 , . . . , xi−1 ); we define x>i and x−i analogously.
    We use sans-serif font for random variables (for calligraphic letters, we instead use bold font to
represent random variables). When it is clear from context, we may use random variables to refer
to their distributions also. For random variables A and B, we use H(A) and I(A ; B) to denote the
Shannon entropy of A and mutual information between A and B. Moreover, ∥A − B∥tvd denotes the
total variation distance of A and B. Appendix D reviews information theory background we use.
   At certain places with consecutive lengthy equations, we may color some parts of the text to
highlight the differences between nearby equations; these highlights are at no place necessary for
parsing the equations and can always be ignored entirely.
Tripartite graphs. We work with tripartite graphs G = (V, E) with vertex set partitioned into
V = A ⊔ B ⊔ C, and |A| = |B| = |C| = n and no edges with both end points in A or B or C. We
use A = {a1 , a2 , . . . , an } to denote the elements of set A, and similarly for B, C. For any i ∈ [n], we
use {< ai } to refer to the set {a1 , a2 , . . . , ai−1 }. This is defined analogously for {< bi } and {< ci }.
An important note on the notation: to avoid the repetition and clutter in the notation, we
use x, y, z to iterate over vertices of the graph without referring to each particular part of A, B, C.
When we use x ∈ {a, b, c}, we use X to refer to the set among {A, B, C} that x belongs to and
vice-versa, and use Y and Z for the other two sets (e.g., if x = a, then X = A and Y ̸= Z ∈ {B, C}).
    Another example is to write xi for x ∈ {a, b, c}, to refer to ai or bi or ci , correspondingly. That
is, when, say, x = a, any other mention of xi or x∗i should be interpreted as ai or a∗i , respectively.



                                                      4
Vectors. Given a vector L of ℓ elements, we use L[i] for i ∈ [ℓ] to refer to the ith element of L.
We use L[S] for any S ⊆ [ℓ] to refer to all the elements at positions from S in vector L.
2.2   Model of Communication
For technical reasons, we work with a stronger model than CONGEST, wherein vertices are allowed
to communicate to some select other vertices in certain rounds even without having an edge to them.
Given we are proving a lower bound, this can only strengthen our result. Throughout the paper, we
use G = (V, E) to denote the input graph and use the terms ‘players’ and ‘vertices’ interchangeably.
Channels. We consider communication as happening over channels between pairs of vertices.
When we say a channel exists between u, v ∈ V in some particular round, vertices u and v can
send messages to each other in this round. Edge (u, v) may not exist in the input graph, and the
channels are a superset of the edges. The sets of channels available may vary between the rounds.
   Let r be the total number of rounds in the protocol. We use Cj ⊆ V × V to denote the set of
channels available at round (r − j + 1) for j ∈ [r]. The channels and the graph satisfy:
                                   Cr ⊇ Cr−1 ⊇ . . . ⊇ C1 ⊇ C0 := E,
where recall that E is the set of edges in the input graph (for notational convenience, it is easier
to define the channels in this reverse order, e.g., have Cr be the channels in round 1 instead of r).
Type of vertex pairs. To any pair of vertices u, v ∈ V , we assign a type, denoted by type(u, v),
which is an integer in [r+1]∪{0} to determine until when the channel is available for communication:

  • If (u, v) ∈ E, then type(u, v) = 0;
  • If (u, v) ∈ Cj \ Cj−1 for some j ∈ [r], then type(u, v) = j;
  • If (u, v) ∈
              / Cr , then type(u, v) = r + 1 and (u, v) is not a channel for any round in the protocol.

   The channel-degree of any vertex u will denote the total number of other vertices v such that
type(u, v) < r + 1, i.e., the total number of vertices v such that (u, v) ∈ Cr .
Sources of randomness. Any protocol has three distinct sources of randomness:

  • Public randomness: this is a global source of random bits visible to all vertices.
  • Pair randomness: for each pair u, v ∈ V , there is a tape of random bits visible only to the two
    vertices u and v. This is independent of whether (u, v) form any channel in the graph.
  • Private randomness: each vertex u ∈ V has a private tape of random bits only visible to itself.

Input of players. We work with tripartite graphs with a known partition of vertices into three
parts A, B, C, each of size n (players also know n). The vertices in each layer are identified with
elements from V = A ⊔ B ⊔ C; we refer to this element as the identity of the vertex. Each vertex
x ∈ X is given two vectors of length n, one for each of layers; in the vector for a layer Y , for each
y ∈ Y , the type of pair (x, y) which is an integer in [r + 1] ∪ {0} is specified. Note that this uniquely
identifies the input graph and all the communication channels.
Communication in a protocol. Communication happens in rounds. In round i ∈ [r], each
vertex u ∈ V simultaneously sends messages to all v ∈ V such that (u, v) ∈ Cr+1−i i.e., in the first
round the vertices can send messages over all pairs (u, v) ∈ Cr , in the second round, over Cr−1 , and
so on (as C0 = E, the players can always communicate over the edges of G).

                                                    5
Output in a protocol: When no triangle exists in the input graph G, we want all vertices to
declare that no triangle exists at the end of the last round. When a triangle exists, we want at least
one vertex to declare that a triangle exists (the vertex may not be part of any triangle).
Protocol parameters.        There are three relevant parameters associated with a protocol π:

    • round(π): the total number of rounds used by protocol π.
    • bw(π): the bandwidth of the protocol, or the maximum of the number of bits sent by any
      vertex over any channel, taken over all rounds (in CONGEST, we have bw(π) = O(log n)).
    • suc(π): the minimum success probability of the protocol π over all input instances where the
      probability is taken over all the sources of randomness.

For deterministic protocols π, we also have the following parameter for any distribution µ of inputs:

    • suc(π, µ): probability of success of π on average over inputs drawn from the distribution µ.

   Our model is more powerful than the CONGEST model, as any protocol π in CONGEST
can be implemented in our model by only communicating messages over channels C0 = E (and
ignoring other channels). It is also worth pointing out—even though this will not be related to our
paper—that this model in the limit can even capture the CLIQUE model by allowing         a channel
                                                                                 V
                                                                                   
between all pairs of vertices throughout all the rounds (i.e., Cr = . . . = C1 = 2 and C0 = E as
before). Although for our lower bounds, we certainly do not allow all channels to exist.

3      Technical Overview
Our proof of Result 1 is quite technical and involves various information-theoretic maneuvers that
can be unintuitive or daunting to parse. Thus, we use this section to unpack our main ideas and
give a streamlined overview of our approach. We emphasize that this section oversimplifies many
details and the discussions will be informal for the sake of intuition. The rest of the paper is written
in an independent way so the reader can skip this part and directly jump to technical arguments.
    We start with two background subsections on: (1) distributed lower bounds in CONGEST via
communication complexity and (2) round elimination arguments in [ANRW15, AKZ22, AKNS24,
ABK+ 25] to review these techniques and be able to pinpoint the obstacles in extending them for
our purpose. A reader familiar with these works can safely skip these subsections. We then move
to the main part of this section that reviews our own approach in establishing Result 1.
3.1     Background I: CONGEST Lower Bounds via Communication Complexity
Communication complexity provides us with a wide array of tools for proving lower bounds in
distributed computing and beyond. There are however two aspects that differentiate the CONGEST
model from typical scenarios wherein one can apply communication complexity arguments directly:
• Point-to-point communication: the communication bottleneck in CONGEST model is not
  based on a limit on the total communication of players: the total communication across all vertices
  in each round is quite large and is sufficient to specify the entire input of all players to an external
  party that sees all the messages. Instead, the bottleneck is imposed by the individual view of
  each player who can only receive limited information from each of its own neighbors. Thus, here,
  the players not only have an inconsistent view of the input, but also, the communicated messages
  (this is in sharp contrast with all broadcast or “shared blackboard” communication models used
  for establishing similar lower bounds in other models).

                                                    6
                          GA                                         GB




Figure 1: An illustration of CONGEST lower bounds via two-party communication complexity. The
edges in the left subgraph GA (resp. right subgraph GB ) are known only to Alice (resp. Bob), and the
edges between the two subgraphs are input-independent and fixed. Alice and Bob can run any CONGEST
algorithm on this graph by Alice simulating vertices in GA and Bob doing the same for GB . The only
communication between Alice and Bob is the messages of the CONGEST algorithm that cross the middle
(input-independent) edges. Thus, any r-round CONGEST protocol over a graph with k edges between GA
and GB , implies a communication protocol with O(r · k · log n) communication.


• Input-sharing: there is a limited but non-negligible degree of “input sharing” between the
  players in this model as each edge of the input is seen by two players. This makes this model to
  move one (small) step away from the friendly number-in-hand communication models (with no
  input sharing) towards the notorious number-on-forehead models (with arbitrary input sharing).
  We refer the reader to [NY19, AKO20, AKZ22] that discuss this aspect in more detail.
    Starting from [PR00], the vast majority of lower bounds in CONGEST have found an interesting
way that simultaneously addresses both these aspects and allows for obtaining reductions from two-
party communication complexity lower bounds. They work by carefully splitting the input graph
G = (V, E) between two induced subgraphs GA and GB with only few edges between GA and GB .
They then show that a hard two-party communication problem (almost always set disjointness)
can be embedded in the edges of GA and GB , while keeping the few edges between GA and GB
fixed and input-independent. Assuming one needs t bits of communication for solving the two-
party communication problem and there are only k edges between GA and GB , this construction
immediately implies an Ω(t/(k log n)) round lower bound for the original problem; see Figure 1.
   This way, the point-to-point communication aspect is reduced to the overall communication
between vertices of GA on one side and vertices of GB on the other side (via the few edges between
them). Input-sharing is bypassed entirely because the only shared edges are now fixed and input-
independent. We refer the reader to [ACKP21] for many successful applications of this technique.
   Unfortunately, it is easy to see that this approach is incapable of addressing triangle detection:
no matter what graph we use and how we partition it, as long as two vertices of any triangle are
handled by a single player, that player gets to see all edges of the triangle and solve the problem
with no communication. As such, any lower bound for distributed triangle detection effectively
needs to handle each vertex as its own individual player and cannot shortcut the aforementioned
unique aspects of the CONGEST model. This is perhaps why distributed triangle detection is
considered “one of the best illustrations of the lack and necessity of new techniques for proving
lower bounds in distributed computing” [ACKL20]. Indeed, the only existing lower bounds for this
problem in [ACKL20, FGKO18] for one-round algorithms precisely target the problem in this way.


                                                 7
3.2       Background II: Round Elimination Arguments in Prior Work
We now switch to discussing the type of round elimination ideas that have proven quite successful
in establishing distributed lower bounds in certain broadcast models [ANRW15, AKZ22] and more
recently graph streaming lower bounds [AKNS24,ABK+ 25]4 . While there are substantial differences
between applications of these ideas across these works, at a sufficiently high level (and for the
purpose of comparison with our own work), we can characterize all of them as follows.
    We inductively create a family of distributions {Gr }r⩾0 where Gr generates hard inputs for
r-round algorithms (with the base case G0 being simply some non-trivial distribution as 0-round
algorithms are typically very easy to analyze directly). For any r ⩾ 1, the distribution Gr is
constructed by sampling a “large” number of (r − 1)-round independent instances I1 , I2 , . . . , Ikr
from Gr−1 . These instances are then “packed” together carefully to ensure that for some randomly
chosen j ⋆ ∈ [kr ], (1) the answer to the instance I sampled from Gr is determined by the answer
of the inner instance Ij ⋆ from Gr−1 , and yet, (2) in the first round of the protocol, the players are
oblivious to the value of j ⋆ . We note that this way, often the inputs and number of players in
r-round instances in Gr are polynomially larger than those in (r − 1)-round instances.
    Suppose we have an r-round protocol πr for solving instances I ∼ Gr with success probability
suc(πr ). We construct an (r − 1)-round protocol πr−1 for solving instances I ′ ∼ Gr−1 using πr :


  1. The players of πr−1 use public randomness to sample an index j ⋆ ∈ [kr ] as well as the first
     round of messages M (1) of πr from its distributions. They assume the inner (r − 1)-round
     instance Ij ⋆ of the outer r-round instance I is their input I ′ .

  2. They then use a combination of private and public randomness to sample the remainder of
     I conditioned on M (1) and Ij ⋆ = I ′ to create a complete r-round instancea .

  3. Finally, the players in πr−1 already have access to the first-round message M (1) and thus
     only need to run πr from its second round onwards—while simulating remaining parts of I
     outside Ij ⋆ = I ′ —and output the same answer as πr .
     This step is highly non-trivial and specialized as each player of I ′ only knows its own input in I ′ and not the
      a

 entire I ′ and so it is not clear (nor always possible) for the players to sample I conditioned on M (1) and Ij ⋆ = I ′ .


    To argue the correctness of the protocol πr−1 , we only need to show that the distribution of
inputs and messages to πr induced by πr−1 is within o(1) total variation distance of the correct
distribution; the rest follows by construction, since the answer to I ∼ Gr is the same as Ij ⋆ which
is chosen to be I ′ , namely, the instance πr−1 wants to solve in the first place. Specifically,

  • The right distribution of all random variables in πr , for a fixed j ⋆ , can be expressed as:
                                                                      
                                 M(1) × Ij ⋆ | M(1) × I−j ⋆ | M(1) , Ij ⋆ ,

      where I−j ⋆ denotes the random variable for all (r − 1)-round sub-instances except for Ij ⋆ .
  4
    We shall note that origins of these ideas also directly traces back to the two-party communication complexity
model and the “round elimination lemma” of [MNSW95] in that model.




                                                            8
  • The distribution sampled from in the protocol πr−1 on the other hand is:
                                                                        
                                  (1)                         (1)
                                M
                                |{z}    ×  Ij ⋆ ×   I−j ⋆ | M     , Ij ⋆   ,
                                          |{z}
                               publicly           |         {z
                                                          input
                                                                         }
                                                                       mix of publicly and privately


      namely, here, M (1) and Ij ⋆ are sampled independently of each other.

Assuming the third step of sampling can be done—which, to emphasize again, contains the bulk
of efforts in many of these works —the distance between the two distributions is only a function of
their second arguments. This distance, for a random choice of j ⋆ ∈ [kr ], can be upper bounded as
                                                                                         1
              E         ∥Ij ⋆ − (Ij ⋆ | M(1) )∥2tvd ⩽      E         I(Ij ⋆ ; M(1) ) ⩽      · I(I1 , . . . , Ikr ; M(1) ) = o(1);
           j ⋆ ∈[kr ]                                   j ⋆ ∈[kr ]                       kr

here, the first inequality is standard (see Fact D.8 and Fact D.4) and the main inequality is the
second one: it holds roughly because the players in πr (but of course not πr−1 ) are oblivious to the
choice of j ⋆ in their first round and thus the information revealed by their first-round messages is
“spread” over all kr sub-instances. The final equality also holds by ensuring that kr is much larger
than the length of sampled messages M (1) (and applying Fact D.1-(1)).
    All in all, this means protocol πr−1 has success probability suc(πr−1 , Gr−1 ) ⩾ suc(πr , Gr ) − o(1)
and a similar communication bandwidth as πr , but with one fewer round. Continuing like this then
leaves us with a 0-round protocol for G0 with a non-trivial probability of success, a contradiction.
    Before moving on, we should caution the reader that while the above discussion captures the
common theme of arguments across the aforementioned work, none of those work follow this recipe
directly. For instance, [ANRW15] samples the message M (1) to be only the ones originating from
players in Ij ⋆ (to ensure its size is small with respect to kr ); [AKZ22] does not even sample the
remainder of I and follows the simulation through sampling relevant messages from I−j ⋆ to Ij ⋆ ;
and finally, for [AKNS24, ABK+ 25], the number of players is a lot fewer (in fact, just two players
in [ABK+ 25]) and instead the players are forced to solve many albeit a small fraction of inner
sub-instances at the same time. This discussion also only focused on the information-theoretic
aspects of the lower bounds and entirely neglected the combinatorial parts of how one can “pack”
so many (r − 1)-round independent instances inside a single r-round instance. However, we hope
our description provides a big picture of these prior arguments.
3.3     Our Approach
We now start presenting the main ideas behind our own work.
3.3.1    A Hard Input Distribution
We generate a recursive family of hard input distributions {Gr }r⩾0 where Gr samples tripartite
graphs with nr vertices in each layer for r-round protocols. For reasons that will become clear
soon, unlike in Section 3.2, we cannot specify our r-round instances as a combination of many
(r − 1)-round instances. Instead, they are obtained by sampling a single (r − 1)-round instance
plus a very large individualized “noise” for each vertex in the inner (r − 1)-round instance to hide
its inner edges among the outer graph.
   We use parameters nr and dr in the description of the distribution and they are defined recur-




                                                                         9
                                                                      B*                           B




              A                                 A*
                                                                 G*

                                                                                 C*                C


Figure 2: An illustration of our hard input distribution. The solid (blue) edges show the (r − 1)-round
hard instance inside an r-round hard instance and the dashed (gray) edges show the extra unique channels
sampled for each vertex of the inner (r − 1)-round instance.


sively as follows5 :

                                dr = poly(nr−1 )        and      nr = poly(dr ).                               (1)

    The base case G0 has n0 = 1 and simply consists of three vertices a, b, c with an edge between each
pair appearing with probability 1/2 (and thus a triangle with probability 1/8). The distribution
for r-rounds for r > 0 is as follows.


 Distribution 1. A hard distribution Gr of graphs G = (A ⊔ B ⊔ C, E) for r-round protocols:

  1. Sample three sets of vertices A∗ ⊆ A, B ∗ ⊆ B, and C ∗ ⊆ C each of size nr−1 independently.

  2. Sample an (r − 1)-round instance G∗ over (A∗ , B ∗ , C ∗ ) and let the induced subgraph of G
     on these vertices be G∗ . The vertices in different layers have a channel in Cr to each other,
     whose type is determined by the channel-type in G∗ (not having a channel in G∗ translates
     to a type r in G).

  3. For any x in some layer X ∗ , any layer Y ̸= X ∈ {A, B, C}, and any type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0}
     of channel, sample enough vertices for v uniformly from Y \ Y ∗ such that x has dr type-t
     channels in total to Y . We require all sampled vertices to be unique across all vertices of G∗ .

    See Figure 2 for an illustration.
    It is easy to see that a graph G sampled from Gr for r ⩾ 1 has a triangle iff its inner graph G∗
has one. Thus, the task of players in solving an r-round instance G reduces to that of solving the
inner (r − 1)-round instance G∗ . Moreover, while a player in G can determine whether it belongs
to G∗ or not (its channel-degree is only 1 in the latter case), it cannot determine this information
about its neighbors on its own. Intuitively, this suggests that the messages between two players
x, y ∈ G∗ cannot reveal almost any information about G∗ as either of these vertices have > dr
channels, but only nr−1 ≪ dr of them are in G∗ , and their identities are unknown to the sender.
Hence, one expects the first round messages to be “wasted” until the players find their channels in
G∗ , and then have to solve a hard (r − 1)-round instance in the remaining (r − 1) rounds.
   5
     We specify these parameters explicitly in the actual proof, but here keep them at this level to focus on their
connections as opposed to their actual values.


                                                        10
    As expected, turning this intuition into an actual proof is quite challenging. For instance, our
distribution G1 for one-round protocols is almost identical to the ones for the one-round lower bound
of [FGKO18] (modulo the notion of channels) and based on the same principle as the deterministic
one-round lower bound of [ACKL20]. But, even for one-round protocols, quite a lot of technical
work has been done in [FGKO18, ACKL20] to establish the lower bound. As such, all our effort in
this paper is dedicated to formalizing this basic intuition. It is also worth pointing out that while
many one-round lower bounds can be cast as round elimination arguments to zero-round instances,
this is not the case for the arguments in [FGKO18, ACKL20], and thus from a technical point of
view, our arguments already deviate from these prior approaches even for one-round protocols.
3.3.2    First Attempt on Round Elimination: Public Sampling of Messages
Following prior work in Section 3.2, let us consider creating an (r − 1)-round protocol πr−1 for
Gr−1 ∼ Gr−1 from an r-round protocol πr for Gr ∼ Gr :


  1. The players of πr−1 use public randomness to sample vertices (A∗ , B ∗ , C ∗ ) and map [nr−1 ],
     namely, vertices of their input Gr−1 in each layer, to these sets accordingly. They then define
     the induced subgraph G∗ in Gr to be Gr−1 after this mapping of vertices.

  2. The players of πr−1 sample the first-round messages M (1) of πr using public randomness
     conditioned on (A∗ , B ∗ , C ∗ ) but independent of the types of channels in G∗ .
     ...

 We will already run into a serious problem!

    For this approach to have any chance of succeeding, we need to be able to say that the joint
distribution of (M (1) , G∗ ) | (A∗ , B ∗ , C ∗ ) in the protocol πr−1 is close to being a product distribution,
so that sampling them independently in πr−1 does not change their distribution too much. But
certainly distribution of M (1) highly correlates with that of G∗ : for any channel in G∗ , the message
of M (1) can easily reveal the type of this channel with very small communication (and if we consider
the original CONGEST model, then simply having a message between a pair of vertices reveals the
existence of the edge between them as well!). Thus, the protocol above is doomed to fail.
    This issue stems from the inherent difference of point-to-point communication versus broadcast
ones targeted in Section 3.2. Basically, sampling the message M (1) publicly is effectively the same
as revealing the first round messages to everyone (in the second round); but unlike a broadcast
model, for us, this is way too much information. Fortunately, to simulate a CONGEST protocol πr ,
each vertex only needs to know the messages communicated to and from it and not all messages.
Hence, the first lesson for our round elimination protocol is that sampling first-round messages
should “respect” the point-to-point communication pattern as well.
3.3.3    Second Attempt on Round Elimination: Pair Sampling of Messages
Equipped with our previous lesson, we make a second attempt at creating the protocol πr−1 . In
addition to public randomness, we have equipped the vertices with pair randomness, to facilitate
the sampling of first round messages. See Section 2 for the different sources of randomness given
to the vertices.




                                                      11
  1. The players of πr−1 use public randomness to sample vertices (A∗ , B ∗ , C ∗ ) and define G∗ of
     Gr based on their input Gr−1 , as before.

  2. Then, every pair of vertices in x, y ∈ G∗ , use pair randomness to sample the messages to and
                                         (1)           (1)
     from each other, namely, Mx→y and My→x , conditioned on (A∗ , B ∗ , C ∗ ) and type(x, y) but
     independent of the rest of G∗ .
     ...

 Again, we stop the description of the protocol here already.

    Let us examine the two distributions involved here:

  • The right distribution of involved variables is:
                                                      ą                                                      
                                                                                     (1)
             (A∗ , B∗ , C∗ ) × (G∗ | A∗ , B∗ , C∗ ) ×                        M(1)              ∗   ∗   ∗
                                                                              x,y | M<(x,y) , G , A , B , C
                                                                                                            ∗
                                                                                                                .
                                                         (x,y)∈X∗ ̸=Y∗

              (1)          (1)     (1)
    where Mx,y = (Mx→y , My→x ) denotes both messages communicated over a pair (x, y), and,
                                                                                        (1)
    under some arbitrary ordering between all pairs of vertices (x, y) ∈ G∗ , variable M<(x,y) collects
    these messages for all pairs before (x, y).

  • On the other hand, the distribution of variables in πr−1 are:
                                                              ą                                  
                (A∗ , B∗ , C∗ ) × (G∗ | A∗ , B∗ , C∗ ) ×                 M(1)    ∗      ∗   ∗   ∗
                                                                          x,y | Gx,y , A , B , C ,
                                                         (x,y)∈X∗ ̸=Y∗ |
                |     {z     }    |      {z         }                              {z             }
                    public randomness    input plus renaming
                                                                                       pair randomness

    where G∗x,y is the random variable for type(x, y) (conditioned on vertices (A∗ , B ∗ , C ∗ )).

Bounding the difference between these distributions thus boils down to bounding the following for
every pair (x, y) ∈ G∗ (we use G∗−(x,y) to denote the other types in G apart from (x, y) and we say
N∗ = (A∗ , B∗ , C∗ ) to avoid the clutter):
                                                          
                     (1)       ∗     ∗             ∗       ∗                     ∗         (1)       ∗      ∗
      ∥ M(1)x,y | M  <(x,y) , G  , N    −  M(1)
                                            x,y | Gx,y , N     ∥2tvd ⩽ I(M(1)
                                                                          x,y ; G−(x,y) , M<(x,y) | Gx,y , N ).
                                                                                           (by Fact D.8 and Fact D.4)

Using the chain rule of mutual information (Fact D.1-(5)), we can further write the RHS above as

             ∗           (1)     ∗      ∗              ∗         ∗      ∗                        ∗ (1)
                                                                                                     ∗
   I(M(1)                                       (1)                             (1)
      x,y ; G−(x,y) , M<(x,y) | Gx,y , N ) = I(Mx,y ; G−(x,y) | Gx,y , N ) + I(Mx,y ; M<(x,y) | G , N ).            (2)

Let us now consider each term in the RHS separately.
First term in RHS of Eq (2). This term measures the information revealed by the messages
between x, y about other pairs inside G∗ (conditioned on type(x, y)). Our intuition is that this
information should be quite low because vertices x and y cannot distinguish between their channels
in or out of G∗ , and thus should not be able to tell each other about the type of their other edges
inside the graph G∗ .


                                                             12
    At this point, it is tempting to follow a similar strategy as in Section 3.2 and re-write the
distribution Gr so that it is a combination of, say, kr many (r − 1)-round instances. We can then
say that given x participates in kr many instances and only one of them is special (namely, is G∗ ),
x will not be able to reveal much information about this instance in its message. The problem
is again the unicast versus broadcast: if the partitioning of the input into separate instances are
known to the players, even if they do not know which one is special, we still have a problem: vertex
x can reveal a lot of information to its neighbor y about the same instance they are both part of.
    To bypass this, we instead use an inconsistent way of creating these instances. Suppose in the
distribution Gr , for the vertex x ∈ G∗ we sample kr partial (r − 1)-round sub-instances K1 , . . . , Kkr
on 2nr−1 − 1 vertices such that each one is sampled from a distribution that combined with the
edge (x, y) can form the input of x in a Gr−1 instance. See Figure 3 for an illustration.


                                                                       ⋯
                               y
                                      K1                      K2                           Kkr
                x
                                                                       ⋯
Figure 3: An illustration of sampling partial (r − 1)-round sub-instances. Here, from the perspective of x,
the edge (x, y) plus any of Ki ’s for i ∈ [kr ] form a proper input of x in an instance sampled from Gr−1 . One
of these instances corresponds to the special inner instance G∗ , while for all other instances, the instance is
not complete, as in there are no edges between Y - and Z-part of the instance.

    By setting kr = dr /(nr−1 )2 , we can show that for inputs sampled from Gr , with high probability,
we can find such sub-instances for every vertex x and any of the r possible types of channels in
G∗ (basically, x has sampled dr many channels of each type so one can re-order them to create kr
many partial sub-instances). Moreover, from the perspective of x in protocol πr , the special part
of the input, namely, G∗−(x,y) can be any of these kr many partial sub-instances. This, with some
more technical but standard ideas that we omit here, allows us to essentially write:

                    ∗         ∗      ∗              ∗                            ∗      ∗      1
          I(M(1)                             (1)
             x,y ; G−(x,y) | Gx,y , N ) ⩽ I(Mx,y ; G−(x,y) | K1 , . . . , Kkr , Gx,y , N ) ⩽      · bw(πr ),
                                                                                               kr
                                                                       (1)
by effectively arguing that the information revealed by Mx→y is spread over kr many possible
                                                                                          (1)
choices for G∗−(x,y) among K1 , . . . , Kkr from the perspective of x (and similarly for My→x and y).
Here, with an abuse of notation, conditioning on K1 , . . . , Kkr means conditioning on the existence
of Cr channels to them, but the type of those channels are not fully determined (only that they are
sampled from the marginal distribution of Gr−1 | type(x, y)).
    Given the choice of parameters in Eq (1), across all choices of x, y ∈ G∗ , the total contribution
of the first term of RHS of Eq (2) to the distances between distributions is

                        1              (nr−1 )4                  1
           (nr−1 )2 ·      · bw(πr ) =          · bw(πr ) ⩽             · bw(πr ) ⩽ 1/poly(nr−1 ).
                        kr               dr                 poly(nr−1 )


                                                         13
Second term in RHS of Eq (2). This term measures the information revealed by the messages
between x, y about some of other messages, conditioned on the entire special sub-instance G∗ . This
is where we run into another serious problem.
    Consider a protocol wherein every vertex x samples a random coin privately and sends its value
                                                                                          (1)
as part of the message to all its neighbors. In such a protocol, knowing the message Mx,y for any
                                                    (1)
y reveals (at least) one bit of information about Mx,z for any other z ̸= y as well, making the RHS
of Eq (2) at least 1 which is way too large for our purpose.
    Thus, our second attempt at designing protocol πr−1 also fails, although this time we made some
further progress. The second lesson is that we need to break the correlation between messages
originating from a single vertex to other vertices in G∗ (but certainly not all of G).
3.3.4   Third Attempt on Round Elimination: Public and Pair Sampling of Messages
We now use yet another sampling process for obtaining πr−1 from πr . To simplify the exposition,
we only write this sampling from the perspective of a single pair (x, y) ∈ G∗ and only the message
  (1)                                             (1)
Mx→y from x to y, assuming other messages Mx→−y of x to G∗ \ {y} have already been (somehow)
sampled using their own pair randomness. Doing this for all pairs of vertices has several additional
challenges but we skip those in this discussion to provide the high level intuition (see also Figure 4).


  1. The players of πr−1 use public randomness to sample vertices (A∗ , B ∗ , C ∗ ) and define G∗
                                                                                        (1)
     of Gr based on their input Gr−1 , as before. We also assume messages Mx→−y have been
     sampled using pair randomness at this point (so, in particular, are unknown to y).

  2. Player x uses public randomness to sample

                K1 , . . . , Kkr ⊆ Y ∪ Z,        L ⊆ Y,       and     Mx(1) [L ∩ {< id(y)}];

    • Ki is a disjoint set of (2nr−1 − 1) vertices in G, which together with (x, y) can form an
      (r − 1)-round instance from Gr−1 ; we let x have Cr -channels to all these vertices but do not
      sample their types yet (also, value of kr will be determined later);
    • L is a disjoint set of ℓr (to be determined later) random vertices in Y , each of which has a
      type(x, y)-channel to x;
         (1)
    • Mx [L∩{< id(y)}] is the messages x sends to its neighbors in L∩{< id(y)} in πr conditioned
      on all the publicly sampled information (id(y) ∈ Y ∗ is the id assigned to y ∈ Gr−1 ).
                                    (1)
  3. Finally, x and y sample Mx→y via pair randomness conditioned on type(x, y) and all the
                                                                     (1)
     publicly sampled variables (so specifically, independent of Mx→−y ).

   As for the parameters ℓr and kr , we pick them such that

                ℓr = poly(nr−1 ),           kr = poly(ℓr ),    and         dr = poly(kr ).          (3)
    We note that the entire goal of these sampling steps is to generate an input Gr and first-round
messages M (1) for the protocol πr so that players in πr−1 can run this protocol on the sampled
input. The above process only specifies some part of the input to one of the players x, with respect
to one of the pairs (x, y) in the original input of πr−1 . We will need to repeat this process for all
pairs of vertices in πr−1 and complete the remainder of inputs and messages of players (including

                                                   14
  L ∩ {< id(y)}        L
                                                                              ⋯
                      y
                                                     K1                 K2                        Kkr
            M (1)[L ∩ {< id(y)}]

     x                                                                        ⋯
Figure 4: An illustration of sampling messages via a mixture of public and pair randomness. The type of
the channel between (x, y) any (x, y ′ ) for any y ′ ∈ L is the same.


x) before we can run πr . However, we can already start analyzing the difference between variables
involved in this process and the actual distribution of Gr and πr . In the following, it helps to think
of y as a vertex in the original input Gr−1 and id(y) as the vertex y maps to in Gr .
  • The right distribution of involved variables is (we define N∗ := (A∗ , B∗ , C∗ ), K := (K1 , . . . , Kkr ),
    and W := (N∗ , K, L) to reduce the clutter):
                                                                                                           
           (1)                                     (1)                                                     (1)
  W, G∗ , Mx→−y × M(1)                        ∗                (1)     (1)
                      x [L ∩ {< id(y)}] | W, G , Mx→−y × Mx→y | Mx [L ∩ {< id(y)}], W, Gx , Mx→−y ,
                                                                                                     ∗


     where G∗x in the last term denotes types of all channels incident on x to vertices in G∗ . We note
     that technically, here, we should have also conditioned on all of G∗ and not only G∗x . However,
     it is easy to see that the distribution of messages sent by x is independent of the rest of G∗
     once we condition on G∗x . This is because G∗x provides the input to x, thus conditioning on G∗x
     or G∗ is the same.

  • And, the distribution of variables in πr−1 is:
                                                                                                
                 (1)
        W, G∗ , Mx→−y         × M(1)x  [L ∩ {< id(y)}] | W  ×  M (1)
                                                                 x→y | M(1)
                                                                        x   [L ∩ {< id(y)}], W, G∗
                                                                                                 x,y
      |       {z      }          |           {z            } |                   {z                  }
input plus public and pair randomness         public randomness                 pair randomness

     where G∗x,y (after conditioning on N∗ ) will simply be the type of the pair (x, y).
Let us focus on the third terms for now. Bounding the difference between these terms (as before
using Fact D.8 and Fact D.4) boils down to upper bounding
                           ∗            (1)                       ∗
                 I(M(1)                       (1)
                    x→y ; Gx,−y , Mx→−y | W, Mx [L ∩ {< id(y)}], Gx,y ) =       (G∗x,−y is G∗x minus G∗x,y )
           ∗          ∗                                           (1)                      ∗
 I(M(1)                      (1)                     (1)               (1)
    x→y ; Gx,−y | W, Gx,y , Mx [L ∩ {< id(y)}]) + I(Mx→y ; Mx→−y | W, Mx [L ∩ {< id(y)}], Gx ), (4)

where the equality is a direct application of chain rule (Fact D.1-(5)). Notice that the LHS here is
quite similar to the LHS of Eq (2): modulo the extra conditioning on some new random variables,
LHS of Eq (4) also measures the correlation of message of x to y with its remaining input G∗x,−y
as well as x’s other messages (in Eq (2) also, we could have replaced G−(x,y) by Gx,−y ). While we
(provably) could have not bound the RHS of Eq (2) (in particular its second term), we can bound
the RHS of Eq (4) with the help of these extra conditionings.

                                                          15
    Before getting to the sketch of the proof, it is worth briefly checking the protocol outlined at
the end of the last subsection when discussing the second term of Eq (2). For that specific protocol,
                                                      (1)
the moment we condition on any message of x in Mx [L ∩ {< id(y)}] (as in the RHS of Eq (4)),
we already have fixed the random coin toss of the protocol across its different messages and thus
                                     (1)         (1)
can at least hope to say messages Mx→y and Mx→−y have low correlation.
First term in RHS of Eq (4).                    We have
                          ∗           ∗
                I(M(1)                      (1)
                   x→y ; Gx,−y | W, Gx,y , Mx [L ∩ {< id(y)}])
                                    ∗                                 ∗
                       = I(M(1)                                              (1)
                             x→y ; Gx,−y | W \ K, K1 , . . . , Kkr , Gx,y , Mx [L ∩ {< id(y)}])
                                                                              (as W contains K = (K1 , . . . , Kkr ))
                                 ..
                          ⩽           .                                          (skipping some technical steps)
                        1                                        ∗
                          ⩽· I(M(1)                                     (1)
                                x→y ; K1 , . . . , Kkr | W \ K, Gx,y , Mx [L ∩ {< id(y)])
                        kr
    (following Section 3.3.3 as G∗x,−y could be any of K1 , . . . , Kkr from the perspective of x | G∗x,y )
                        1
                     ⩽     · bw(πr ),                                                     (by Fact D.1-(1))
                        kr
              (1)
given that Mx→y is message with at most bw(πr ) bits. By the choice of kr in Eq (3), we can bound
the contribution of this term, across all x, y ∈ G∗ , by 1/poly(nr−1 ).
Second term in RHS of Eq (4).                         We have,
                    (1)  ∗                                (1)                        ∗
    I(M(1)                        (1)              (1)
       x→y ; Mx→−y | W, Gx ) = I(Mx→y ; Mx→−y | Mx [L ∩ {< id(y)}], W− , L, id(y), Gx )
                                        (by defining W = (W− , L, id(y)) since id(y) is fixed in Y∗ )
                                                          (1)                                              ∗
                                          = I(M(1)                     (1)
                                                x→y ; Mx→−y | W− , Mx [L ∩ {< id(y)}], L ∪ id(y), id(y), Gx ).
                                          (since id(y) is disjoint from L and thus (L ∪ id(y), id(y)) ≡ (L, id(y)))
But now the good part is that the choice of id(y) is uniform over L ∪ id(y), conditioned on all other
variables; in particular, since all neighbors of x in L have the same type as the (x, y) edge, this
is still true even conditioned on G∗x,y . In other words, from the perspective of the vertex x in the
protocol πr (but certainly not πr−1 ), the edge (x, y) is “just another” one of its edges of this type
                                                                        (1)
among the set L ∪ id(y). Thus, when it is sending the message Mx→−y , it cannot particularly
correlate it with a specific message to vertices in L as opposed to all messages to L. Using this
intuition and an application of chain rule (Fact D.1-(5)) allows us to bound the RHS above as
                (1)                                             ∗
   I(M(1)                 (1)
      x→y ; Mx→−y | W− , Mx [L ∩ {< id(y)}], L ∪ id(y), id(y), Gx )
                                                (1)                                                ∗
          =           E       I(M(1)                     (1)
                                 x [yj ] ; Mx→−y | W− , Mx [L ∩ {< yj }], L ∪ id(y), id(y) = yj , Gx )
              yj ∈[L∪id(y)]
          (think of yj here as going over all vertices in L ∪ id(y) and choosing which one is id(y))
              ..
          ⩽      .     (skipping some technical arguments to drop the conditioning on id(y) = yj )
               1                           (1)
          =        · I(M(1) [L ∪ id(y)] ; Mx→−y | W− , L ∪ id(y), G∗x ) (by chain rule in Fact D.1-(5))
            ℓr + 1
               1
          ⩽        · (nr−1 − 1) · bw(πr ),                                           (by Fact D.1-(1))
            ℓr + 1
              (1)
given that Mx→−y contains (nr−1 − 1) messages with bw(πr ) bits each. Finally, by the choice of ℓr
in Eq (3), we can bound the contribution of this term, across all x, y ∈ G∗ , by 1/poly(nr−1 ).


                                                                 16
Back to the distributions. We are not done yet however as we only compared the third terms
in the distributions of variables induced by πr−1 versus their actual distribution in πr . We now
need to compare the second terms also, namely, bound
                                                          ∗      (1)
                                  I(M(1)
                                     x [L ∩ {< id(y)}] ; G , Mx→−y | W),

which is the information revealed by some of the messages of x about the inner graph G∗ (and some
other messages). But this seems to bring us to the very beginning: we again have a collection of
publicly sampled messages and need to bound their correlation with the inner special sub-instance.
The key observation here is that we moved away from messages communicated over channels
                                                               (1)
of G∗ and now we can indeed hope that at least messages Mx [L] sampled for x (and eventually
other vertices in G∗ ) which are going to channels outside of G∗ may not be too correlated with
G∗ . So, while the current protocol does not handle this part, we can hope to fix this issue using an
argument similar to Section 3.2 which, unlike in Section 3.3.2, is no longer doomed to fail.
3.3.5    The Final Attempt: Our Round Elimination Protocol
At this point, hopefully, we have provided enough intuition about the need for the rather peculiar
sequence of sampling of variables in our final round elimination protocol. Describing this protocol at
the level of details of previous subsections requires us to provide another lengthy set of definitions.
Instead, equipped with the lessons and observations of previous subsections, we only state our final
protocol πr−1 at a very high-level as follows.
Public randomness.          The players of πr−1 use public randomness to sample

  • (A∗ , B ∗ , C ∗ ) defines the vertices of the inner graph G∗ and allows players to map their input
    Gr−1 to this induced subgraph;

  • (J1x , . . . , Jjxr ) are full (r − 1)-round instances sampled from Gr−1 for each vertex x of G∗ (similar
    in spirit to Section 3.2 but now for each individual vertex);

  • (K1x,y,t , . . . , Kkx,y,t
                          r
                               ) are partial (r − 1)-round instances that for each pairs of vertices x, y ∈ G∗
    are sampled from (Gr−1 | type(x, y) = t)6 so that together with the type of (x, y) they can form
    a full (r − 1)-round instance (similar to Section 3.3.3);

  • (Lx,t           x,t                                             ∗
       1 , . . . , Lℓr ) are sets of neighbors for each vertex x ∈ G and a fixed type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0};
    (similar to Section 3.3.4);

  • Mpublic contains publicly sampled messages to subsets of (Lx,t          x,t                 ∗
                                                               1 , . . . , Lℓr ) from each x ∈ G and
    type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0} (similar to Section 3.3.4).
                                                                                           (1)
Pair randomness. Each pair of vertices (x, y) ∈ G∗ samples the messages Mx,y conditioned on
type(x, y) and all publicly sampled variables (similar to Section 3.3.3 and Section 3.3.4).
Private randomness. By the above steps, each vertex x ∈ G∗ has sampled many of its channels
in G. It then simply samples any remaining channels so that it has dr channels for each type in
each layer, conditioned on all the publicly sampled variables and all variables sampled with pair
randomness that are known to x (i.e., are related to channels incident on x).
  6
     Only x and y know type(x, y) and so to sample these sets using public randomness, we instead need to sample
the sets for all possible types from [r] ∪ {0} and then let x, y pick the right type for themselves.



                                                      17
       The parameters of the protocol are chosen as follows (notice that the dependencies are acyclic):

           ℓr = poly(nr−1 ),    kr = poly(ℓr ),     jr = poly(kr ),     dr = poly(jr ),        nr = poly(dr ).

These variables then, using a combination of ideas outlined in the previous subsections, allow us to
                                                                                         (1)
 1. L-variables and Mpublic : break the correlation between messages Mx,y sampled by pair ran-
    domness for all pairs (x, y) ∈ G∗ ;
                                                                          (1)
 2. K-variables: break the correlation between messages Mx,y sampled by pair randomness and
    input graph G∗−(x,y) for all pairs (x, y) ∈ G∗ ;

 3. J-variables: break the correlation between Mpublic sampled by public randomness and G∗ .

Simulation step. We are not yet done because we also need to handle messages and inputs of
players in G that are outside G∗ . While for some other problems, this can be quite challenging (see,
e.g. [AKZ22] and their “partial-input embedding” technique for handling this), for us this step is
quite straightforward7 . Any vertex x in G \ G∗ only has a single channel by construction and this
channel is to a vertex y ∈ G∗ ; thus, in our protocol, either the channel (x, y) has been sampled
publicly or vertex y has sampled this channel privately. In either case, y knows the entire input
of x and since x only communicates with y, vertex y can completely simulate the work of x on its
own by sampling its message also.
     This means that players of πr−1 on Gr−1 have all the information needed to simulate the
protocol πr on the graph G they have collectively created, use the sampled messages M (1) for the
first round of πr without themselves communicating at all, and then communicating messages of
πr in its remaining (r − 1) rounds as part of their own (r − 1) rounds of communication. This way,
and using our analysis for the sampling steps, we can prove that πr−1 satisfies

                                suc(πr−1 , Gr−1 ) ⩾ suc(πr , Gr ) − 1/poly(nr−1 ),

using only (r − 1) rounds and a similar bandwidth as πr .
   Continuing like this allows us to obtain a 0-round protocol for G0 with success probability much
better than 7/8 (which is easy to show is the optimal bound on the distribution G0 for 0-round
protocols), a contradiction. Finally, in terms of parameters, given that the size of instances grows
polynomially from Gr−1 to Gr , we have
                                                     Ω(r)
                                             nr ⩾ 22
which means an r-round lower bound on Gr translates to an

                                                  r = Θ(log log nr )

lower bound as desired by Result 1.




   7
     This also means our techniques and [AKZ22], besides their starting point in [ANRW15], are almost entirely
disjoint: all our efforts in this paper is in the handling of “special inner” vertices whereas in [AKZ22], this part is
done exactly as in [ANRW15] and instead their main focus is on the remaining vertices.


                                                          18
4     A Hard Distribution and its Properties
We start our formal technical proofs from this section. Throughout the proofs, we use a large
number of random variables, and Appendix B lists them to help the reader in keeping track of
them. We also provide a schematic organization of our proofs in Appendix C.
   Throughout, we use Gr (nr ) to denote the hard distribution for r-rounds over tripartite graphs
with nr vertices in each layer. In this section, we describe our hard distribution and some of its
properties, and prove the following theorem (minus its technical details) that formalizes Result 1.
Theorem 1. There exists a family of distributions {Gr (nr )}r⩾0 over tripartite graphs with nr
                                                r
vertices in each layer, such that for nr > r4·34 , any deterministic protocol πr with,
                         round(πr ) = r        and         suc(πr , Gr (nr )) ⩾ 15/16,
must have,
                                                              r
                                   bw(πr ) ⩾ (nr )(1/2)·(1/34 ) · (480)−2 .
    Let us see how the hardness of distribution Gr (nr ) proves Result 1.

Proof of Result 1. By the easy direction of Yao’s minimax principle (i.e, an averaging argument),
it is sufficient to argue that for deterministic protocols using o(log log n) rounds, O(log n) length
messages are not sufficient to solve triangle detection with probability of success at least 15/16
when input graphs are drawn from distribution Gr (nr ).
                                                                                                           r
    In Theorem 1, when r = o(log log nr ), we know that the initial condition of nr > r4·34 is
satisfied. The bandwidth required, however, is,
                                               r
                                (nr )(1/2)·(1/34 ) · (480)−2 ≫ poly log (nr ),
which is more than the O(log n) bandwidth allotted in the CONGEST model.

    We begin by describing the hard distribution for 0-round protocols, and we recursively construct
hard distributions for r-rounds using the distribution for (r − 1)-rounds. We also talk about the
joint distribution of the input and first round messages to set us up for the analysis.
4.1   Base Case: Hard Distribution for 0-rounds
In this subsection, we will describe the hard distribution for 0-rounds, and prove some of its
necessary properties. By a 0-round protocol, we mean that there is no communication and the
players must output whether a triangle exists just based on their own input. This will serve as the
base case for our inductive proof of Theorem 1.


 Distribution 2. Distribution G0 (n0 ) over graphs G for 0-round protocols:
 (See Figure 5 for an illustration.)
 (1) Start with a tripartite graph with n0 vertices in each layer, and with vertex set V = A⊔B ⊔C,
     and A = {a1 , a2 , . . . , an0 }, B = {b1 , . . . , bn0 }, C = {c1 , . . . , cn0 }.
 (2) Choose three random vertices a∗ ∈ A, b∗ ∈ B and c∗ ∈ C.
 (3) For all three pairs of (a∗ , b∗ ), (b∗ , c∗ ), (c∗ , a∗ ), add an edge between each pair with probability
     1/2 uniformly at random and independently.

    First, we prove a simple property about 0-round instances sampled from Distribution 2.

                                                      19
                                                          A




                                                                    C
                                             B

Figure 5: An illustration of an instance from the hard distribution for 0-rounds with n0 = 3. The middle
(yellow) vertices are a∗ , b∗ , c∗ . The double line indicates that the edge is present with probability 1/2.


Observation 4.1. In any graph G ∼ G0 (n0 ), a triangle exists between vertices {a∗ , b∗ , c∗ } with
probability 1/8, and there is no triangle otherwise.

Proof. The edges are only between a∗ , b∗ , and c∗ and exist independently with probability 1/2.

    It is straightforward that protocols which do not communicate at all cannot have a high prob-
ability of success for 0-round instances; we formalize this statement next for completeness.

Claim 4.2. Any deterministic protocol π with 0-rounds detects whether a triangle exists in G ∼
G0 (n) with success probability at most 7/8.

Proof. In the following, we additionally condition on any fixed choice of (a∗ , b∗ , c∗ ) and assume this
choice is known to all players. This can only strengthen the lower bound.
   First consider any vertex w ∈   / {a∗ , b∗ , c∗ }. If w outputs Yes, namely, that there is a triangle in
G, then, by Observation 4.1, the answer is only correct with probability 1/8 as the choice of edges
between a∗ , b∗ , c∗ is independent. So, we assume all vertices other than (a∗ , b∗ , c∗ ) output No.
   Now, consider any vertex x∗ ∈ {a∗ , b∗ , c∗ }. When degree of x∗ is anything other than two, it
can simply output No and will be correct in this case. There are now two cases:

  • All vertices in {a∗ , b∗ , c∗ } still output No even when their degree is two: in that case, the
    protocol always outputs No (by our assumption earlier) and thus is wrong with probability 1/8
    by Observation 4.1.

  • At least one vertex x∗ ∈ {a∗ , b∗ , c∗ } outputs Yes when its degree is two: in that case, with
    probability half the edge between y ∗ ̸= z ∗ ∈ {a∗ , b∗ , c∗ } may not appear, thus making the
    protocol wrong with probability 1/2 in this case. The probability that x∗ has degree two here
    is 1/4 and conditioned on this, its output will be wrong with probability 1/8. Thus, in this
    case also the protocol is wrong with probability 1/8 again.

Overall the success probability of the protocol is at most 7/8.



                                                     20
4.2      Hard Distribution for r-rounds
In this subsection, we describe the hard distribution for r-round protocols for r ⩾ 1.
Notation. All vertices in the graph know which layer among {A, B, C} they belong to. Each
vertex in X ∈ {A, B, C} has a unique identity xi ∈ X for i ∈ [nr ], which distinguishes it from other
vertices in X.
    For i ∈ [nr ], the input of each vertex xi ∈ X is given as two ordered vectors of length nr each
labeled as N xi →Y and N xi →Z , denoting the types of all vertex pairs (x, w) for w ∈ Y and w ∈ Z,
respectively. The j th entry in the vector corresponding to layer Y (denoted by N xi →Y [yj ]) contains
the type of the vertex pair xi , yj ∈ [r + 1] ∪ {0}, for j ∈ [nr ] (and similarly for N xi →Z and Z).
   Sometimes, we also use N xi to denote the vectors of xi together. We use N xi [S] for any
S ⊆ Y ∪ Z to denote the types of all the vertex pairs of the form (xi , w) for w ∈ S.
   To avoid confusion, we sometimes write X(G) to denote the layer X ∈ {A, B, C} of the graph
G (to specify the graph). See also our note about the notation of X, etc. in Section 2.


 Distribution 3. Distribution Gr (nr ) over graphs G for r-round protocols with r ⩾ 1:
 (See Figure 6 for an illustration.)

 (1) Sample a graph Gr−1 ∼ Gr−1 (nr−1 ) for some parameter nr−1 to be fixed later in Eq (5).

 (2) For each X ∈ {A, B, C} in G, sample nr−1 distinct indices X ∗ = {x∗1 , x∗2 , . . . , x∗nr−1 } from X
     uniformly. The vertex xi in layer X(Gr−1 ) of Gr−1 takes on the identity x∗i in G.

 (3) Set type(x∗i , yj∗ ) in G to be type(xi , yj ) for any xi , yj in different layers of Gr−1 for i, j ∈ [nr−1 ].

 (4) Sample 2nr−1 · (r + 1) subsets Sty→X , Stz→X ⊆ X \ X ∗ , for each y, z ∈ Gr−1 , and type
     t ∈ [r] ∪ {0}, all disjoint from each other. The sets are of size dr each, and are sampled
     uniformly at random. Parameter dr will be fixed later in Eq (5).

 (5) For i ∈ [nr−1 ] and xi ∈ X = X(Gr−1 ), each other layer Y ̸= X, and type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0}, add
     channels of type t between x∗i to just enough sampled vertices from Stxi →Y so that the total
     number of neighboring channels between x∗i to any other layer Y of type t is exactly dr .a

 (6) Set the type of all pairs of vertices, the types of which have not been fixed yet to be r + 1.
      a ∗
       xi may have some type-t channels from Gr−1 , so we add more channels to increase its type-t channels to dr .


   Let us fix the parameters in the hard distribution as follows,
                                       nr−1 = (nr )1/34        dr = (nr−1 )13 .                                  (5)

    We sample nr−1 vertices from X for each xi ∈ Gr−1 in step (1). We also sample dr distinct
vertices for each yi , zj and type t with i, j ∈ [nr−1 ], and t ∈ [r] ∪ {0} in step (4). In total,

                                            nr−1 + (r + 1) · dr · 2nr−1

distinct vertices are sampled from X uniformly at random. We have to check that nr is large
enough to make this sampling process feasible:

                      nr−1 + (r + 1) · dr · 2nr−1 = nr−1 (2dr (r + 1) + 1) ⩽ n16
                                                                              r−1 < nr .


                                                          21
                           A

                           a*
                            j                                                                        a* A*
                                                                                                      j


                                                                          B


     B                                     C


(a) Realization of all types of channels between one              (b) Addition of channels of type 0 for one inner ver-
inner vertex a∗j to other layers. The other inner ver-            tex a∗j to outer vertices to ensure correct channel-
tices (blue and yellow) also have simlar channels to              degree for all types (some parts of the instance are
each other if they are in different layers.                       omitted).
                                  Type 0           Type 1                Type 2

                         B



                                                             a*
                                                              i
                                               A*




                         C

                                  Type 0           Type 1                  Type 2

                       (c) An illustration of the input of one inner vertex. The other inner
                       vertices are connected only to outer vertices u such that type of (a∗i , u)
                       is 2. Vertex ai does not know which vertices in B, C are inner vertices.
                       In the figure, only A∗ and the relevant vertices of B, C are shown.

Figure 6: An illustration of some parts of the 1-round instance. Inner vertices from 0-round instance are
blue and yellow (in accordance with Figure 5), and outer vertices are green. We used n0 = d1 = 3 for
illustration, but this is certainly not true in the actual instance. Dashed lines indicate a channel of type 1,
straight lines indicate a channel of type 0, and other pairs of vertices with no lines are of type 2. The input
of blue and yellow vertices of the inner graph have exactly 3 channels of type 0 and type 1 in total.

Thus, we have more than enough room in nr for step (4).
    We call the vertices in X ∗ , Y ∗ , Z ∗ to be inner vertices (sampled in step (2)), and all other
vertices as outer vertices. We refer to the graph Gr−1 from step (1) as the inner graph. We
prove some simple properties of Gr (nr ) now.

Observation 4.3. The number of neighboring channels of type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0} of any inner vertex in
G is exactly dr . The channel-degree of all outer vertices is at most one.


                                                            22
Proof. In step (5), we ensure the number of channels of each type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0} for each inner vertex
is exactly dr explicitly, by adding enough channels to sets sampled in step (4). Any outer vertex
gets sampled at most once in the sets of step (4), as all the sets are disjoint. Therefore all outer
vertices have channel-degree at most one.

    We only ever refer to the input of inner vertices to talk about graph G ∼ Gr (nr ), due to the
following observation.

Observation 4.4. In any G ∼ Gr (nr ), fixing the identity x∗i and the two nr size neighborhood
vectors, N x→Y , N x→Z for all inner vertices xi ∈ Gr−1 fixes the graph G.

Proof. The only randomness involved in the distribution Gr (nr ) is in the graph Gr−1 , the identities
chosen for each inner vertex, and the at most (r + 1) · dr many neighboring channels sampled for
each inner vertex. Thus, the variables in the observation statement fix the graph G.

   We can say something further about the structure of N x→Y for every inner vertex x and layer
Y with x ∈
         / Y.

Observation 4.5. For every inner vertex x ∈ Gr−1 , the marginal distribution of N x→Y for every
other layer Y is obtained by:

  • Setting the types of all vertices in Y ∗ and Z ∗ based on the type in Gr−1 .

  • Sampling the rest of N x uniformly random, conditioned on the types of Y ∗ ∪ Z ∗ so that there
    are exactly dr vertices of type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0}, and nr − dr (r + 1) vertices of type r + 1.

Proof. We know that the number of channels of type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0} for each vertex xi ∈ Gr−1 is
exactly dr from Observation 4.3. Therefore the total number of channels with types in [r] ∪ {0} is
(r + 1) · dr . The remaining nr − dr · (r + 1) channels are of type r + 1.
    The sets Stx→Y and Stx→Z are also chosen uniformly at random, so that they are disjoint from
Y ∗ and Z ∗ . Hence, the final distribution of N x→Y is such that uniformly random subsets are
chosen for each type. The total number of vertices in Y ∗ is exactly nr−1 , and even if all of them
had the same type, we know that there is still enough room for dr vertices of each type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0}
as dr > nr−1 from Eq (5).

    The identities of inner vertices are chosen at random, so the distribution of the neighborhoods
are symmetric over all nr vertices of X. More formally, we have the following observation.

Claim 4.6. For r ⩾ 0, in Gr (nr ) for all i ∈ [nr−1 ] and xi ∈ X(Gr−1 ), the marginal distribution of
the two neighborhood vectors given to the inner vertex xi in Gr−1 is independent of x and i.

Proof. It is sufficient to show that the marginal distribution of the input given to all vertices in
distribution Gr−1 (nr−1 ) are the same, and independent of x and i for all r ⩾ 1. We prove the claim
by induction on r. For the base case when r = 1, the inner graph is sampled from G0 (n0 ). We
know that the vertex x∗ is chosen uniformly at random from [n0 ]. Therefore, each vertex in layer
X has equal probability of being chosen as x∗ in G0 (n0 ).
    For any r > 1, we know that all the identities of inner vertices x∗1 , x∗2 , . . . , x∗nr−2 in Gr−1 (nr−1 ) are
chosen uniformly at random from [nr−1 ]. Therefore, any vertex from X(Gr−1 ) is equally likely to be
chosen as the identity of a vertex from Gr−2 (the inner graph of Gr−1 ). The marginal distribution
of the neighborhood in Gr−2 is identical by induction hypothesis.

                                                        23
     For the outer vertices in X, again, the sets sampled in step (4) are uniform over [nr−1 ], and ver-
 tices from [nr−1 ] are equally likely to be chosen to be a part of these sets in distribution Gr−1 (nr−1 ).
 Our construction is fully symmetric over the three layers and the vertices in each layer. There-
 fore, the marginal distribution of the input given to each vertex in graph Gr−1 is the same and
 independent of x and i.

    Lastly, we need to argue about the existence of triangles in G ∼ Gr (nr ).

 Observation 4.7. In any graph G ∼ Gr (nr ), a triangle exists if and only if a triangle is present
 in Gr−1 sampled in step (1) while sampling G.

 Proof. Firstly, the channel-degree of all outer vertices is at most one by Observation 4.3. Thus, all
 of them have at most one edge also. Hence, only the inner vertices can be a part of a triangle. We
 do not add or remove any edges between inner vertices, we only add channels which do not form
 edges. Hence, triangle existence in Gr−1 is preserved in graph G.

 4.3    Another Way of Sampling from Hard Distribution
 In this subsection, we talk more about the hard distribution Gr (nr ), and give an alternate way of
 sampling it. This makes the analysis much easier, as it gives us another perspective of looking at
 the hard distribution. This alternate way is not without loss, however, but we show that these
 distributions are quite close in total variation distance.
     We only ever talk about the input and identities of inner vertices, as this fixes distribution
 Gr (nr ) by Observation 4.4.
 Notation. We use idX to denote the variables x∗1 , x∗2 , . . . , x∗nr−1 (elements of X ∗ ) for X ∈ A, B, C.
 We use ids to denote the variables (idA , idB , idC ) collectively. We use id(xi ) to denote x∗i for
 i ∈ [nr−1 ]. We use Ninxi to denote the input of inner vertex xi ∈ Gr−1 . This is two vectors of length
 nr−1 each, containing types to layers Y and Z in Gr−1 .
     We use Din to denote the marginal distribution of Ninxi for each inner vertex xi . Formally, Din
 is the distribution of N xi in an instance G ∼ Gr−1 (nr−1 ) for i ∈ [nr−1 ]. Note that this is identical
 for each i ∈ [nr−1 ] by Claim 4.6.
    We need to define three more parameters to proceed.

                           αr = (nr−1 )11      βr = (nr−1 )5      γr = (nr−1 )6 .                       (6)

 We know that dr is much larger than nr−1 from Eq (5). However, we want to argue that, for any
 inner vertex xi ∈ Gr−1 , given only its input N xi in graph G, there are multiple choices for what
 the other inner vertices may be; formally, we need the following for each inner vertex xi ∈ Gr−1 :

• An αr -size collection of sets of size 2nr−1 each, all of which are distributed independently and
  exactly according Din with channels to xi .

• For each type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0} and any other inner vertex y ∈ / X(Gr−1 ), a βr -size collection of sets
  of size 2nr−1 − 1 each, all of which are distributed independently of each other according to the
  (r − 1)-round input on 2nr−1 − 1 vertices, conditioned on the channel to the one remaining vertex
  being of type t.

• For each type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0} and any other inner vertex y ∈
                                                           / X(Gr−1 ), a set of size γr with channels
  of type t to xi .

                                                     24
We show it is possible to sample from Gr (nr ) while satisfying these conditions with high probability.


 Distribution 4. Distribution Ger (nr ) for r-round protocols with r ⩾ 1:

 (1) Sample Gr−1 and sets X ∗ , Y ∗ , Z ∗ as before from Distribution 3.

 (2) Fix any inner vertex x ∈ Gr−1 , and from the other sets Y \Y ∗ and Z \Z ∗ , sample the following
     subsets, disjoint from each other for all x: (Observation 4.9 shows that this is feasible)

     (a) A collection J x = (J1x , . . . , Jαxr ), where each Jix for i ∈ [αr ] is a set containing nr−1
         elements of Y \ Y ∗ and nr−1 elements of Z \ Z ∗ .
     (b) For each type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0}, value i ∈ [nr−1 ], each other layer Y, Z a collection
                                          x→Y     x→Y              x→Y
                                         Kt,i = (Kt,i,1 , . . . , Kt,i,β r
                                                                           )
                      x→Y for j ∈ [β ] is a set containing (n                              ∗
         where each Kt,i,j           r                        r−1 − 1) elements from Y \ Y and
         nr−1 elements from Z \ Z ∗ . Similarly, Kt,i
                                                  x→Z is a collection of β -sets, each with n
                                                                           r                  r−1
         elements from Y \ Y and nr−1 − 1 elements from Z \ Z ∗ .
                            ∗

     (c) For each type t and value i ∈ [nr−1 ] and each other layer Y , a set Lx→Y
                                                                               t,i of γr elements
         from Y \ Y ∗ .

 (3) For each inner vertex x ∈ Gr−1 , do the following:

     (a) For each i ∈ [αr ], sample (N x [Jix ]) from Din independently of other i.
     (b) For each t ∈ [r] ∪ {0}, each other layer Y , i ∈ [nr−1 ] and j ∈ [βr ], sample N x [Kt,i,j
                                                                                              x→Y ] so
                    x→Y ∪ {y ∗ }] is sampled from D , conditioned on type(x, y ∗ ) = t.
         that N x [Kt,i,j     i                       in                            i
     (c) For each t ∈ [r] ∪ {0}, i ∈ [nr−1 ], and other layer Y , set N x→Y [y] for each y ∈ Lx→Y
                                                                                              t,i to
         be type t.
     (d) Sample the rest of the input of N x ∼ Gr (nr ) conditioned on the random variables sampled
         in earlier steps independent of the input of other inner vertices (see Claim 4.10.)

 (4) For all pairs of vertices whose types are not fixed yet, set them to be of type r + 1.

   The parameters in Eq (5) and Eq (6) are chosen so that the sets in step (2) can be sampled:
Observation 4.8. In step (2) of Distribution 4, for each inner vertex x, and layer Y with x ∈
                                                                                            / Y,
the total number of identities sampled is at most 2(nr−1 )12 .

Proof. For each inner vertex x ∈ X, to another layer Y , we sample:
 • αr -many sets of size nr−1 each.
 • A collection of βr -many sets of size at most nr−1 each for type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0}, value i ∈ [nr−1 ]
   and each other layer which does not contain x.
 • A collection of size γr for (r + 1) types and nr−1 values.
In total, we sample, at most
αr · nr−1 + 2βr · (nr−1 )2 · (r + 1) + γr · (r + 1) · nr−1 ⩽ (nr−1 )12 + 2(nr−1 )8 + (nr−1 )8 ⩽ 2(nr−1 )12
                              (as r + 1 < nr−1 for large nr and by Eq (6) and for large enough nr−1 )

                                                    25
                                                                                     Value 1,       Value nr−1,
                                     Value 1, type 0           Value nr−1, type r     type 0          type r




             Full instances                Partial instances from inner
                                                                                    Extra channels of same type
           from inner round                round with one less vertex




                  Remaining channels which
                ensure correct channel-degree                             Other inner vertices


Figure 7: An illustration of what the input of one inner vertex x looks like in Ger . Pink outer vertices
correspond to collections J , green outer vertices correspond to collections K (only for one other layer Y are
shown, this is repeated once more), blue outer vertices correspond to sets L (again, only for Y are shown,
this is repeated for Z), yellow vertices correspond to vertices in Y ∗ ∪ Z ∗ , and the unshaded vertices are the
other outer vertices with various types to ensure correct number of channels of each type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0}.


vertices for each inner vertex not in Y .

Observation 4.9. In Step (2) of Distribution 4, for each layer Z, the total number of vertices
sampled from Z \ Z ∗ is at most 4(nr−1 )13 < nr − nr−1 .

Proof. By Observation 4.8, for each inner vertex not in Z, we sample at most, 2(nr−1 )12 vertices
from Z. There are exactly 2nr−1 inner vertices which are not in Z. In total, from set Z \ Z ∗ , we
sample at most 4(nr−1 )13 vertices, which is less than nr − nr−1 by construction.

    We show that the parameters are set so that step (3) can be performed.

Claim 4.10. In the definition of Ger (nr ) from Distribution 4, conditioned on Gr−1 and values of
X ∗ , Y ∗ and Z ∗ , in step (3), each N x can be sampled marginally the same way as in distribution
Gr (nr ) from Distribution 3.

Proof. We will prove that after the sampling process in step (2) is done, it is feasible to sample the
input N x of any inner vertex x from Gr (nr ) marginally. We refer to Observation 4.5. We know
that the types of all vertices in Y ∗ ∪ Z ∗ are set correctly.
    We argue that it is still possible to sample the input so that uniformly random dr -size subsets
are chosen for each type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0} for each layer Y, Z.
   By Observation 4.8, we know that the total number of entries in N x→Y for each other layer Y
whose types are fixed by the first three steps of (3) are at most 2(nr−1 )12 , which is still less than
dr by Eq (5). Therefore, we have enough room to marginally sample the rest of N x so that the
conditions in Observation 4.5 are satisfied.


                                                        26
   Finally, we argue that these distributions are close overall.

Claim 4.11. Distribution Ger (nr ) which is obtained by marginally sampling each N x→Y as in Dis-
tribution 4 is close in total variation distance to Gr (nr ).
                                                                    1
                                     ∥Gr (nr ) − Ger (nr )∥tvd ⩽        .
                                                                   nr−1

Proof. In distribution Gr (nr ), after the types of vertex pairs (x, y) are set according to Gr−1 for
inner vertices x, y, we sample disjoint subsets of the remaining X \ X ∗ to add as neighbors to inner
vertices in Y ∗ and Z ∗ . This ensures that all outer vertices have channel-degree at most one, as we
have stated in Observation 4.3.
    In distribution Ger (nr ), all the subsets of outer vertices sampled in step (2) are disjoint from
each other by construction. Even though channels of some type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0} are added to all these
outer vertices, exactly one channel is added, and they have channel-degree at most one.
    However, the rest of the input for each inner vertex x is sampled independenly of the input of
other inner vertices in Ger (nr ). This process corresponds to sampling at most dr vertices for each
type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0} for each inner vertex, so that the condition stated in Observation 4.3 is satisfied.
Namely, the condition that the number of channels of each type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0} for each inner vertex
is exactly dr . Outer vertices sampled for this purpose may have collisions, which will cause outer
vertices to have channel-degree more than one.
     We will show that even though the rest of the outer vertices in step (3) for each inner vertex are
sampled independently of each other, it is highly unlikely that some vertex is sampled twice. Let
Euniq be the event that all the outer vertices sampled to fill up the dr slots for each type, and for
each inner vertex are unique for all layers X, Y, Z. We will show that probability of Euniq happening
is large. We have,

  Pr[Euniq ] ⩽ (Pr[(2nr−1 · (r + 1) · dr + nr−1 ) vertices sampled u.a.r. from [nr ] do not overlap])3 ,

where we bound the probability of a super set of Euniq . In Euniq , fewer than dr · (r + 1) vertices are
sampled from any layer Y for any inner vertex x ∈  / Y . We will show that even if dr · (r + 1) vertices
are sampled for each inner vertex, in addition to the set Y ∗ uniformly at random and independently
of each other, no vertex is sampled more than once except with a very small probability.
   We choose 2nr−1 ·(r +1)·dr +nr−1 < n16    r−1 := θ vertices uniformly at random and independently
from nr vertices in layer Y . The probability that none of them are sampled more than once is,
                               θ−1                          θ
                                                                  !
          nr            1      Y                           X
               · θ! ·        =    (1 − i/nr ) ⩾ exp −2 ·       i/nr = exp(−(θ − 1) · θ/nr ).
           θ          (nr )θ
                               i=0                           i=0

    We do this for all three layers A, B and C. The probability that no element is sampled twice
in any layer is at least,

                 Pr[Euniq ] ⩾ exp(−3 · (θ − 1) · θ/nr ) ⩾ exp(−3/n2r−1 ) ⩾ 1 − 1/nr−1 ,

where we have used the value of nr = n34       2  2
                                       r−1 = θ · nr−1 from Eq (5) and that nr−1 ⩾ 3.
   Conditioned on event Euniq , we argue that the distribution of Gr (nr ) and Ger (nr ) are identical.
We already know that the distributions of the input of each inner vertex is marginally the same by
Claim 4.10. When Euniq happens, all the outer vertices have channel-degree at most one, and the

                                                    27
 neighbors of each inner vertex are disjoint barring X ∗ , Y ∗ , Z ∗ . This satisfies all the properties of
 instances sampled from Gr (nr ).
    Let Iuniq be the indicator random variable for event Euniq .

   ∥Gr (nr ) − Ger (nr )∥tvd ⩽     E       ∥(Gr (nr ) | Iuniq = I) − (Ger (nr ) | Iuniq = I)∥tvd
                                 I∼Iuniq
                                                                     (by “overconditioning” as in Fact D.7)
                           ⩽ Pr[Iuniq = 1] · ∥(Gr (nr ) | Euniq ) − (Ger (nr ) | Euniq )∥tvd + Pr[Iuniq = 0]
                           = 0 + Pr[Iuniq = 0]           (conditioned on Euniq , the distributions are the same)
                               1
                           ⩽      ,
                             nr−1

 where, in the last inequality we have used our upper bound on the probability of ¬Euniq .

    We need some more notation about random variables in Ger (nr ) for the later sections.
 Notation. We use Jall to denote the joint random variable containing all J x for all inner vertices
 x. Similarly, we use Kall , Lall to denote the joint random variable Kt,i  x→Y , Lx→Y respectively for all
                                                                                   t,i
 inner vertices x, layer Y with x ∈    / Y , type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0}, and value i ∈ [nr−1 ]. We call the random
 varibles Jall , Kall , Lall as auxiliaries, and together we use aux to denote them.

 Observation 4.12. We have the following independence properties for the inputs of vertices in
 graph G ∼ Ger (nr ):

 (i) Conditioned on (Gr−1 , aux, ids), the inputs of each of the inner vertices in G are independent
     of each other.

(ii) The input N x→Y , N x→Z for any inner vertex x in the graph G is independent of all other
     random variables in Gr−1 conditioned on Ninx , ids and aux.

(iii) The random variable Gr−1 is independent of ids and aux.

 Proof. For part (i), we know that for each inner vertex x, once the new identities ids and auxiliaries
 aux are fixed, and graph Gr−1 is fixed, its input is sampled independently of the other inner vertices
 in step (3).
      Part (ii) follows by a similar argument: once Ninx , ids and aux are fixed, the entire input of x
 is fixed by randomness completely independent of Gr−1 .
     For part (iii), it is easy to see that ids, J all , Kall and Lall are sampled from A, B, C in graph
 G, irrespective of the inner graph Gr−1 .

 4.4   Distribution of Input and Messages
 In this subsection, we talk about the joint distribution of input Gr (nr ) and the messages sent across
 all channels in the first round of communication. Let πr be a protocol for solving triangle detection
 on an input G sampled from Gr (nr ).
 Notation. Let Dreal denote the distribution of the inputs and messages in the first round of πr .
 For any inner vertex xi , let Mxi →Y denote the nr -length vector of the messages sent by xi to its
 channels in Y . When there is no channel between xi to some vertex yj , we use ⊥ to denote the null
 message that xi sends. We use Mout→xi to denote the messages xi receives from outer vertices. We

                                                             28
use Mall to denote all the messages sent and received by all inner vertices in the first round. Note
that this is also all the messages sent over the first round as the type of all pairs of outer vertices
is set as r + 1, and they can send no messages to each other in any round.
    We define a distribution D]real for the input graph and first round messages below. We will show

that this distribution is generated when input G is sampled from Ger (nr ), and protocol πr is run
over this graph instead. We will also show that distribution D   ] real is close to D real .



                               real :
 Distribution 5. Distribution Dg

   Gr−1 × (ids, J all , Kall , Lall )                              (the inner graph, identities, auxiliaries)
        ą
   ×(           N xi →Y , N xi →Z | N xini , aux, ids)                      (the inputs of all inner vertices)
       x∈{a,b,c},
        i∈[nr−1 ]
          ą
   ×(               Mxi →Y , Mxi →Z | N xi →Y , N xi →Z , aux, ids) (the messages sent by inner vertices)
       x∈{a,b,c},
        i∈[nr−1 ]
          ą
   ×(               (Mout→xi | N xi →Y , N xi →Z , aux, ids))
       x∈{a,b,c},
        i∈[nr−1 ]
                                                   (the messages sent by outer vertices to inner vertices)

                                                ]
Observation 4.13. The distribution of inputs in D real is sampled from G
                                                                       er (nr ).

Proof. In distribution Ger (nr ), we know that all the ids, J all , Kall and Lall are sampled conditioned
on each other. And, they are independent of Gr−1 from Observation 4.12-(iii). Hence, we have
that the distributions of Gr−1 , ids and aux are exactly as in Ger (nr ) in D] real .

   The input of the inner vertices are independent of each other conditioned on Gr−1 , ids and aux
                                                                           ]
from Observation 4.12-(i). Therefore, they can be sampled separately as in D real .

    Lastly, we know that for any inner vertex x, its input is independent of Gr−1 when conditioned
on N xin , ids and aux by Observation 4.12-(ii), so the other random variables in Gr−1 can be ignored
also when sampling these inputs.

Observation 4.14. For any graph G sampled from Gr (nr ), the distribution of all the first round
messages is the same in Dreal and D
                                  ] real conditioned on the input graph being G.


Proof. The protocol π is deterministic, hence the messages sent by any vertex are only a function
                                             ]
of its input. For all the inner vertices, in D real , the messages are sampled conditioned on their

entire input, and are distributed the same as in Dreal .
    For outer vertices, when input graph G lies in support of Gr (nr ), we know that the channel-
degree of all these vertices is at most one, by Observation 4.3. For any outer vertex u connected
to inner vertex x, the entire input given to u is known to x. Thus, x can sample the messages that
u would send to x only with its input.

Claim 4.15. Distributions Dreal and D
                                    ] real are close to each other:


                                          ∥Dreal − D
                                                   ] real ∥
                                                           tvd ⩽ 1/nr−1 .


                                                         29
Proof. By Observation 4.13 and Fact D.6,

      ∥Dreal − D
               ] real ∥
                       tvd ⩽ ∥Gr (nr ) − Gr (nr )∥tvd +
                                         e                         E       ∥Dreal (Mall | G) − D
                                                                                               ] real (M
                                                                                                         all | G)∥tvd
                                                              G∼Gr (nr )
                                 1                                                                        1
                          ⩽          +        E       ∥Dreal (Mall | G) − D
                                                                          ] real (M
                                                                                    all | G)∥tvd =              ,
                              nr−1       G∼Gr (nr )                                                      nr−1
where the last inequality is by Claim 4.11 and the equality follows from Observation 4.14.

4.5      Proof of Theorem 1 Barring Round Elimination
In the next section, we construct a round elimination protocol, with the following parameters.
Lemma 4.16. For any s, r ⩾ 1 and δ ∈ (0, 1), given a deterministic protocol πr for instances
Gr ∼ Gr (nr ), with the following parameters:
                           round(πr ) = r             bw(πr ) = s          suc(πr , Gr (nr )) ⩾ δ,
we can construct a deterministic protocol πr−1 which takes instances Gr−1 ∼ Gr−1 (nr−1 ) and has
the following parameters:
                                                                                      r
                                                                              1          s
     round(πr−1 ) = r − 1   bw(πr−1 ) ⩽ s     suc(πr−1 , Gr−1 (nr−1 )) ⩾ δ −      − 15       .
                                                                             nr−1       nr−1
    The proof of Lemma 4.16 is the focus of Section 5. We now prove Theorem 1 using Lemma 4.16.

Proof of Theorem 1. Assume towards a contradiction that there exists a protocol πr with r-rounds,
                                                                                                 r     1
               suc(πr , Gr (nr )) ⩾ 15/16,             and         bw(πr ) = s < nr(1/2)·(1/34 ) ·          .
                                                                                                     (480)2
We prove the theorem by repeatedly applying Lemma 4.16 for r times on protocol πr , to get a
                                                                                          r
protocol π0 for G0 (n0 ). The value of n0 , using Eq (5) is n0 = n1 1/34 = · · · = nr 1/34 . From the
large value of nr in the statement of the theorem, we have,
                                                                   r
                                                      n0 = n1/34
                                                            r    > r4 .                                                 (7)
The probability of success of π0 is at least,
                                        r                 r
                                        X  1         √ X        1
                 suc(πr , Gr (nr )) −          − 15 · s ·
                                          nr−ℓ
                                        ℓ=1
                                                            (nr−ℓ )1/2
                                                                   ℓ=1
                        r                 r
                   15 X 1            √ X        1
                 ⩾    −        − 15 · s ·
                   16     nr−ℓ
                           ℓ=1
                                            (nr−ℓ )1/2  ℓ=1
                                             (by value of suc(πr , Gr (nr )) from the theorem statement)
                 15         1           √          1
              ⩾     − r · ( ) − 15 · s · r · ( 1/2 )                  (as n0 , n1 , . . . , nr−1 are increasing)
                 16        n0                     n0
                 15    1          √           1
              ⩾     −      − 15 · s · r · ( 1/2 )                                (as r < 32n0 from Eq (7))
                 16 32                      n0
                 29          1                                                                             1/34r
              ⩾     − 15 ·      · r · (1/n−0.25
                                          0     )                        (by value of s, and n0 = nr             )
                 32         480
                 29    1      7
              >     −      > .                                                  (as r < n0 1/4 from Eq (7))
                 32 32        8
This contradicts Claim 4.2, thereby proving the theorem.


                                                              30
5     Round Elimination: Description
In this section, we give the desired protocol πr−1 in Lemma 4.16 for solving instances Gr−1 ∼
Gr−1 (nr−1 ), and provides parts of the analysis of the protocol. This protocol constructs an instance
Gr ∼ Gr (nr ) and embeds its input Gr−1 into it. It also samples the first round messages that
protocol πr sends using the different sources of randomness in our model (see Section 2.2).
    We want to sample the input and messages from D      ] real . As we have established in Claim 4.15,

this distribution is close to the correct distribution Dreal . However, sampling from D     ]real is not

feasible either.
    We sample from a distribution we label as Dfake , and show that this is close in total variation
distance to D]real and thus D real . The description of π
                                                         r−1 is given in steps where the random
             ]
variables in Dreal and D fake are sampled progressively.
5.1     Key Steps of the Protocol
In this subsection, we describe some prominent steps of the protocol πr−1 .
5.1.1    Public Random Variables
Given a graph Gr−1 ∼ Gr−1 (nr−1 ), it is easy to sample new identites for each of the vertices using
public randomness. It is also easy to sample the auxiliary random variables. This is the first step
of the protocol. To break the correlation between messages that each inner vertex sends, we also
sample some messages publicly.


 Protocol 1. Step (1) of protocol πr−1 for Gr−1 ∼ Gr−1 (nr−1 ) given πr for Gr ∼ Gr (nr ):

 (1) Sample the random variables ids and also, J all , Kall , and Lall which jointly form aux using
     public randomness.

 (2) For i ∈ [nr−1 ], the vertex with identity xi in Gr−1 takes on the identity of x∗i ∈ X ∗ in random
     variable ids. It changes the identities of all its neighbors in Gr−1 correspondingly.

                                                / Y , set N x→Y [Lx→Y
 (3) For each inner vertex x and layer Y with x ∈                 t,i ] to all be type t for
     t ∈ [r] ∪ {0} and i ∈ [nr−1 ].

 (4) For each inner vertex x, and layer Y with x ∈ / Y , sample the message that x sends to vertex
           x→Y         ∗
     yj ∈ Lt,i ∩ {< yi }, for all types t ∈ [r] ∪ {0}, and i ∈ [nr−1 ], with public randomness.
          x
 We use Npub  and Mxpub to denote the input and messages sent by each inner vertex x that are
 sampled publicly in this protocol.

Observation 5.1. The total number of messages sampled in Mxpub for each inner vertex x is at
most 2 · γr · (r + 1) · nr−1 .
                         x→Y is exactly γ for all i ∈ [n
Proof. The size of set Lt,i              r               r−1 ] and type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0}, and other layer
Y with x ∈ / Y . At most γr many messages are sampled for each of the r + 1 types and nr−1 values
of i, and the two choices of Y .

   We do not have the complete description of Dfake yet, this will be clear as we formalize more of
protocol πr−1 . But we can prove that what we have sampled so far is the same way as in D   ]real .



                                                  31
                                                                        ]
Observation 5.2. The distribution of Gr−1 , ids and aux are the same in D real and D fake .


                                           ]
Proof. Random variable Gr−1 is the same in D real and D fake , as it is just sampled from G
                                                                                           r−1 (nr−1 ).
    In step (1) of Protocol 1, the random variables ids and aux are jointly sampled independently
of Gr−1 . However, even in D]real , G
                                     r−1 is independent of ids, aux by Observation 4.12-(iii).

5.1.2   Sampling Messages Between Inner Vertices
We now use pair randomness to sample messages between inner vertices.
    In the description of Gr (nr ) from Distribution 3, the type of each pair (x, y) in Gr−1 is unchanged.
The types of all these vertices is upper bounded by r in graph Gr−1 ∼ Gr−1 (nr−1 ). Hence, all pairs
(x, y) ∈ Gr−1 are present in Cr of instance G from Gr (nr ), and they can send messages to each
other in the first round of πr . We describe how to sample these messages now.


 Protocol 2. Step (2) of protocol πr−1 for Gr−1 ∼ Gr−1 (nr−1 ) given πr for Gr ∼ Gr (nr ):
 For each pair x, y ∈ Gr−1 , with y ∈
                                    / X, sample the message that x sends to y in the first round
                                       x and Mx
 conditioned on ids, type(x, y), aux, Npub       pub using pair randomness between x and y.

 We use Mxin to denote all the messages that inner vertex x sends to some other inner vertex
 y ∈ Gr−1 and y ∈/ X. We use Mxin (y) to denote the message that x sends to the inner vertex
 y ∈ Gr−1 , and Mxin (−y) to denote all the messages that x sends to other inner vertices that are
 not y. These messages are all sampled by this protocol.

5.1.3   Sampling Rest of the Input and Messages
                                                                   ]
We can now sample the rest of the random variables in distribution D real .



 Protocol 3. Step (3) of protocol πr−1 for Gr−1 ∼ Gr−1 (nr−1 ) given πr for Gr ∼ Gr (nr ):
 Each inner vertex xi ∈ Gr−1 does the following:
                                                    ]
 (a) Sample the rest of its input from distribution D real and the remaining messages that x sends
                                                                                              i
                                                                              xi
     to its neighbors with private randomness conditioned on ids, aux, Npub      , Mxpub
                                                                                      i
                                                                                         , Mxini , and
     its inner input Ninxi .

 (b) Sample all the messages that xi receives from outer vertices, conditioned on the entire input
     of xi , ids and aux.
           xi
 We use Nrest to denote all the random variables that xi samples in step (3) of Protocol 3 using
 private randomness. This is comprised of the rest of the input of xi , the messages it sends to
 outer neighbors, and all the messages it receives from its outer neighbors.

                                            xi
    We can prove that the random variables Nrest for each inner vertex xi are sampled from the
                     ]real
correct distribution D .

Observation 5.3. In Dfake , conditioned on any choice of ids, aux, Gr−1 , N xpub , Mxpub and Mxin
for each inner vertex x, N y for all inner vertices y are jointly sampled from D
                             rest
                                                                               ] real .



                                                   32
Proof. In D ]real , for each inner vertex x, its input, all the messages it sends, and the messages it

receives from outer vertices are sampled independently of the other inner vertices and independently
of Gr−1 when conditioned on N xin , ids and aux by Observation 4.12-(i) and (ii).
     Therefore, in step (3) of Protocol 3, when we sample the remaining input of each inner vertex x
it is sufficient to condition on N xin , Mxin , Mxpub , N xpub , ids and aux. This is true of the remaining
messages sent by x also.
     From the definition of D] real from Distribution 5, we know that all the messages that x receives

from its outer neighbors are sampled only conditioned on the entire input of x, the value of aux
and ids. This process is the same as in step (3) in Protocol 3.

   We have sampled all the random variables associated with D     ]real . However, the distribution of
                                                        ]
input and first round messages we get is different from D real , even though parts of them may be

the same from Observation 5.2 and Observation 5.3.
5.2    Full Protocol πr−1 and its Distribution
We finally put together the multiple parts of protocol πr−1 , and see the full description of Dfake .


 Protocol 4. Protocol πr−1 for Gr−1 ∼ Gr−1 (nr−1 ) given πr for Gr ∼ Gr (nr ):

 (1) The random variable Gr−1 is given as input. Random variables ids, aux, and N xpub , Mxpub for
     all inner vertices x are sampled according to Protocol 1. Identities are changed appropriately
     as given in step (1) from Protocol 1.

 (2) All messages between pairs of inner vertices x, y ∈ Gr−1 which have a channel in Gr−1 are
     sampled as given in Protocol 2.

 (3) The remaining input for each inner vertex xi , the other messages it sends and all the messages
     it receives from outer vertices are sampled in Protocol 3.

 (4) All the vertices continue to run πr starting from the second round, assuming first round
     messages are as sampled, and output the same answer as πr . See Claim 5.4 that specifies
     how to implement this step.

   First, let us argue that the vertices can run the protocol πr starting from the second round.

Claim 5.4. Given any input graph G which lies in the support of Gr (nr ), all inner vertices can run
protocol πr correctly starting from second round based on the information they have access to.

Proof. First, we argue that all the inner vertices have access to all the messages they send and
receive in the first round. For any message sent by inner vertex x to another inner vertex y, we use
pair randomness between x, y to sample it in step (2) from Protocol 2. Thus, both x, y have access
to the message. All messages sent by any inner vertex x to any other inner vertex is known to x.
All messages received by x sent by some other inner vertex y is known to x as well.
    The remaining messages that x sends to outer vertices, and all the messages it receives from
outer vertices are sampled with private randomness in step (3) from Protocol 3, and are all known
to the inner vertex x.



                                                    33
    When the input graph G lies in the support of Gr (nr ), the channel-degree of all outer vertices
is at most one from Observation 4.3. Therefore, any inner vertex x with outer neighbor u can
simulate the messages u sends to x, as it has access to the entire input of u.
    As for the inner vertices, they have access to all their inputs. We have argued they also have
access to all the first round messages sent and received by them at the end of step (3) of πr−1 .
They can continue to run protocol πr from the second round by simulating the behavior of all outer
vertices connected to them. This proceeds exactly as in πr till the last round, and the inner vertices
can find the output of πr (again, since they can fully simulate outer vertices).

     Next, let us talk about the distribution Dfake , which is the joint distribution of the input and
first round messages that we generate when running protocol πr−1 .


 Distribution 6. Distribution Dfake :

              Gr−1 × (ids, J all , Kall , Lall )          (the inner graph, identities and auxiliaries)
                   ą
              ×(        N xpub , Mxpub | ids, aux)
                  x∈Gr−1
                            (the public parts of input and messages from step (1) in Protocol 1)
                    ą      ą
               ×(             (Mxin (y) | type(x, y), ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub )
                  x∈Gr−1 y∈Gr−1
                          y ∈X
                            /
                   (messages sent by inner vertices to each other in step (2) from Protocol 2)
                  ą
               ×(    N xrest | Mxin , N xin , ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub ).
                  x∈Gr−1
                    (rest of the input and messages for inner vertices in step (3) from Protocol 3)

Claim 5.5. The distribution of the input and first round messages in πr−1 is exactly Dfake as
defined in Distribution 6.

Proof. We know that ids, J all , Kall and Lall are sampled jointly with public randomness in πr−1 ,
independent of Gr−1 . Therefore, their distributions are exactly as given in Distribution 6.
     The random variables N xpub , Mxpub are sampled with public randomness as well, but we know
by Observation 4.12-(i),(ii) that they are independent of random variables associated with other
inner vertices. Hence, they are sampled only conditioned on ids and aux. (There is no access to
N xin with public randomness.)
   For each pair of inner vertices x, y, we sample Mxin (y) in step (2) of Protocol 2 conditioned on
exactly the random variables stated in the claim: ids, aux from public randomness, type(x, y) that
both inner vertices x, y have access to, and N xpub , Mxpub , again from public randomness.
   Finally, each inner vertex x samples the rest of its input, the remaining messages it sends and
the messages it receives from outer vertices conditioned on ids, aux from public randomness, Mxin
that it sampled using the pair randomness to other inner vertices, N xpub , Mxpub again from public
randomness and N xin it has from graph Gr−1 in step (3) from Protocol 3. This is as stated in the
description of Dfake in Distribution 6.

    We can see that Dfake and D  ] real are not the same distributions. But, we can prove that they

are close to each other in total variation distance. This is the focus of the next section.

                                                     34
Lemma 5.6 (“Dfake and Dreal are not that different”).
                                                                               r
                                  real        fake              1                   s
                             ∥D          −D          ∥tvd ⩽             + 15              .
                                                              (nr−1 )              nr−1

   Proof of Lemma 5.6 can be found in Section 6.2 and constitutes the main technical part of our
argument. This concludes the description of the round elimination protocol.
5.3   Proof of Lemma 4.16
We can prove Lemma 4.16, restated below, using Lemma 5.6.

Lemma (Restatement of Lemma 4.16). For any s, r ⩾ 1 and δ ∈ (0, 1), given a deterministic
protocol πr for instances Gr ∼ Gr (nr ), with the following parameters:

                       round(πr ) = r           bw(πr ) = s             suc(πr , Gr (nr )) ⩾ δ,

we can construct a deterministic protocol πr−1 which takes instances Gr−1 ∼ Gr−1 (nr−1 ) with the
following parameters:
                                                                                      r
                                                                              1          s
     round(πr−1 ) = r − 1   bw(πr−1 ) ⩽ s     suc(πr−1 , Gr−1 (nr−1 )) ⩾ δ −      − 15       .
                                                                             nr−1       nr−1

Proof of Lemma 4.16. We will prove that protocol πr−1 from Protocol 4 obeys the conditions in
the statement of the lemma.
   For the number of rounds in πr−1 , this is exactly r − 1 as πr has r rounds, and the first round
messages are sampled without any communication between the vertices.
   The total length of any message sent in the r − 1 rounds of πr−1 is at most s, as all the messages
sent by πr are at most s bits.
    We know by Observation 4.7 that for the graphs in the support of Gr (nr ), if protocol πr outputs
the correct answer, πr−1 is correct in detecting whether a triangle exists as well. The output of πr
and πr−1 are the same when inputs are sampled from Dreal , by Claim 5.4. Therefore, it is sufficient
to lower bound the probability that πr outputs the correct answer when the inputs and first round
messages are sampled from Dfake as opposed to Dreal .
   We use Fact D.5 to lower bound the probability of success of πr−1 where E is the event that
the answer on input Gr−1 is correct:

                 Pr [πr−1 is correct] = Pr [πr is correct]                                    (by the discussion above)
                Gr−1                       Dfake

                                         ⩾ Pr [πr is correct] − ∥Dreal − Dfake ∥tvd
                                          Dfake
                                                          r       
                                                  1            s
                                         ⩾δ−          + 15           ,
                                                 nr−1         nr−1

where in the second inequality is by the assumption on the correctness probability of πr and Lemma 5.6.
   Finally, the protocol πr−1 is randomized, but it can be made deterministic by fixing the ran-
dom string by the easy direction of Yao’s minimax principle, without changing its probability of
success, rounds, and bandwidth. The different sources of randomness do not cause an issue, as the
randomness in all of these sources can be fixed to be a particular string.



                                                          35
6     Round Elimination: Analysis
In this subsection, we analyze distributions Dfake (see Distribution 6) and Dreal (see Distribution 5),
and prove the upper bound on their total variation distance in Lemma 5.6. We already know that
distribution Dreal is close to D
                               ] real by Claim 4.15. Hence, we focus on proving the distance between
]
D real and D fake is small. When we talk about messages in this section, we only refer to messages

sent over the first round.
    Our analysis is split into three parts:

Part 1. The messages sent by each inner vertex x are correlated with each other through the input
     of x. However, in step (2) of πr−1 from Protocol 2, they are sampled independently, only
     based on some parts of the input of x. We show that the correlation between these messages
     are low and thus can be sampled this way without too much loss.
Part 2. We publicly sample some messages sent by each inner vertex x for both layers Y, Z in
     step (1) of πr−1 from Protocol 1, independent of the input of x. We remove the correlation
     between these messages and the input of x from Gr−1 to allow for this sampling.
Part 3. Messages sent by x to other inner vertices are sampled in step (2) of πr−1 from Protocol 2.
     These are sampled conditioned on some part of the input of x. We will show that the
     correlation between these messages and the rest of the input of x from Gr−1 is low.

                                           ]
    These are the only differences between D real and D fake . We have argued that the other random

variables are sampled correctly in Observation 5.2 and Observation 5.3.
6.1    Setting up the Analysis

We move from D  ] real to D fake by way of multiple distributions (one for each part) which lie between

them and use a hybrid argument. In this subsection, we describe these hybrid distributions.
   First, let us cast distribution D ]real in terms of the random variables in D fake .

                        ]
Claim 6.1. Distribution D real can be written as:


               Gr−1 × (ids, J all , Kall , Lall )                  (the inner graph, identities and auxiliaries)
                    ą
               ×(        N xpub , Mxpub | ids, aux, N xin )
                   x∈Gr−1
                                  (the public parts of input and messages from step (1) in Protocol 1)
                    ą
               ×(           (Mxin | ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub , N xin )
                   x∈Gr−1
                          (messages sent by inner vertices to each other in step (2) from Protocol 2)
                    ą
               ×(           N xrest | Mxin , N xin , ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub ).
                   x∈Gr−1
                      (rest of the input and messages for inner vertices in step (3) from Protocol 3)

Proof. It is evident that random variables Gr−1 , ids and aux are sampled the same way in the
statement and in D] real .

    From Observation 4.12-(i), we know that the inputs of all the inner vertices are independent
of each other conditioned on Gr−1 , ids and aux. Moreover, we know from Observation 4.12-(ii)

                                                         36
that the input of any inner vertex x only depends on the random variables N xin , ids and aux in
Gr−1 . Therefore, the random variables N xpub , Mxpub for each inner vertex in x are sampled only
conditioned on ids, aux and N xin .
    As the protocol is determinstic, we know that the messages sent by any inner vertex x depend
only on its input. Therefore, Mxin is also sampled from the right distribution in the statement of
the claim. This argument applies to the rest of the input of x and the messages sent by x to outer
vertices also.
                            ]
    Lastly, in distribution D real , all the messages received by inner vertex x from outer vertices are

sampled only based on the input of x, ids and aux, as is the case in our statement.

                                 ]
   To bound the distance between D real and D fake , we use weak chain rule of total variation distance

from Fact D.6 repeatedly. We define an ordering on the vertices and channels for this purpose.
Ordering vertices and channels. We use a lexicographic ordering on the inner vertices of the
form a1 , a2 , . . . , anr−1 , then b1 , . . . , bnr−1 and lastly c1 , . . . , cnr−1 . For each inner vertex x, to order
the channels that x has to inner vertices in the other two layers, we again use the lexicographic
ordering we have over all the vertices. (The specific ordering is unimportant and we have picked
the simplest one.)
   We will now describe the hybrid distributions that we use as intermediate steps between the
                  ]
two distributions D real and D fake .


Sampling Inner Messages Separately

The first hybrid distribution which lies between D  ] real and D fake is H that we define here. One
                                                                          1
key difference between D]real and D  fake is in how the messages to other inner vertices sent by any
                                ] real
inner vertex x are sampled. In D , they are sampled together, whereas this correlation is absent
in Dfake . We show that this correlation is small and can be broken.


 Distribution 7. Distribution H1 :

                 Gr−1 × (ids, J all , Kall , Lall )        (the inner graph, identities and auxiliaries)
                      ą
                               x        x             x
                 ×(        N pub , Mpub | ids, aux, N in )
                     x∈Gr−1
                                (the public parts of input and messages from step (1) in Protocol 1)
                       ą       ą
                 ×(               (Mxin (y) | ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub , N xin )
                     x∈Gr−1 y∈Gr−1
                             y ∈X
                               /
                     (messages sent by inner vertices to each other in step (2) from Protocol 2)
                    ą
                 ×(    N xrest | Mxin , N xin , ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub ).
                     x∈Gr−1
                       (rest of the input and messages for inner vertices in step (3) from Protocol 3)

                           ]
    We prove distributions D real and H are close to each other in Section 6.3.
                                       1




                                                          37
Lemma 6.2 (“Messages sent by inner vertices can be sampled separately”).
                                                           r
                         ] real                        5/2      s
                        ∥D      − H1 ∥tvd ⩽ 6 · (nr−1 ) ·           .
                                                             γr + 1

Sampling Public Messages without Inner Inputs

The only difference between H1 and Dfake , is that in some parts of H1 there is additional condi-
tioning on some parts of the input N xin of the inner vertices. We show that these conditionings can
be slowly broken. To this end, we give our second hybrid distribution that lies between H1 and
Dfake , which samples public messages according to Dfake .


 Distribution 8. Distribution H2 :

              Gr−1 × (ids, J all , Kall , Lall )          (the inner graph, identities and auxiliaries)
                   ą
              ×(        N xpub , Mxpub | ids, aux)
                  x∈Gr−1
                            (the public parts of input and messages from step (1) in Protocol 1)
                    ą      ą
               ×(             (Mxin (y) | ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub , N xin )
                  x∈Gr−1 y∈Gr−1
                          y ∈X
                            /
                   (messages sent by inner vertices to each other in step (2) from Protocol 2)
                  ą
               ×(    N xrest | Mxin , N xin , ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub ).
                  x∈Gr−1
                    (rest of the input and messages for inner vertices in step (3) from Protocol 3)

   We prove the following lemma in Section 6.4.

Lemma 6.3 (“Low correlation between first round messages and inputs of inner vertices”).
                                              s
                                                s · γr · (r + 1) · nr−1
                     ∥H1 − H2 ∥tvd ⩽ 3nr−1 ·                            .
                                                         αr + 1

Sampling Inner Messages with only Some Inner Inputs

We come to the last part of our analysis, which shows that distribution H2 is close to Dfake . At this
stage, the only difference between them is in how the messages between inner vertices are sampled.
In H2 , when sampling the message that xi ∈ Gr−1 sends to yj , we condition on the entire input of
the inner vertex xi , whereas in Dfake , we only condition on the input that both inner vertices xi
and yj are aware of. We show that these distributions are close together (see Distribution 6 for the
distribution Dfake ).

Lemma 6.4 (“Low correlation between messages of inner vertices and parts of their inputs”).
                                                    r
                                fake              2        s
                        ∥H2 − D ∥tvd ⩽ 6(nr−1 ) ·                .
                                                       2(βr + 1)

   The proof of Lemma 6.4 is presented in Section 6.5.

                                                     38
6.2   Proof of Lemma 5.6
Proof of Lemma 5.6 now follows from Lemmas 6.2 to 6.4 with some minimal calculations using the
values of αr , βr and γr from Eq (6).

Lemma (Restatement of Lemma 5.6).
                                                                                r
                                      real        fake             1                 s
                                 ∥D          −D          ∥tvd ⩽          + 15              .
                                                                  nr−1              nr−1

Proof of Lemma 5.6. By Claim 4.15, we have
                                                                           1
                                             ∥Dreal − D
                                                      ] real ∥
                                                              tvd ⩽             .
                                                                         nr−1

                                                    ]
Thus, we can focus on bounding the distance between D real and D fake and use triangle inequality.


  ]
 ∥D real − D fake ∥       ] real − H ∥                                        fake
                   tvd ⩽ ∥D            1 tvd + ∥H1 − H2 ∥tvd + ∥H2 − D             ∥tvd (by triangle inequality)
                            s
                               s · (nr−1 )5
                       ⩽6·                   + ∥H1 − H2 ∥tvd + ∥H2 − Dfake ∥tvd
                                 (nr−1 )6
                                                                                    (by Lemma 6.2 and Eq (6))
                                                s
                                                    s · γr · (r + 1) · nr−1
                          r
                               s
                       ⩽6           + 3nr−1 ·                               + ∥H2 − Dfake ∥tvd
                             nr−1                            αr + 1
                                                                                                (by Lemma 6.3)
                                           s
                                             s · (nr−1 )6 · (r + 1) · (nr−1 )3
                          r
                               s
                       ⩽6           +3·                                         + ∥H2 − Dfake ∥tvd (by Eq (6))
                             nr−1                        2 · (nr−1 )11
                                           s
                                             s · (nr−1 )6 · (nr−1 ) · (nr−1 )3
                          r
                               s
                       ⩽6           +3·                                         + ∥H2 − Dfake ∥tvd
                             nr−1                         (nr−1 )11
                                                                                 (as r + 1 ⩽ nr−1 for large nr )
                          r                         r
                               s                             s
                       ⩽9           + 6(nr−1 )2 ·                                               (by Lemma 6.4)
                             nr−1                       2(βr + 1)
                                           s
                                                s · (nr−1 )4
                          r
                               s
                       ⩽9           +6·                                                             (by Eq (6))
                             nr−1            2((nr−1 )5 + 1)
                           r
                                 s
                       ⩽ 15          ,
                              nr−1

concluding the proof.

    The rest of this section contains the heart of our whole argument, namely, proving different
steps of the round elimination protocol incur low losses.
6.3   Messages from One Vertex have Low Correlation
                                                                            ]
In this subsection, we prove Lemma 6.2. Let us recall the two distributions D real and H from
                                                                                        1
Distribution 5 and Distribution 7 respectively.


                                                             39
              real :                                                    Distribution H1 :
Distribution Dg
                                                                        Gr−1 × (ids, J all , Kall , Lall )
 Gr−1 × (ids, J all , Kall , Lall )                                          ą
      ą                                                                 ×(        N xpub , Mxpub | ids, aux, N xin )
 ×(        N xpub , Mxpub | ids, aux, N xin )
                                                                             x∈Gr−1
       x∈Gr−1                                                                 ą        ą
        ą                                                               ×(                    (Mxin (y) | ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub , N xin )
  ×(          (Mxin | ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub , N xin )
                                                                           x∈Gr−1 y∈Gr−1
     x∈Gr−1                                                                        y ∈X
                                                                                     /
        ą
                N xrest | Mxin , N xin , ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub ).
                                                                              ą
 ×(                                                                     ×(            N xrest | Mxin , N xin , ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub ).
       x∈Gr−1                                                                x∈Gr−1



     The difference is in the third line, in how the messages sent by x to other inner vertices in Gr−1
                    ] real , they are jointly sampled conditioned on ids, aux, N x , Mx              x
are sampled. In D                                                                 pub    pub and N in .
In H1 , they are sampled independently of each other, conditioned on the same random variables
ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub and N xin .
Notation.          We use Ninxi (y) to denote the type(xi , y) in Gr−1 for inner vertex y in the input of xi .

Claim 6.5. For every inner vertex x ∈ Gr−1 , and every other inner vertex yi ∈ Y for i ∈ [nr−1 ],
                                                                                                  1
                   I(Mxin (yi ) ; Mxin (−yi ) | N xin , ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub ) ⩽                  · 2nr−1 · s.
                                                                                               γr + 1

Proof. By our notation, we have id(yi ) = yi∗ . First, we have,

   I(Mxin (yi ) ; Mxin (−yi ) | N xin , ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub )
   I(Mxin (yi ) ; Mxin (−yi ) | N xin , ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub , type(x, yi ))               (as type(x, yi ) is fixed by N xin )
    = I(Mx→Y [id(yi )] ; Mxin (−yi ) | N xin , ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub , type(x, yi ))
                                                      (as id(yi ) is the vertex in G to which yi is mapped)
    =         E         I(Mx→Y [id(yi )] ; Mxin (−yi ) | N xin , ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub , type(x, yi ) = t).
        t∼type(x,yi )
                                                               (by the definition of conditional mutual information)

We use Wrest to be the joint random variable N xin , id(w) for each w ̸= yi and w ̸= x, J all , Kall ,
all random variables in Lall barring Lx→Y
                                      t,i   , all random variables in N xpub barring N x→Y [Lx→Y
                                                                                             t,i ], all
                        x
random variables in Mpub barring M        x→Y                  x→Y        ∗
                                               [yj ] for yj ∈ Lt,i ∩ {< yi }. These random variables
are bundled together because they are not relevant to the rest of the proof.
  We prove the statement for each type t separately. Let Et denote the event that type(x, yi ) = t.
We omit the superscript → Y and replace x → Y by ⃗x to avoid the clutter.

I(Mx→Y [id(yi )] ; Mxin (−yi ) | N xin , ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub , type(x, yi ) = t)
= I(Mx→Y [id(yi )] ; Mxin (−yi ) | id(yi ), id(x), Lx→Y
                                                    t,i , N x→Y [Lx→Y
                                                                  t,i ], Mx→Y [Lx→Y
                                                                                t,i ∩ {< id(yi )}], Wrest , Et )
= I(M⃗x [id(yi )] ; Mxin (−yi ) | id(yi ), id(x), L⃗t,i
                                                    x
                                                        , N ⃗x [L⃗t,i
                                                                  x
                                                                      ], M⃗x [L⃗t,i
                                                                                x
                                                                                    ∩ {< id(yi )}], Wrest , Et )
                                                              (changing superscript x → Y to ⃗x for readability)
= I(M⃗x [id(yi )] ; Mxin (−yi ) | id(yi ), id(x), L⃗t,i
                                                    x
                                                        , N ⃗x [L⃗t,i
                                                                  x
                                                                      ∪ {id(yi )}], M⃗x [L⃗t,i
                                                                                           x
                                                                                               ∩ {< id(yi )}], Wrest , Et )
 (as N [id(yi )] is fixed to be t, conditioned on Et and thus conditioning on N ⃗x [id(yi )] is w.l.o.g.)
      ⃗
      x

= I(M⃗x [id(yi )] ; Mxin (−yi ) | id(yi ), id(x), L⃗t,i
                                                    x
                                                        ∪ {id(yi )}, N ⃗x [L⃗t,i
                                                                             x
                                                                                 ∪ {id(yi )}],


                                                                   40
                                                                  M⃗x [L⃗t,i
                                                                         x
                                                                             ∩ {< id(yi )}], Wrest , Et )
                                                    ⃗
                                                    x
                                               (as Lt,i , id(yi ) are fixed by L⃗t,i
                                                                                 x ∪ {id(y )}, id(y ) and vice-versa)
                                                                                             i         i

=           E         I(M⃗x [id(yi )] ; Mxin (−yi ) | id(yi ), id(x), N ⃗x [P ], M⃗x [P ∩ {< id(yi )}],
    L⃗t,i
      x ∪{id(y )}=P
              i

                                                              Wrest , L⃗t,i
                                                                        x
                                                                            ∪ {id(yi )} = P , Et ).
                                                         (by the definition of conditional mutual information)

Again, we prove the statement for every set P ⊂ [nr ] of size γr + 1. Let Econd be the event that
L⃗t,i
  x ∪ {id(y )} = P and E happen.
           i            t
   We argue that conditioned Econd , the value of id(yi ) is uniform over the set P . This is because,
by the definition of L⃗t,i
                        x , for all y ∈ L⃗ x                    x→Y [y ] = t, similar to N x→Y [id(y )]. The
                                     j     t,i , the value of N       j                             i
random variable id(yi ) is uniform over [nr ], and L⃗t,i  x is a uniformly random set of size γ that does
                                                                                                 r
not contain id(yi ). If P is the set L⃗t,i
                                       x ∪ {id(y )}, the value of id(y ) can be any value in this set with
                                                    i                    i
equal probability. As such, continuing the above equations for any fixed P and Econd , we will get,

       I(M⃗x [id(yi )] ; Mxin (−yi ) | id(yi ), id(x), M⃗x [P ∩ {< id(yi )}], Wrest , Econd )
        = E I(M⃗x [yj ] ; Mxin (−yi ) | id(x), M⃗x [P ∩ {< yj }], Wrest , id(yi ) = yj , Econd )
            yj ∈P
               1     X
        =          ·   I(M⃗x [yj ] ; Mxin (−yi ) | id(x), M⃗x [P ∩ {< yj }], Wrest , id(yi ) = yj , Econd ).
            γr + 1
                        yj ∈P
                                                                                       (as id(yi ) is uniform over P )

Now, we argue that the event id(yi ) = yj is independent of the joint distribution of all the other
random variables in the mutual information term, conditioned on Econd . Let us list these random
variables, and argue in steps (in each step, we condition on everything in the previous steps also).

  • id(w) for w ̸= yi : these are disjoint from P and independent of the identity of yi inside P .

  • N x→Y [P ]: this is deterministically fixed to all be t conditioned on Econd .

  • N x→Y : the input of x to layer Y is already fixed to be type t for all elements of P . The rest
    of the input is independent of which of these choices are the actual identity of yi .

  • N x→Z : the input of x to layer Z is independent of which of the identities in P belong to yi .

  • Mx→Y , Mx→Z : we know the inputs of x are independent of the event id(yi ) = yj . As protocol
    πr is deterministic, the messages sent by x are independent of this event also.

  • J all , Kall : these are sets which are disjoint from P , and are also independent of id(yi ) = yj .

  • N xin : this input to x comes from Gr−1 , which is independent of the identity of yi .

  • N xpub barring N x→Y [P ]: this is comprised of inputs chosen for x on sets disjoint from P and
    are independent of which identity in P is given to yi .

  • Lall barring Lt,i
                  x→Y : these are all sets disjoint from P , independent of what happens inside P .


  • Wrest : we have argued that all the random variables in Wrest are independent of P .




                                                             41
As such, the joint distribution of these random variables is independent of the event id(yi ) = yj
conditioned on Econd . Hence, we can continue as,
       1     X
           ·   I(M⃗x [yj ] ; Mxin (−yi ) | id(x), M⃗x [P ∩ {< yj }], Wrest , id(yi ) = yj , Econd )
    γr + 1
             yj ∈P
          1     X
     =        ·   I(M⃗x [yj ] ; Mxin (−yi ) | id(x), M[P ∩ {< yj }], Wrest , Econd )
       γr + 1
                yj ∈P
              (as id(yi ) = yj is independent of all random variables together conditioned on Econd )
          1
     =        · I(M⃗x [P ] ; Mxin (−yi ) | id(x), Wrest , Econd )
       γr + 1
                                              (by the chain rule of mutual information in Fact D.1-(5))
          1
     ⩽        · H(Mxin (−yi ) | Econd )                                              (by Fact D.1-(3))
       γr + 1
          1
     ⩽        · 2nr−1 · s.    (as Mxin (−yi ) has 2nr−1 − 1 messages of length at most s sent by x)
       γr + 1
Putting things together, we have,

           I(Mxin (yi ) ; Mxin (−yi ) | N xin , ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub )
                                                                      
                                                       1
                  ⩽       E             E                   · 2nr−1 · s           (by all the bounds above)
                      type(x,yi ) Lx→Y
                                   t,i ∪{id(yi )} γr + 1
                          =t           =P
                          1
                     =        · 2nr−1 · s.
                       γr + 1
This completes the proof.

     We can now prove Lemma 6.2 using the weak chain rule of total variation distance. First,
let us recall this chain rule from Fact D.6. For any two distributions µ, ν on k random variables
w1 , w2 , . . . , wk , we have,
                                          X
                             ∥µ − ν∥tvd ⩽   E ∥µ(wi | w<i ) − ν(wi | w<i )∥tvd .
                                                 w<i ∼µ
                                         i∈[k]


To bound the distance between D  ] real from Distribution 5 and H from Distribution 7, we use the
                                                                 1
lexicographic ordering on all the vertices and inner channels.
   We need to define some more random variables. These random variables are local to this
subsection. They may be used for different purposes later. (See Appendix B for a list of global
random variables.)

 • Variable wstart : This is the joint random variable Gr−1 , ids, J all , Kall , Lall along with N xpub , Mxpub
   for each inner vertex x.

 • Variables wx→y for inner vertices x, y in different layers : this is the random variable Mxin (y)
   for inner vertices x, y.

 • Variables wx for each inner vertex x: this is the joint random variable of wx→y for all inner
   vertices y which are not in the same layer as x. We use the lexicographic ordering defined
   earlier to order these random variables based on y.

                                                          42
   • Variables wend : Joint random variable N xrest for each inner vertex x.

    We need some simple observations.
                                                         ]
 Observation 6.6. About random variables associated with D real and H :
                                                                     1

 (i) The random variable wstart is distributed the same way in D
                                                               ] real and H .
                                                                           1

             ]
(ii) In both D real and H , ww ⊥ ww′ | wstart for any distinct pair of inner vertices w, w ′ ∈ A∪B ∪C.
                         1
     This is true regardless of whether w, w′ are in the same layer or in different layers.
(iii) Conditioned on any choice of random variable wstart and wx for all inner vertices x, distribution
      of wend is the same in D
                             ] real and H .
                                         1

                     ]
(iv) In distribution D real and H , for any inner vertex x, wx ⊥ wstart | N x , ids, aux, N x , Mx .
                                 1                                          in              pub  pub
                                                                             ′
 (v) In distribution H1 , for any inner vertex x, wx→w ⊥ wx→w | N xin , ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub , for any
     distinct pair of inner vertices w, w′ ∈ Y ∪ Z of Gr−1 . Again, w and w′ may be in the same
     layer or different layers.

 Proof. Part (i) is apparent from the definition of distributions D  ] real and H , as all random variables
                                                                                 1
 in w start are sampled the same way in D] real and H1 .
     For part (ii), we know that when ww is sampled in D   ] real , it is sampled conditioned on random

 variables ids, aux, N w         w          w
                          in , N pub , and Mpub and ids. All these random variables are fixed by w
                                                                                                   start .
                        ′
 Thus, ww and ww are independent for two distinct inner vertices w, w′ conditioned on wstart in
 distribution D] real .

  Similarly in H1 , random variable w              w is sampled only conditioned on ids, aux, N w , N w , and
                                                                                                in    pub
 Mw
  pub , all of which are fixed by w
                                    start .

                                                       ]
     Part (iii) is clear, again from the definition of D real and H as N x
                                                                   1      rest is sampled the same way
 in the two distributions for all inner vertices x for any choice of the other random variables.
    Part (iv) is evident from how wx are sampled. They are conditioned only on ids, aux, N xin , N xpub ,
 and Mxpub and are independent of the other random variables in wstart .
     For part (v), in distribution H1 , we know that when wx→w = Mxin (w) is sampled, it is con-
 ditioned only on ids, aux, N xin , N xpub , and Mxpub . It is independent of the messages sent by x to
 other inner vertices, conditioned on these random variables.

     First, we show that the distribution of wx in D
                                                   ] real and H are close to each other for all inner
                                                               1
 vertices x, conditioned on w start .
 Claim 6.7. For any inner vertex x, we have,
                                                                                                  r
                               ] real (wx | wstart ) − H (wx | wstart )∥                  3/2            s
                  E           ∥D                        1               tvd ⩽ 2 · (nr−1 )     ·              .
                     ^
             wstart ∼D real                                                                           γr + 1

 Proof. Let u1 , u2 , . . . , u2nr−1 be all the inner vertices not in the same layer as x, following the
 ordering we defined. We use wj to denote the random variable wx→uj for j ∈ [2nr−1 ]. We use w0
 to denote wstart . We use w<j to denote the random variables w0 , w1 , . . . wj−1 . We have,

                              E         ]
                                       ∥D real (wx | wstart ) − H (wx | wstart )∥
                                                                 1                tvd
                              ^
                      wstart ∼D real



                                                             43
                                  X
                         ⩽                    E          ]
                                                        ∥D real (wj | w<j ) − H (wj | w<j )∥
                                                                               1             tvd
                                               ^
                                          w<j ∼D real
                             j∈[2nr−1 ]
                                                        (by the weak chain rule of total variation distance Fact D.6)
                                                              q
                           1     X
                                                                  ] real (wj | w<j ) || H (wj | w<j ))
                         ⩽√ ·                           E       D(D                      1
                            2 j∈[2n                     ^
                                                   w<j ∼D real
                                           r−1 ]

                                                                                         (by Pinsker’s inequality Fact D.8)
                                                   s
                          1     X
                                                                       ] real (wj | w<j ) || H (wj | w<j )).
                         ⩽√ ·                              E         D(D                      1
                           2 j∈[2n                          ^
                                                       w<j ∼D real
                                           r−1 ]

                                                                 (by Jensen’s inequality and concavity of square root)

   We bound the KL-divergence term separately for each j ∈ [2nr−1 ]. Let us use Mxin (< uj )
to denote the random variables Mxin (u1 ), Mxin (u2 ), . . . , Mxin (uj−1 ). We use Wcond to denote the
random variables aux, ids, N xin , N xpub , and Mxpub as they always appear in the conditioning.
   We know by Observation 6.6-(iv) that the distribution of wj | w<j in D
                                                                        ] real is,


                                    ]
                                    D real (wj | w<j ) = Mx (u ) | Mx (< u ), W
                                                          in j      in    j     cond .

We know by Observation 6.6-(v) and (iv) that the distribution of wj | w<j in H1 is,

                                              H1 (wj | w<j ) = Mxin (uj ) | Wcond .

Combining the above two equations gives us,

      E           ]
                D(D real (wj | w<j ) || H (wj | w<j ))
                                         1
       ^
  w<j ∼D real

          =        E            D(Mxin (uj ) | Mxin (< uj ), Wcond || Mxin (uj ) | Wcond )
            Mxin (<u j ),W cond
                  x→u
          ⩽ I(Min j ; Mxin (< uj ) | Wcond )                                                     (by Fact D.4)
                  x→uj
          ⩽ I(Min         ; Mxin (−uj ) | Wcond ) (by Fact D.1-(6), as Mxin (< uj ) is fixed by Mxin (−uj ))
                  x→u
          = I(Min j ; Mxin (−uj ) | ids, aux, N xin , N xpub , Mxpub )                 (by definition of Wcond )
          ⩽ s · 2nr−1 · 1/(γr + 1).                                                                            (by Claim 6.5)

Putting things together, we have,

                     E            ]
                                 ∥D real (wx | wstart ) − H (wx | wstart )∥
                                                           1                tvd
                        ^
                wstart ∼D real
                                                   s
                          1     X
                                                                       ] real (wj | w<j ) || H (wj | w<j ))
                         ⩽√ ·                              E         D(D                      1
                           2 j∈[2n                        ^
                                                     w<j ∼D real
                                           r−1 ]

                                  (from our earlier bound on the total variation distance in the proof)
                                                                               r
                            1         p                                    3/2      s
                         ⩽ √ · 2nr−1 · s · 2nr−1 · 1/(γr + 1) = 2 · (nr−1 ) ·           .
                             2                                                   γr + 1

   We prove Lemma 6.2, with another application of Fact D.6.




                                                                       44
Proof of Lemma 6.2. Let u1 , u2 , . . . , u3nr−1 be the inner vertices with the lexicographic ordering.
We use wu<ℓ to denote the joint random variable wu1 , wu2 , . . . , wuℓ−1 for ℓ ∈ [3nr−1 ]. We use wall
to denote all wuℓ for ℓ ∈ [3nr−1 ]. Using Fact D.6, we get,
 ]
∥D real − H ∥
           1 tvd
                                                               X
            ]
         ⩽ ∥D real (wstart ) − H (wstart )∥                                                 ]
                                                                                           ∥D real (wuℓ | wu<ℓ ) − H (wuℓ | wu<ℓ )∥
                                1          tvd +                                 E                                  1               tvd
                                                                           u<ℓ    ^ real
                                                            ℓ∈[3nr−1 ] w         ∼D

                  +            E              ]
                                             ∥D real (wend | wstart , wall ) − H (wend | wstart , wall )∥
                                                                                1                         tvd
                                    ^
                      wstart ,wall ∼D real
                      X
         =0+                         E            ]
                                                 ∥D real (wuℓ | wu<ℓ ) − H (wuℓ | wu<ℓ )∥
                                                                          1               tvd
                              u    ^ real
                  ℓ∈[3nr−1 ] w <ℓ ∼D

                  +            E              ]
                                             ∥D real (wend | wstart , wall ) − H (wend | wstart , wall )∥
                                                                                1                         tvd
                                    ^
                      wstart ,wall ∼D real


           (by Observation 6.6-(i), we know D   ] real (wstart ) and H (wstart ) are the same distribution)
                                                                      1
            X
         =                 ∥D] real (wuℓ | wu<ℓ ) − H (wuℓ | wu<ℓ )∥
                     E                                  1              tvd + 0
                         u    ^ real
             ℓ∈[3nr−1 ] w <ℓ ∼D
                                                          (by Observation 6.6-(iii), distribution of wend is the same)
                X
         =                     E            ]
                                           ∥D real (wx | wstart ) − H (wx | wstart )∥                       (by Observation 6.6-(ii))
                                                                     1                tvd
                                  ^
                          wstart ∼D real
             ℓ∈[3nr−1 ]
                                                 r
                                          s3/2
         ⩽ (3nr−1 ) · 2 · (nr−1 ) ·                                                                                       (by Claim 6.7)
                                       γr + 1
                            r
                                 s
         = 6 · (nr−1 )5/2 ·          .
                              γr + 1

6.4     Inner Inputs and Public Messages have Low Correlation
In this subsection, we prove Lemma 6.3 that bounds the distance between distributions H1 and H2 ,
from Distribution 7 and Distribution 8, respectively. We recall the definition of these distributions:
Distribution H1 :                                                           Distribution H2 :

Gr−1 × (ids, J all , Kall , Lall )                                          Gr−1 × (ids, J all , Kall , Lall )
    ą                                                                           ą
×(        N xpub , Mxpub | ids, aux, N xin )                                 ×(       N xpub , Mxpub | ids, aux)
      x∈Gr−1                                                                         x∈Gr−1
       ą        ą                                                                     ą        ą
 ×(                    (Mxin (y) | ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub , N xin )        ×(                       (Mxin (y) | ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub , N xin )
      x∈Gr−1 y∈Gr−1                                                                  x∈Gr−1 y∈Gr−1
              y ∈X
                /                                                                            y ∈X
                                                                                               /
       ą                                                                              ą
 ×(            N xrest | Mxin , N xin , ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub ).          ×(               N xrest | Mxin , N xin , ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub ).
      x∈Gr−1                                                                         x∈Gr−1



    The only difference is that the conditioning on N xin when sampling some messages publicly in
the second line in distribution H1 is removed in H2 . We show that the correlation between messages
sampled publicly and N xin is small in this subsection.
Observation 6.8. For every inner vertex x,

                                                        N xpub ⊥ N xin | ids, aux.

                                                                      45
Proof. We know that N xpub is comprised of N x→Y [Lx→Y  t,i ] for every other layer Y with x ∈/ Y , type
t ∈ [r] ∪ {0} and value i ∈ [nr−1 ]. All these values are deterministically fixed to be t for each
t ∈ [r] ∪ {0} by definition of Lx→Y
                                t,i . Thus, N xpub is independent of N xin conditioned on ids, aux.

Claim 6.9. For every inner vertex x, we have,
                                                                   1
                     I(Mxpub , N xpub ; N xin | ids, aux) ⩽             · s · 2γr · (r + 1) · nr−1 .
                                                               (αr + 1)

Proof. First, we have,

       I(Mxpub , N xpub ; N xin | ids, aux)
                  = I(N xpub ; N xin | ids, aux) + I(Mxpub ; N xin | ids, aux, N xpub )
                                                     (by the chain rule of mutual information Fact D.1-(5))
                  = 0 + I(Mxpub ; N xin | ids, aux, N xpub )            (by Observation 6.8 and by Fact D.1-(2))
                  = I(Mxpub ; N xin | idX , idY , idZ , J all , Kall , Lall , N xpub ).   (expanding aux and ids)
                        x        x    Y       Z      X     Y     Z                      x
                  = I(Mpub ; N [id ∪ id ] | id , id , id , J all , Kall , Lall , N pub ).
                                        (as N xin is fixed by N x [idY ∪ idZ ] when the identities are unique)

We use Wrest to denote the random variables idX , Kall , Lall , N xpub and all random variables in J all
barring J x . These random variables are bundled together as they are not relevant to the rest of
the argument.

                  I(Mxpub ; N x [idY ∪ idZ ] | idX , idY , idZ , J all , Kall , Lall , N xpub )
                          = I(Mxpub ; N x [idY ∪ idZ ] | idY , idZ , J x , Wrest )
                          = I(Mxpub ; N x [idY ∪ idZ ] | idY ∪ idZ , J x , Wrest ),

where for the last equality, we have used that idY ∪ idZ is fixed by idY , idZ and vice-versa. This is
because idY = {idY ∪ idZ } ∩ Y and idZ = {idY ∪ idZ } ∩ Z as they are disjoint. We continue,

                          = I(Mxpub ; N x [idY ∪ idZ ] | idY ∪ idZ , J x ∪ {idY ∪ idZ }, Wrest ),

where, the last step is true because J x ∪{idY ∪idZ }, idY ∪idZ is fixed by J x , idY ∪idZ and vice-versa
(the elements in J x are disjoint from all the elements in idY ∪ idZ by definition).
    We know that J x ∪ {idY ∪ idZ } is a collection of size αr + 1, where each set has 2nr−1 elements
(nr−1 ones from each of Y and Z). We condition on this collection being sets J = (J1 , J2 , . . . , Jαr +1 )
in the next step and have,

        I(Mxpub ; N x [idY ∪ idZ ] | idY ∪ idZ , J x ∪ {idY ∪ idZ }, Wrest )
         =            E         I(Mxpub ; N x [idY ∪ idZ ] | idY ∪ idZ , J x ∪ {idY ∪ idZ } = J , Wrest ).
              x      Y    Z
             J ∪{id ∪id }=J
                                                         (by the definition of conditional mutual information)

We prove the statement separately for each collection J .
    Now, we argue that conditioned on J x ∪ {idY ∪ idZ } = J , the value of idY ∪ idZ is uniform over
all the sets in collection J . Random variable J x is made of αr disjoint collections, each with nr−1
elements from each of Y and Z. Moreover, both J x and idY ∪ idZ are chosen uniformly at random

                                                             46
such that the sets in J x and idY ∪ idZ are disjoint. Hence, given that J x ∪ {idY ∪ idZ } = J ,
idY ∪ idZ can be any set in this collection chosen uniformly. We continue as,

        I(Mxpub ; N x [idY ∪ idZ ] | idY ∪ idZ , J x ∪ {idY ∪ idZ } = J , Wrest )
              1        X
         =        ·         I(Mxpub ; N x [Ji ] | Wrest , idY ∪ idZ = Ji , J x ∪ {idY ∪ idZ } = J ).
           αr + 1
                          i∈[αr +1]


   We will prove that the joint distribution of all the random variables in the mutual information
term is independent of the event {idY ∪ idZ } = Ji conditioned on the event J x ∪ {idY ∪ idZ } = J .
We will go over the terms one by one, and for each term, we also condition on the preceding terms.

  • N x [Ji ] for i ∈ [αr + 1]: all these subsets are sampled from Din independently of each other.
    The value of set idY ∪ idZ inside collection J has no correlation with the joint distribution of
    these inputs.

  • N x→Y , N x→Z : this is the input of vertex x. These variables can only be correlated to the
    event idY ∪ idZ = Ji through random variables N x [Ji ] for i ∈ [αr + 1], which we have just
    argued is independent of the event.

  • Wrest : this has random variable N xpub , which are channel types of x to vertices disjoint from
    collection J (and independent of what happens inside J ), and the other random variables
    idX , Kall , Lall , all J w for w ̸= x. These other variables are disjoint from J x ∪ {idY ∪ idZ }, and
    are independent of the value of set idY ∪ idZ inside collection J .

  • Mxpub : these are the messages that x sends to specific indices in Lx→Y
                                                                          t,j  for each other layer Y ,
    type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0} and j ∈ [nr−1 ]. We have argued that the input to vertex x is independent of
    the identity of idY ∪ idZ inside collection J . As the protocol πr is deterministic, Mxpub is fixed
    by N x→Y , N x→Z , id(x), and is independent of the event idY ∪ idZ = Ji .

Thus, the joint distribution of all the random variables is independent of the value of {idY ∪ idZ }
inside collection J . The mutual information term then becomes,
    1         X
        ·               I(Mxpub ; N x [Ji ] | Wrest , idY ∪ idZ = Ji , J x ∪ {idY ∪ idZ } = J )
 αr + 1
            i∈[αr +1]
                1           X
        =           ·                 I(Mxpub ; N x [Ji ] | Wrest , J x ∪ {idY ∪ idZ } = J )
             αr + 1
                          i∈[αr +1]
             1              X
        ⩽        ·                    I(Mxpub ; N x [Ji ] | Wrest , N x [J1 ], . . . , N x [Ji−1 ], J x ∪ {idY ∪ idZ } = J ),
          αr + 1
                          i∈[αr +1]


where for the last step we have used that N x [Ji ] ⊥ N x [Jk ] | Wrest , J x ∪ {idY ∪ idZ } = J for any
i, k ∈ [αr + 1] with i ̸= k, and thus we can apply Proposition D.2. The independence of N x [Ji ] and
N x [Jk ] follows because, conditioned on J x ∪ {idY ∪ idZ } = J , both these variables are sampled
from Din independently of each other. The value of Wrest does not affect this independence either,
as Wrest is made of Kall , Lall , idX , J w for w ̸= x, all of which are disjoint from J and N xpub
consisting of channel types to x disjoint from collection J . We proceed with the proof as follows.
          1         X
              ·               I(Mxpub ; N x [Ji ] | Wrest , N x [J1 ], . . . , N x [Ji−1 ], J x ∪ {idY ∪ idZ } = J )
       αr + 1
                  i∈[αr +1]


                                                                47
             1
        =        · I(Mxpub ; N x [J1 ], N x [J2 ], . . . , N x [Jαr +1 ] | Wrest , J x ∪ {idY ∪ idZ } = J )
          αr + 1
                                              (by the chain rule of mutual information in Fact D.1-(5))
             1
        ⩽        · H(Mxpub | Wrest , J x ∪ {idY ∪ idZ } = J )                                     (by Fact D.1-(3))
          αr + 1
             1
        ⩽        · s · 2γr · (r + 1) · nr−1 .
          αr + 1
            (by Fact D.1-(1), Observation 5.1, and as the length of each message is bounded by s)

 To finish the proof, we get,
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                   1
            I(Mxpub , N xpub ; N xin | ids, aux) ⩽             E                       · s · 2γr · (r + 1) · nr−1
                                                       J x ∪{idY ∪idZ }=J       αr + 1
                                                          1
                                                   =          · s · 2γr · (r + 1) · nr−1 .
                                                       αr + 1

      We are ready to prove Lemma 6.3 using the weak chain rule of total variation distance. We
 begin by defining the random variables on which we apply weak chain rule. These random variables
 are local to this subsection and may be used for different purposes later. (See Appendix B for a
 list of global random variables.)

   • Variable wstart : this is the joint random variable Gr−1 , ids, J all , Kall , Lall .

   • Variables wx for each inner vertices x: this is the joint random variable N xpub , Mxpub .

   • Variables wend : joint random variable Mxin , N xrest for each inner vertex x.

    We use the following simple observations. They are fairly direct, and are not justified further.
 Observation 6.10. About random variables wstart , wx for each inner vertex x and wend , in distri-
 butions H1 and H2 , we have,

 (i) In H1 and H2 , the distribution of random variable wstart is the same.
                                                                   ′
(ii) In H1 and H2 , the random variables ww and ww are independent of each other conditioned on
     wstart for inner vertices w ̸= w′ (where w, w′ could be in the same layer or in different layers).
     This is because all the random variables ids, aux and N xin for each inner vertex x are fixed when
     conditioned on wstart .

(iii) In H1 , random variable wx is independent of wstart when conditioned on N xin , ids and aux.

(iv) In H2 , random variable wx is independent of wstart when conditioned on ids and aux.

 (v) Conditioned on any choice of wstart and wx for each inner vertex x, the distribution of random
     variable wend is the same in H1 and H2 .

     We prove the following intermediate claim that states that the distribution of wx is close in
 total variation distance in H1 and H2 .
 Claim 6.11. For every inner vertex x,
                                                                                   s
                                                                                       s · γr · (r + 1) · nr−1
                    E           ∥H1 (wx | wstart ) − H2 (wx | wstart )∥tvd ⩽                                   .
                wstart ∼H   1                                                                   αr + 1

                                                              48
Proof. We know from Observation 6.10-(iii) that,

                                    H1 (wx | wstart ) = N xpub , Mxpub | ids, aux, N xin .                                  (8)

Similarly in distribution H2 from Observation 6.10-(iv), we get,

                                          H2 (wx | wstart ) = N xpub , Mxpub | ids, aux.                                    (9)

We can write the total variation distance as,

             E        ∥H1 (wx | wstart ) − H2 (wx | wstart )∥tvd
         wstart ∼H1
                    1                  p
                 ⩽√ ·          E          D(H1 (wx | wstart ) || H2 (wx | wstart ))
                     2 w ∼H1
                           start

                                                                          (by in Pinsker’s inequality Fact D.8)
                    1    r
                 ⩽√ ·              E      D(H1 (wx | wstart ) || H2 (wx | wstart ))
                     2       wstart ∼H1
                                                         (by Jensen’s inequality and concavity of square root)
                    1 r
                 =√ ·               E      D((N xpub , Mxpub | ids, aux, N xin ) || (N xpub , Mxpub | ids, aux))
                     2       ids,aux,N xin

                                                                                              (by Eq (8) and Eq (9))
                    1    q
                 = √ · I(N xpub , Mxpub ; N xin | ids, aux)
                     2
                                   (by relation between KL-Divergence and mutual information Fact D.4)
                   r
                         1
                 ⩽               · s · γr · (r + 1) · nr−1 .                                           (by Claim 6.9)
                      αr + 1

   We conclude this subsection by proving Lemma 6.3.

Proof of Lemma 6.3. Firstly, by Observation 6.10-(i), we know that,

                                              ∥H1 (wstart ) − H2 (wstart )∥tvd = 0.                                        (10)

We follow the lexicographic ordering on the vertices to order the random variables wx for inner
vertices x ∈ Gr−1 . Let u1 , u2 , . . . , u3nr−1 be the inner vertices with the ordering. We use wu<ℓ to
denote the joint random variable wu1 , wu2 , . . . , wuℓ−1 for ℓ ∈ [3nr−1 ]. We use wall to denote all wuℓ
for ℓ ∈ [3nr−1 ].
   By Observation 6.10-(ii), we have, for any ℓ ∈ [3nr−1 ],
                                                     u<ℓ
     E       ∥H1 (wuℓ | wu<ℓ ) − H2 (wuℓ |w                )∥tvd =        E       ∥H1 (wuℓ | wstart ) − H2 (wuℓ | wstart )∥tvd
  wu<ℓ ∼H1                                                           wstart ∼H1
                                                                     s
                                                                         s · γr · (r + 1) · nr−1
                                                                ⩽                                ,                         (11)
                                                                                  αr + 1

where for the inequality we used Claim 6.11. Lastly, from Observation 6.10-(v), we have,

                             E           ∥H1 (wend | wstart , wall ) − H2 (wend | wstart , wall )∥tvd = 0.                 (12)
                      wstart ,wall ∼H1

We can complete the proof easily now.

  ∥H1 − H2 ∥tvd

                                                                 49
                                                               X
            ⩽ ∥H1 (wstart ) − H2 (wstart )∥tvd +                            E       ∥H1 (wuℓ | wu<ℓ ) − H2 (wuℓ | wu<ℓ )∥tvd
                                                                         wu<ℓ ∼H1
                                                            ℓ∈[3nr−1 ]
                                                    end
                    +         E        ∥H1 (w    | wstart , wall ) − H2 (wend | wstart , wall )∥tvd                      (by Fact D.6)
                      wstart ,wall ∼H1
                    X
            =             u
                              E      ∥H1 (wuℓ | wu<ℓ ) − H2 (wuℓ | wu<ℓ )∥tvd
                              w <ℓ ∼H1
                 ℓ∈[3nr−1 ]
                                                               (by Eq (10) and Eq (12) first and last terms are zero)
                           s
                               s · γr · (r + 1) · nr−1
            ⩽ 3nr−1 ·                                  .                                                                   (by Eq (11))
                                        αr + 1

6.5      Inner Messages and Inner Inputs have Low Correlation
In this subsection, we prove Lemma 6.4, which bounds the total variation distance between H2
from Distribution 8 and Dfake from Distribution 6.
 Distribution H2 :                                                       Distribution Dfake :

 Gr−1 × (ids, J all , Kall , Lall )                                      Gr−1 × (ids, J all , Kall , Lall )
      ą                                                                       ą
 ×(        N xpub , Mxpub | ids, aux)                                    ×(        N xpub , Mxpub | ids, aux)
       x∈Gr−1                                                                  x∈Gr−1
        ą        ą                 ids,aux,N x ,                                ą        ą                    ids,aux,N xpub ,
  ×(                    (Mxin (y) | Mx ,Npub  x )                         ×(                    (Mxin (y) | Mx                 )
                                        pub   in                                                                pub ,type(x,y)
       x∈Gr−1 y∈Gr−1                                                        x∈Gr−1 y∈Gr−1
               y ∈X
                 /                                                                  y ∈X
                                                                                      /
        ą                                                                       ą
 ×(             N xrest | Mxin , N xin , ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub ).      ×(            N xrest | Mxin , N xin , ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub ).
       x∈Gr−1                                                                  x∈Gr−1



   The final step to get to distribution Dfake is that in sampling Mxin (y) for each inner vertex x
                   / X, in H2 , we condition on N xin , whereas in Dfake , there is only conditioning
and inner vertex y ∈
on type(x, y). We will show that the conditioning on the other random variables in N xin can be
removed without much loss in the total variation distance.
Claim 6.12. For every inner vertex x and yi ∈ Gr−1 , we have,
                                                                                                          s
                           I(Mxin (yi ) ; N xin | ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub , type(x, yi )) ⩽                  .
                                                                                                       βr + 1

Proof. We start by using the definition of conditional mutual information to write,
                 I(Mxin (yi ) ; N xin | ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub , type(x, yi ))
                           =        E          I(Mxin (yi ) ; N xin | ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub , type(x, yi ) = t).
                               type(x,yi )=t

Let Et denote the event that type(x, yi ) = t. We prove the statement separately for each t ∈ [r]∪{0}.
                   I(Mxin (yi ) ; N xin | ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub , Et )
                              = I(Mxin (yi ) ; N x [idY ∪ idZ ] | idX , idY , idZ , aux, N xpub , Mxpub , Et ).
                                                          (expanding ids, and as N xin is fixed by N x [idY ∪ idZ ])

Let id(−yi ) denote the random variables idZ and id(y ′ ) for y ′ ̸= yi ∈ Gr−1 , and Wrest denote the
random variables idX , J all , Lall , Mxpub , N xpub and all random variables in Kall barring Kt,i
                                                                                               x→Y
                                                                                                   .

I(Mxin (yi ) ; N x [idY ∪ idZ ] | idX , idY , idZ , aux, N xpub , Mxpub , Et )

                                                                   50
       = I(Mxin (yi ) ; N x [idY ∪ idZ ] | idY , idZ , Kx→Y
                                                        t,i , Wrest , Et )
       = I(Mxin (yi ) ; N x [id(yi ) ∪ id(−yi )] | id(−yi ), id(yi ), Kx→Y
                                                                       t,i , Wrest , Et )
                                                                               (by definition of Wrest , id(−yi ))
       = I(Mxin (yi ) ; N x [id(−yi )] | id(−yi ), id(yi ), Kx→Y
                                                              t,i , Wrest , Et )
                                                            (as N x [id(yi )] is fixed to be t conditioned on Et )
       = I(Mxin (yi ) ; N x [id(−yi )] | id(−yi ), id(yi ), Kx→Y
                                                             t,i ∪ {id(−yi )}, Wrest , Et )
                              (as id(−yi ), Kt,i is fixed by id(−yi ), Kx→Y
                                              x→Y
                                                                            t,i ∪ {id(−yi )} and vice-versa)
       =                E          I(Mxin (yi ) ; N x [id(−yi )] | id(−yi ), id(yi ), Wrest , Kx→Y
                                                                                               t,i ∪ {id(−yi )} = K, Et ).
            K∼Kx→Y
               t,i ∪{id(−yi )}
                                                           (by the definition of conditional mutual information)

We prove the statement separately for each collection K = {K1 , K2 , . . . , Kβr +1 }. We know K is a
collection of βr + 1 sets, each of which has nr−1 − 1 elements from Y \ id(yi ) and nr elements from
Z. We argue that id(−yi ) is uniform over all the sets in collection K. This is because Kx→Y t,i  is a
collection of βr elements disjoint from id(−yi ) chosen uniformly at random. Variable id(−yi ) is also
chosen uniformly at random from sets with nr−1 − 1 elements from Y and nr−1 elements from Z.
                                x→Y
   Let Econd be the event that Kt,i ∪ {id(−yi )} = K and Et happen. We have,

                I(Mxin (yi ) ; N x [id(−yi )] | id(−yi ), id(yi ), Wrest , Econd )
                      1         X
                 =          ·          I(Mxin (yi ) ; N x [Kj ] | id(yi ), Wrest , id(−yi ) = Kj , Econd ),
                   βr + 1
                                 j∈[βr +1]

by uniformity of id(−yi ) argued above.
    Conditioned on Econd , the joint distribution of all the random variables in the mutual information
term are independent of the event id(−yi ) = Kj . Let us list these random variables, and argue in
steps (in each step, we condition on everything in the previous steps also).

 • N x [Kℓ ] for all ℓ ∈ [βr + 1]: these random variables are all distributed so that N x [Kℓ ∪ {id(yi )}]
   is sampled from Din , conditioned on Econd . The value of id(−yi ) among the βr + 1 sets is
   irrelevant to the distribution.

 • N x→Y , N x→Z : this is the input of x, and it depends on the event id(−yi ) = Kj only through
   N x [Kℓ ] for ℓ ∈ [βr + 1], which we have argued is independent of the value of id(−yi ).

 • Mx→Y , Mx→Z : as the protocol is deterministic, and the input of x is independent of the value
   of id(−yi ), the messages are independent of the event also.

 • idX , J all , Lall and Kall barring Kx→Y
                                        t,i : all these sets are disjoint from sets in collection K, and
   therefore are independent of what happens inside K.

 • Wrest : this random variable is comprised of idX , J all , Lall , Mxpub , N xpub and Kall barring Kx→Y
                                                                                                      t,i ,
   all of which we have argued are independent of event id(−yi ) = Kj .

The joint distribution of all these random variables is independent of the event id(−yi ) = Kj . We
can continue the proof as,
   1         X
       ·               I(Mxin (yi ) ; N x [Kj ] | id(yi ), Wrest , id(−yi ) = Kj , Econd )
βr + 1
           j∈[βr +1]


                                                               51
               1         X
        =          ·               I(Mxin (yi ) ; N x [Kj ] | id(yi ), Wrest , Econd )
            βr + 1
                       j∈[βr +1]
     (by the independence of the joint distribution of remaining variables and event id(−yi ) = Kj )
             1     X
       ⩽         ·      I(Mxin (yi ) ; N x [Kj ] | N x [K1 ], N x [K2 ], . . . , N x [Kj−1 ], id(yi ), Wrest , Econd ),
          βr + 1
                       j∈[βr +1]


 where we have used that N x [Kj ] ⊥ N x [Kℓ ] conditioned on id(yi ), Wrest and Econd for ℓ ̸= j, so we
 can apply Proposition D.2. The independence holds because for ℓ ∈ [βr + 1], N x [Kℓ ] is sampled so
 that N x [Kℓ ∪ {id(yi )}] is distributed according Din independently other ℓ′ ∈ [βr + 1] conditioned
 on id(yi ), Wrest and the event Econd . We continue

             1
        =        · I(Mxin (yi ) ; N x [K1 ], N x [K2 ], . . . , N x [Kβr +1 ] | id(yi ), Wrest , Econd )
          βr + 1
                                                        (by chain rule of mutual information Fact D.1-(5))
             1
        ⩽        · H(Mxin (yi ) | id(yi ), Wrest , Econd )                                           (by Fact D.1-(3))
          βr + 1
             1
        ⩽        · s.                               (as message length is bounded by s and Fact D.1-(1))
          βr + 1

     We can prove Lemma 6.4 again through weak chain rule of total variation distance from
 Fact D.6. We first define the random variables we perform chain rule over. These are local to
 this subsection and may be used for different purposes later. (See Appendix B for a list of global
 random variables.)

   • Variable wstart : joint random variable Gr−1 , ids, aux and N xpub , Mxpub for each inner vertex x .

   • Variables wx→y for each pair of inner vertices x, y in different layers: random variable Mxin (y),
     corresponding to the message x sends to y.

   • Variables wend : joint random variable N xrest for each inner vertex x.

     For each inner vertex x, there are 2nr−1 other inner vertices in a different layer than X. Hence,
 totally, there are 6(nr−1 )2 random variables of the form wx→y . Let us define an ordering on these
 6(nr−1 )2 random variables. We use the lexicographic ordering on x, followed by that of y to order
                                      2
 them. Let w1 , w2 , . . . , w6(nr−1 ) be these random variables in order.
   We look at the specific distribution of these random variables in H2 and Dfake more carefully.
 We state the following simple observations without proof.
 Observation 6.13. About random variables wstart , wx→y for each pair of inner vertices x, y in
 different layers and wend , in distributions H2 and Dfake , we have,

 (i) In H2 and Dfake , the distribution of random variable wstart is the same.

(ii) In H2 and Dfake , the random variables wi and wj are independent of each other conditioned on
     wstart for any i ̸= j, i, j ∈ [6(nr−1 )2 ]. Random variable wx→y is sampled only conditioned on
     ids, aux and N xin , N xpub , Mxpub for each inner vertex x, all of which are fixed when conditioned
     on variable wstart .

(iii) In H2 , random variable wx→y is independent of the rest of wstart when conditioned on N xin , ids, aux,
      N xpub and Mxpub inside wstart .

                                                                52
(iv) In Dfake , random variable wx→y is independent of the rest of wstart when conditioned on
     ids, aux, N xpub , type(x, y) and Mxpub inside wstart .

(v) Conditioned on any choice of wstart and wx→y all pairs of inner vertices x, y in different layers,
    the distribution of random variable wend is the same in H2 and Dfake .
Claim 6.14. For any ℓ ∈ [6(nr−1 )2 ], we have,
                                                                                                                                                 r
                                        ℓ        1            ℓ−1        start         fake      ℓ      1          ℓ−1         start                     s
           E                  ∥H2 (w | w , . . . , w                ,w           )−D          (w | w , . . . , w          ,w           )∥tvd ⩽                 .
wstart ,w1 ,...,wℓ−1 ∼H   2                                                                                                                          2(βr + 1)

Proof. Let wℓ = wx→y . Firstly, by Observation 6.13-(ii), we have,

                                        H2 (wℓ | w1 , . . . , wℓ−1 , wstart ) = H2 (wℓ | wstart ),                            and
                                        fake         ℓ   1           ℓ−1         start           fake       ℓ    start
                                   D           (w | w , . . . , w           ,w           )=D            (w | w           ).

Hence the total variation distance term becomes,

                              E                ∥H2 (wℓ | w1 , . . . , wℓ−1 , wstart ) − Dfake (wℓ | w1 , . . . , wℓ−1 , wstart )∥tvd
               wstart ,w1 ,...,wℓ−1 ∼H2

                        =           E          ∥H2 (wℓ | wstart ) − Dfake (wℓ | wstart )∥tvd       (by the equalities above)
                               wstart ∼H2
                         1
                                                    q
                        ⩽√ ·                   E      D(H2 (wℓ | wstart ) || Dfake (wℓ | wstart ))
                          2 wstart ∼H2
                                                                                                         (by Pinsker’s inequality in Fact D.8)
                         1
                                        r
                        ⩽√ ·                         E       D(H2 (wℓ | wstart ) || Dfake (wℓ | wstart ))
                          2                 wstart ∼H2
                                                                             (by Jensen’s inequality and concavity of square root)
                         1
                                        r
                        =√ ·                         E       D((Mxin (y) | N xin , N xpub , Mxpub , ids, aux) || Dfake (wℓ | wstart ))
                          2                 wstart ∼H2
                                                                             (by Observation 6.13-(iii))
                    v
                 1 u                         N x ,ids,aux,           ids,aux,Mxpub ,
               = √ ·u       E x D(Mxin (y) | N xin ,Mx || Mxin (y) | N x ,type(x,y)  )
                  2 t ids,aux,N ,              pub
                                                in
                                                       pub             pub
                                  Mx      x
                                   pub ,N pub

                                                                                     (by Observation 6.13-(iv))
                          1 q
                        = √ · I(Mxin (y) ; N xin | ids, aux, N xpub , Mxpub , type(x, y))
                           2
                             (by relation between KL-Divergence and mutual information in Fact D.4)
                             r
                          1       s
                        ⩽√ ·          .                                                        (by Claim 6.12)
                           2   βr + 1

    Proof of Lemma 6.4 is simple now.

Proof of Lemma 6.4. We have,

∥H2 − Dfake ∥tvd
         = ∥H2 (wstart ) − Dfake (wstart )∥tvd
                     X
              +              ∥H2 (wℓ | wstart , w1 , . . . , wℓ−1 ) − Dfake (wℓ | wstart , w1 , . . . , wℓ−1 )∥tvd
                      ℓ∈[6(nr−1 )2 ]


                                                                                  53
                                                                     2                                               2
                       + ∥H2 (wend | wstart , w1 , . . . , w6(nr−1 ) ) − Dfake (wend | wstart , w1 , . . . , w6(nr−1 ) )∥tvd
                                                                                                          (by Fact D.6)
                      X
                                 ℓ    start    1            ℓ−1        fake ℓ    start    1           ℓ−1
        =0+               ∥H2 (w | w        , w , . . . , w ) − D (w | w               , w , . . . , w )∥tvd
                 ℓ∈[6(nr−1 )2 ]
                                                             2                                               2
                + ∥H2 (wend | wstart , w1 , . . . , w6(nr−1 ) ) − Dfake (wend | wstart , w1 , . . . , w6(nr−1 ) )∥tvd
                                                                                            (by Observation 6.13-(i))
                X
        =             ∥H2 (wℓ | wstart , w1 , . . . , wℓ−1 ) − Dfake (wℓ | wstart , w1 , . . . , wℓ−1 )∥tvd + 0
            ℓ∈[6(nr−1 )2 ]
                                                                                           (by Observation 6.13-(v))
                             r
                                     s
        ⩽ 6(nr−1 )2 ·                      .                                                           (by Claim 6.14)
                                 2(βr + 1)

    This concludes the analysis of our round elimination protocol and the proof of Lemma 5.6, which
in turn, as shown before, finalizes the entire proof of Lemma 4.16 and consequently Theorem 1.


Acknowledgements
We thank Keren Censor-Hillel and Seri Khoury for introducing us to this problem through open
problem sessions and discussions at Dagstuhl Seminar “Graph Algorithms: Distributed Meets
Dynamic” and Simons Institute program on “Sublinear Algorithms”. We also thank Rotem Oshman
for helpful conversations on prior work in related models. We are additionally grateful to Keren
Censor-Hillel, Seth Pettie and Thatchaphol Saranurak for many helpful comments and pointers to
the literature, and to Artur Czumaj for the suggestion to add Appendix A to this paper.
    Finally, we would like to express our gratitude to the organizers of the above Dagstuhl Seminar
and Simons Institute program as well as “New York Theory Day (Fall 2024)” that initiated and
facilitated of some of these discussions.

References
[A23]          S. Assadi. Recent advances in multi-pass graph streaming lower bounds. SIGACT
               News, 54(3):48–75, 2023. 2, 4

[ABK+ 25] S. Assadi, S. Behnezhad, C. Konrad, K. K. Naidu, and J. Sundaresan. Settling the
          pass complexity of approximate matchings in dynamic graph streams. In Y. Azar
          and D. Panigrahi, editors, Proceedings of the 2025 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
          Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2025, New Orleans, LA, USA, January 12-15, 2025, pages
          864–904. SIAM, 2025. 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9

[ACK19]        S. Assadi, Y. Chen, and S. Khanna. Polynomial pass lower bounds for graph streaming
               algorithms. In M. Charikar and E. Cohen, editors, Proceedings of the 51st Annual ACM
               SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2019, Phoenix, AZ, USA, June
               23-26, 2019, pages 265–276. ACM, 2019. 2

[ACKL20] A. Abboud, K. Censor-Hillel, S. Khoury, and C. Lenzen. Fooling views: a new lower
         bound technique for distributed computations under congestion. Distributed Comput.,
         33(6):545–559, 2020. 1, 2, 7, 11



                                                            54
[ACKP21] A. Abboud, K. Censor-Hillel, S. Khoury, and A. Paz. Smaller cuts, higher lower bounds.
         ACM Trans. Algorithms, 17(4):30:1–30:40, 2021. 7

[ADV+ 25] J. Alman, R. Duan, V. Vassilevska Williams, Y. Xu, Z. Xu, and R. Zhou. More
          asymmetry yields faster matrix multiplication. In Y. Azar and D. Panigrahi, editors,
          Proceedings of the 2025 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA
          2025, New Orleans, LA, USA, January 12-15, 2025, pages 2005–2039. SIAM, 2025. 3

[AGL+ 24] S. Assadi, P. Ghosh, B. Loff, P. Mittal, and S. Mukhopadhyay. Polynomial pass semi-
          streaming lower bounds for k-cores and degeneracy. In R. Santhanam, editor, 39th
          Computational Complexity Conference, CCC 2024, July 22-25, 2024, Ann Arbor, MI,
          USA, volume 300 of LIPIcs, pages 7:1–7:16. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
          Informatik, 2024. 4

[AKNS24] S. Assadi, C. Konrad, K. K. Naidu, and J. Sundaresan. O(log log n) passes is optimal for
         semi-streaming maximal independent set. In B. Mohar, I. Shinkar, and R. O’Donnell,
         editors, Proceedings of the 56th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
         STOC 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, June 24-28, 2024, pages 847–858. ACM, 2024.
         2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9

[AKO20]    S. Assadi, G. Kol, and R. Oshman. Lower bounds for distributed sketching of maximal
           matchings and maximal independent sets. In Y. Emek and C. Cachin, editors, PODC
           ’20: ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, Virtual Event, Italy,
           August 3-7, 2020, pages 79–88. ACM, 2020. 7

[AKSY20] S. Assadi, G. Kol, R. R. Saxena, and H. Yu. Multi-pass graph streaming lower bounds
         for cycle counting, max-cut, matching size, and other problems. In S. Irani, editor, 61st
         IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2020, Durham,
         NC, USA, November 16-19, 2020, pages 354–364. IEEE, 2020. 4

[AKZ22]    S. Assadi, G. Kol, and Z. Zhang. Rounds vs communication tradeoffs for maximal inde-
           pendent sets. In 63rd IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
           FOCS 2022, Denver, CO, USA, October 31 - November 3, 2022, pages 1193–1204.
           IEEE, 2022. 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 18

[AKZ24]    S. Assadi, G. Kol, and Z. Zhang. Optimal multi-pass lower bounds for MST in dy-
           namic streams. In B. Mohar, I. Shinkar, and R. O’Donnell, editors, Proceedings of the
           56th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2024, Vancouver, BC,
           Canada, June 24-28, 2024, pages 835–846. ACM, 2024. 4

[ANRW15] N. Alon, N. Nisan, R. Raz, and O. Weinstein. Welfare maximization with limited
         interaction. In V. Guruswami, editor, IEEE 56th Annual Symposium on Foundations
         of Computer Science, FOCS 2015, Berkeley, CA, USA, 17-20 October, 2015, pages
         1499–1512. IEEE Computer Society, 2015. 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 18

[AR20]     S. Assadi and R. Raz. Near-quadratic lower bounds for two-pass graph streaming algo-
           rithms. In S. Irani, editor, 61st IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
           Science, FOCS 2020, Durham, NC, USA, November 16-19, 2020, pages 342–353. IEEE,
           2020. 2, 4




                                               55
[AS23]     S. Assadi and J. Sundaresan. Hidden permutations to the rescue: Multi-pass stream-
           ing lower bounds for approximate matchings. In 64th IEEE Annual Symposium on
           Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2023, Santa Cruz, CA, USA, November 6-9,
           2023, pages 909–932. IEEE, 2023. 4

[ASW19]    S. Assadi, X. Sun, and O. Weinstein. Massively parallel algorithms for finding well-
           connected components in sparse graphs. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Symposium
           on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC ’19, page 461–470, New York, NY,
           USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/3293611.3331596. 64

[BO17]     M. Braverman and R. Oshman. A rounds vs. communication tradeoff for multi-party
           set disjointness. In C. Umans, editor, 58th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations
           of Computer Science, FOCS 2017, Berkeley, CA, USA, October 15-17, 2017, pages
           144–155. IEEE Computer Society, 2017. 4

[CCGL21] K. Censor-Hillel, Y. Chang, F. L. Gall, and D. Leitersdorf. Tight distributed listing
         of cliques. In D. Marx, editor, Proceedings of the 2021 ACM-SIAM Symposium on
         Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2021, Virtual Conference, January 10 - 13, 2021, pages
         2878–2891. SIAM, 2021. 4

[Cen22]    K. Censor-Hillel. Distributed subgraph finding: Progress and challenges.          CoRR,
           abs/2203.06597, 2022. 1, 4

[CHS24]    Y. Chang, S. Huang, and H. Su. Deterministic expander routing: Faster and more ver-
           satile. In R. Gelles, D. Olivetti, and P. Kuznetsov, editors, Proceedings of the 43rd ACM
           Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC 2024, Nantes, France, June
           17-21, 2024, pages 194–204. ACM, 2024. 1, 3, 4

[CK18]     A. Czumaj and C. Konrad. Detecting cliques in CONGEST networks. In U. Schmid and
           J. Widder, editors, 32nd International Symposium on Distributed Computing, DISC
           2018, New Orleans, LA, USA, October 15-19, 2018, volume 121 of LIPIcs, pages 16:1–
           16:15. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018. 4

[CKK+ 15] K. Censor-Hillel, P. Kaski, J. H. Korhonen, C. Lenzen, A. Paz, and J. Suomela. Alge-
          braic methods in the congested clique. In C. Georgiou and P. G. Spirakis, editors, Pro-
          ceedings of the 2015 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC
          2015, Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain, July 21 - 23, 2015, pages 143–152. ACM, 2015.
          3

[CKP+ 21] L. Chen, G. Kol, D. Paramonov, R. R. Saxena, Z. Song, and H. Yu. Almost optimal
          super-constant-pass streaming lower bounds for reachability. In S. Khuller and V. V.
          Williams, editors, STOC ’21: 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of
          Computing, Virtual Event, Italy, June 21-25, 2021, pages 570–583. ACM, 2021. 2, 4

[CKP+ 23] L. Chen, G. Kol, D. Paramonov, R. R. Saxena, Z. Song, and H. Yu. Towards multi-
          pass streaming lower bounds for optimal approximation of max-cut. In N. Bansal and
          V. Nagarajan, editors, Proceedings of the 2023 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
          Algorithms, SODA 2023, Florence, Italy, January 22-25, 2023, pages 878–924. SIAM,
          2023. 4




                                                56
[CLV22]     K. Censor-Hillel, D. Leitersdorf, and D. Vulakh. Deterministic near-optimal distributed
            listing of cliques. In A. Milani and P. Woelfel, editors, PODC ’22: ACM Symposium on
            Principles of Distributed Computing, Salerno, Italy, July 25 - 29, 2022, pages 271–280.
            ACM, 2022. 1, 3, 4

[CMGS25] D. Chen, S. Meierhans, M. P. Gutenberg, and T. Saranurak. Parallel and distributed
         expander decomposition: Simple, fast, and near-optimal. In Y. Azar and D. Panigrahi,
         editors, Proceedings of the 2025 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algo-
         rithms, SODA 2025, New Orleans, LA, USA, January 12-15, 2025, pages 1705–1719.
         SIAM, 2025. 3, 61

[CPSZ21]    Y. Chang, S. Pettie, T. Saranurak, and H. Zhang. Near-optimal distributed tri-
            angle enumeration via expander decompositions. J. ACM, 68(3):21:1–21:36, 2021.
            doi:10.1145/3446330. 1, 3, 61, 62

[CPZ19]     Y. Chang, S. Pettie, and H. Zhang. Distributed triangle detection via expander de-
            composition. In T. M. Chan, editor, Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual ACM-SIAM
            Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2019, San Diego, California, USA, January
            6-9, 2019, pages 821–840. SIAM, 2019. 1

[CS19]      Y. Chang and T. Saranurak. Improved distributed expander decomposition and nearly
            optimal triangle enumeration. In P. Robinson and F. Ellen, editors, Proceedings of the
            2019 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC 2019, Toronto,
            ON, Canada, July 29 - August 2, 2019, pages 66–73. ACM, 2019. 1, 3

[CS20]      Y. Chang and T. Saranurak. Deterministic distributed expander decomposition and
            routing with applications in distributed derandomization. In S. Irani, editor, 61st IEEE
            Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2020, Durham, NC,
            USA, November 16-19, 2020, pages 377–388. IEEE, 2020. 1, 3

[CT06]      T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas. Elements of information theory (2. ed.). Wiley, 2006.
            70

[DKO14]     A. Drucker, F. Kuhn, and R. Oshman. On the power of the congested clique model. In
            M. M. Halldórsson and S. Dolev, editors, ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed
            Computing, PODC ’14, Paris, France, July 15-18, 2014, pages 367–376. ACM, 2014.
            2, 3

[EFF+ 22]   T. Eden, N. Fiat, O. Fischer, F. Kuhn, and R. Oshman. Sublinear-time distributed
            algorithms for detecting small cliques and even cycles. Distributed Comput., 35(3):207–
            234, 2022. 1, 3, 4, 59

[FGKO18] O. Fischer, T. Gonen, F. Kuhn, and R. Oshman. Possibilities and impossibilities for
         distributed subgraph detection. In C. Scheideler and J. T. Fineman, editors, Proceedings
         of the 30th on Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures, SPAA 2018,
         Vienna, Austria, July 16-18, 2018, pages 153–162. ACM, 2018. 1, 2, 7, 11

[GKS17]     M. Ghaffari, F. Kuhn, and H.-H. Su. Distributed mst and routing in almost mixing time.
            In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC
            ’17, page 131–140, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing Machinery.
            doi:10.1145/3087801.3087827. 61, 62


                                                57
[GKW21]    A. Golovnev, A. S. Kulikov, and R. R. Williams. Circuit Depth Reductions. In J. R.
           Lee, editor, 12th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS 2021),
           volume 185 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 24:1–
           24:20, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2021. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.
           doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ITCS.2021.24. 66

[GL18]     M. Ghaffari and J. Li. New Distributed Algorithms in Almost Mixing Time via
           Transformations from Parallel Algorithms. In U. Schmid and J. Widder, edi-
           tors, 32nd International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC 2018), vol-
           ume 121 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 31:1–
           31:16, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2018. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.
           doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.DISC.2018.31. 62

[GO16]     V. Guruswami and K. Onak. Superlinear lower bounds for multipass graph processing.
           Algorithmica, 76(3):654–683, 2016. 2, 4

[HPZZ21]   D. Huang, S. Pettie, Y. Zhang, and Z. Zhang. The communication complexity of set
           intersection and multiple equality testing. SIAM Journal on Computing, 50(2):674–717,
           2021. doi:10.1137/20M1326040. 1

[IG17]     T. Izumi and F. L. Gall. Triangle finding and listing in CONGEST networks. In
           E. M. Schiller and A. A. Schwarzmann, editors, Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on
           Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC 2017, Washington, DC, USA, July 25-27,
           2017, pages 381–389. ACM, 2017. 1, 3

[JS89]     M. Jerrum and A. Sinclair. Approximating the permanent. SIAM Journal on Com-
           puting, 18(6):1149–1178, 1989, https://doi.org/10.1137/0218077. doi:10.1137/0218077.
           60

[KN24]     C. Konrad and K. K. Naidu. An unconditional lower bound for two-pass streaming al-
           gorithms for maximum matching approximation. In D. P. Woodruff, editor, Proceedings
           of the 2024 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2024, Alexandria,
           VA, USA, January 7-10, 2024, pages 2881–2899. SIAM, 2024. 4

[KPSY23] G. Kol, D. Paramonov, R. R. Saxena, and H. Yu. Characterizing the multi-pass stream-
         ing complexity for solving boolean csps exactly. In Y. T. Kalai, editor, 14th Innova-
         tions in Theoretical Computer Science Conference, ITCS 2023, January 10-13, 2023,
         MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, volume 251 of LIPIcs, pages 80:1–80:15. Schloss
         Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2023. 4

[Lin92]    N. Linial. Locality in distributed graph algorithms. SIAM J. Comput., 21(1):193–201,
           1992. 1

[LPPP05] Z. Lotker, B. Patt-Shamir, E. Pavlov, and D. Peleg. Minimum-weight spanning tree
         construction in O(log log n) communication rounds. SIAM J. Comput., 35(1):120–131,
         2005. 3

[MNSW95] P. B. Miltersen, N. Nisan, S. Safra, and A. Wigderson. On data structures and asym-
         metric communication complexity. In F. T. Leighton and A. Borodin, editors, Pro-
         ceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 29
         May-1 June 1995, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, pages 103–111. ACM, 1995. 8


                                              58
[NY19]        J. Nelson and H. Yu. Optimal lower bounds for distributed and streaming spanning
              forest computation. In T. M. Chan, editor, Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual ACM-
              SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2019, San Diego, California, USA,
              January 6-9, 2019, pages 1844–1860. SIAM, 2019. 7

[Pel00]       D. Peleg. Distributed computing: a locality-sensitive approach. SIAM, 2000. 1

[PR00]        D. Peleg and V. Rubinovich. A near-tight lower bound on the time complexity of dis-
              tributed minimum-weight spanning tree construction. SIAM J. Comput., 30(5):1427–
              1442, 2000. 7

[PRS18]       G. Pandurangan, P. Robinson, and M. Scquizzato. On the distributed complexity of
              large-scale graph computations. In C. Scheideler and J. T. Fineman, editors, Proceed-
              ings of the 30th on Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures, SPAA
              2018, Vienna, Austria, July 16-18, 2018, pages 405–414. ACM, 2018. 3

[Suo20]       J. Suomela. Using round elimination to understand locality. SIGACT News, 51(3):63–
              81, 2020. 2



Appendix
A       CONGEST Lower Bounds and Circuit Complexity Barriers
This appendix is a note on the barrier proven by [EFF+ 22] for proving lower bounds on the number
of rounds required to solve triangle detection in CONGEST, and how they may break barriers in
circuit complexity. We optimize the parameters a bit further to improve the result from nΩ(1)
lower bound breaking barriers in circuit complexity to nΩ(1/ log log n) lower bound breaking the same
barriers in a weaker sense, but the framework of these reductions are exactly the same as [EFF+ 22],
and we claim no novelty for these ideas.
    Another purpose of this appendix is to keep track of all parameters involved explicitly which
leads to the following observation. Even though, strictly speaking, proving an no(1/ log log n) lower
bound for triangle detection does not break circuit complexity barriers currently, it is plausible that
even proving an Ω(logc n) lower bound for some large constant c > 1 could break circuit complexity
barriers assuming CONGEST algorithms for expander routing can be made to run in poly log (n)
rounds (see Remark A.7)8 .
A.1       Background on Expander Decomposition and Routing
In this section, we state the prior results on expander decomposition and routing in graphs with
high conductance in the CONGEST model. We start with some basic definitions and results.
Definitions and terminology. In any graph G = (V, E), we use m to denote the number of
edges and n to denote the total number of vertices.9 We use deg(v) to denote the degree of v.
                                                    P
   For any subset S ⊂ V , we use vol(S) to denote v∈S deg(v). The conductance of a cut S
    8
     To our knowledge, currently, no CONGEST lower bounds rule out such a possibility.
    9
     In the other parts of this paper, n referred to the number of vertices in one layer of a tripartite graph. Throughout
this appendix, we are not working with tripartite graphs and use n to denote the total number of vertices.




                                                           59
and V \ S is defined as:
                                    |{(u, v) | (u, v) ∈ E, u ∈ S, v ∈ V \ S}|
                           Φ(S) =                                             .
                                            min{vol(S), vol(V \ S)}
For the special case S = ∅, we set Φ(S) = 0. The conductance of a graph G is defined as,

                                        Φ=        min       Φ(S).
                                              S⊂V,0<|S|<n

    A uniform lazy random walk in a graph starting from a vertex s ∈ V performs the following
step iteratively: with probability 1/2, stay at the current vertex; otherwise, pick a uniformly random
neighbor of the current vertex and move to that neighbor. In any connected graph G, the stationary
distribution of a lazy random walk is π(u) = deg(u)/2m for all u ∈ V .
    Let pst (v) denote the probability that after t ⩾ 0 steps, a lazy random walk starting from vertex
s ∈ V lands at v for each v ∈ V . Then the mixing time, denoted by τmix (G) of graph G is defined
as the minimum t such that for all s, v ∈ V ,

                                       |pst (v) − π(v)| ⩽ π(v)/n.

The following relation between mixing time and conductance is well known [JS89]:
                                                            
                                    1                    log n
                               Θ        ⩽ τmix (G) ⩽ Θ           .                               (13)
                                   Φ                      Φ2
It is also known that the diameter D of any graph is at most the mixing time of the graph.
A.1.1    Results on Expander Decomposition in CONGEST
An expander is any graph which has large conductance, usually at least 1/polylog(n). We now
define the standard expander decomposition, where the vertex set of the input graph has to be
partitioned into clusters that form expanders.
Definition A.1 (Expander Decomposition). Given a graph G = (V, E), and parameters ε ∈ (0, 1)
and ϕ ∈ (0, 1), an expander decomposition of G is a partition of V into sets V1 ⊔ V2 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Vℓ for
some integer ℓ > 0 such that,

 1. The subgraph of G induced by each partition Vi for i ∈ [ℓ] is an expander with conductance at
    least ϕ.
 2. The number of edges (u, v) ∈ E such that u ∈ Vi and v ∈ Vj for i ̸= j ∈ [ℓ], also called
    inter-cluster edges, is at most ε · |E|.

Each partition Vi for i ∈ [ℓ] is termed a cluster of the decomposition.

   In the CONGEST model, we want to perform expander decomposition and require that at the
end of the decomposition, each node knows the partition that it belongs to.
Problem 1 (Expander Decomposition in CONGEST). Given a graph G = (V, E) in the CONGEST
model, given parameters ε, ϕ ∈ (0, 1), the expander decomposition in CONGEST problem is to find
an expander decomposition V1 ⊔ . . . ⊔ Vℓ with parameters ϕ and ε such that each vertex v ∈ V knows
which partition Vi for i ∈ [ℓ] it belongs to.
    We use Texp (ε, ϕ, n) to denote the minimum number of CONGEST rounds that such a decom-
position can be implemented in for all n-vertex graphs.

                                                   60
      The following result is known for expander decomposition in CONGEST.

Proposition A.2 ([CMGS25, Theorem 1.2]). There is an algorithm in the CONGEST model that
solves Problem 1; there exists some constants ccond , cexp > 1 such that, for any ϕ ∈ (0, 1),

                                  Texp (ϕ · logccond (n), ϕ, n) ⩽ (log n)cexp · ϕ−4 .

The algorithm is randomized and succeeds with high probability.

    It is easy to see that once Problem 1 is solved, each vertex can also identify the number of
vertices and the edges inside the cluster that it belongs to.

Claim A.3. In any graph G, after Problem 1 is solved with parameters ε, ϕ, in an additional
O(log n · ϕ−2 ) rounds, each vertex v ∈ V can also know:

 1. For each u ∈ N (v), which cluster Vi for i ∈ [ℓ] that u belongs to.

 2. If v ∈ Vi , the size of cluster Vi , and the total number of edges inside cluster Vi .

 3. If v ∈ Vi , each vertex also gets an identity from [|Vi |] that is distinct from the identities of all
    other vertices in Vi , and v knows the identities of all its neighbors that are also present in Vi .

Proof. To communicate the cluster that each neighbor of v belongs to, one additional round is
sufficient, as each vertex u ∈ V can broadcast to all its neighbors the identity of the cluster u
belongs to in log n bits.
    Let v ∈ Vi , let Gi be the subgraph of G induced by Vi , and let D be the diameter of Gi . The
vertices can compute a rooted spanning tree of Gi in O(D) time by performing a breadth-first
search from each node, and using the identities of the nodes in V for tie-breaking in choosing which
breadth-first tree becomes the spanning tree. Once such a spanning tree is computed, the total
number of vertices and edges inside Gi can be collected through the edges of the tree in O(D)
many rounds. The required identities of vertices in Vi can also be generated by propagating new
identities from the root vertex of the spanning tree in O(D) many rounds.
   We know that the diameter of the graph Gi is at most O(log n · ϕ−2 ), by Eq (13) and the
properties of the expander decomposition, which proves the claim.

A.1.2       Results on Routing Algorithms in CONGEST
We cover the results on routing demand instances from [GKS17], following the presentation of these
results in [CPSZ21].

Problem 2 (Routing in CONGEST). In a graph G = (V, E) in the CONGEST model, an instance
of the routing problem is defined as:

 1. There are a source-destination pairs (s1 , t1 ), (s2 , t2 ), . . . , (sa , ta ) for some a ∈ N. Each source
    si has to send a message of length at most O(log n) to vertex ti for i ∈ [a]. Each vertex v ∈ V
    knows all vertices u such that (v, u) is one of the source-destination pairs, and the message v
    should send to u.10

 2. Each vertex v ∈ V is the source of at most deg(v) messages and is the destination of at most
    deg(v) messages.
 10
      The vertices need not know any other information about the source-destination pairs.


                                                          61
There may be multiple instances of the routing problem that need to be routed sequentially.
   We use a tuple (Prou (n), Qrou (n)) to denote the runtime of an algorithm in CONGEST that on
n-vertex graphs, uses Prou (n) · τmix rounds of preprocessing steps, and after these steps, can route
each instance of the routing problem in Qrou (n) · τmix time, where τmix is the mixing time of the
underlying graph G.

    Let us state one existing routing algorithm that we employ. This way of presenting the results
of [GKS17] can be found in Section 2.1 of [CPSZ21].

Proposition A.4 (cf. Lemma 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4 of [GKS17]). There exists constants cP , cQ > 1 such
that, for any integer k ⩾ 1, there exists a routing algorithm with:

                                 Prou (n) ⩽ k · n4/k · (log n)cP ·k · O(1),
                                 Qrou (n) ⩽ (log n)cQ ·k · O(1),

that succeeds with high probability. Note that there is also a τmix factor in the total number of
rounds based on the definitions in Problem 2.

    Another routing algorithm is from [GL18], which is better than the ones we state from [GKS17]
for a certain ranges of number of instances of routing, although it does not admit a tradeoff in
preprocessing and routing requests.
    To conclude our background section, we summarize the problems we consider and the functions
corresponding to their runtimes. This may help the reader keep track of these functions while
perusing the next subsection.

             Function        Definition
            Texp (ε, ϕ, n)   The minimum number of rounds taken by a CONGEST al-
                             gorithm that finds an expander decomposition with param-
                             eters ε, ϕ of the input n-vertex graph.
              Prou (n)       In the routing problem, P (n) · τmix is the total number of
                             rounds required for preprocessing.
              Qrou (n)       In the routing problem, after pre-processing, Q(n) · τmix is
                             the total number of rounds required to handle one instance
                             of the routing demand problem.

A.2    From Circuits to CONGEST Algorithms
In this section, we will show how CONGEST lower bounds can also imply circuit lower bounds for
an explicit function. For n, m ⩾ 1, let fn,m : {0, 1}2m log n → {0, 1} denote the function that takes
as input a representation of a graph G = (V, E) where each edge is given by 2 log n bits denoting
the identities of the two end points of the edge in log n bits each. The function outputs 1 if the
input graph has a triangle, and outputs 0 otherwise.
   We show that we can simulate a circuit that computes fn,m in the CONGEST model.

Lemma A.5. Given a family of circuits C = {C}n,m⩾1 that compute function fn,m with constant
fan-in and fan-out, depth d(n, m) and total number of gates at most m · s(n, m), for any graph


                                                    62
G = (V, E), for any parameters ε ∈ (0, 1/3) and ϕ ∈ (0, 1), there is an algorithm in CONGEST
that solves triangle detection in
                                                                                                  
      
                                    −2
                                                                                          log n
        Texp (ε, ϕ, n) + O(log n · ϕ ) · (Prou (n) + Qrou (n) · s(n, m) · d(n, m)) · O
                                                                                         log(1/3ε)
many rounds.

Proof. First, we perform expander decomposition on graph G with parameters ε, ϕ in Texp (ε, ϕ, n)
many rounds. Each cluster performs the following procedures for simulating circuits in parallel.
Choosing the circuit. We use the result in Claim A.3 to make sure each vertex in any cluster
Vi knows all the information listed in the statement of Claim A.3. We use new(v) to denote the
identities from Claim A.3.
    In each cluster Vi , a vertex v ∈ Vi is said to be a good node if the number of neighbors of v
inside cluster Vi is at least as many as the number of neighbors of v outside cluster Vi . All other
vertices are called bad nodes.
    We let graph Gi be the subgraph of G with the union of all the edges incident on the good
nodes of Vi (including ones which go out of Vi ), and all the edges between two vertices in Vi . Using
an argument similar to the one in Claim A.3, the total number of these edges can be known to all
vertices in Vi in O(log n · ϕ−2 ) rounds. Let mi be the total number of these edges.
   Each cluster Vi simulates the circuit Cn,mi , and each vertex in cluster Vi knows the value of n
and mi . Hence, all the vertices in the cluster know which circuit to simulate.
Assignment of gates to vertices. Each gate g of the circuit Cn,mi is assigned to one of the
nodes in Vi that is responsible for computing the output of gate g, as well as sending this output to
all the gates in the next layer of the circuit that g feeds into. The assignment of gates is as follows:

(i) Each gate g of the input layer corresponds to some edge (u, v) of graph G. If both u, v ∈ Vi ,
    all these 2 log n gates are assigned to either u or v, lexicographically breaking ties based on
    new(u) and new(v). Moreover, which gate among the input layer corresponds to which edge
    can be fixed by arguments similar to the proof of Claim A.3: the root of the spanning tree can
    communicate to each of its neighbors a partition of the input gates corresponding to the number
    of edges in each of the subtrees, and this can be done recursively. This will take O(log(n) · ϕ−2 )
    rounds, also based on the upper bound on the diameter of the cluster.

(ii) Each gate in any layer which is not the input layer, is assigned to a vertex in Vi so that the
     total number of gates in any layer given to any vertex v is at most 2 · s(n, mi ) · degi (v), where
     degi (v) is the total number of neighbors of v inside the cluster as follows:

    (a) The gates assigned to each vertex v form 2 · s(n, mi ) many disjoint contiguous segments in
        layer j.
    (b) There is a partition of [mi ] into |Vi | many contiguous segments, and each segment is given
        to a vertex v ∈ Vi . Let [gv,1 , gv,2 ] be the segment given to vertex v, and we require that
        gv,2 − gv,1 + 1 = degi (v).
     (c) All the gates numbered (x − 1) · (mi ) + y is assigned to vertex v for each x ∈ [2 · s(n, mi )],
         gv,1 ⩽ y ⩽ gv,2 if such a gate exists.

    The total number of gates in each layer is at most mi · s(n, mi ), so, all the gates are assigned to
    some vertex. Each vertex v can also be made to know the integers gv,1 and gv,2 with arguments

                                                   63
       similar to assigning gates in the input layer: the root picks a contiguous segment of length
       equal to its degree for itself starting from 1, then partitions the rest of the gates among its
       subtrees based on the number of edges. This step is performed recursively in each subtree.
       Totally in O(log(n) · ϕ−2 ) rounds, each vertex v knows gv,1 and gv,2 and hence, all the gates
       that are assigned to it.

Next, we show how the vertices can communicate to each other the output of the gates they are
assigned to.
Routing gate outputs. The vertices simulate the circuit layer by layer starting from the input
layer. We prove that this simulation is possible by induction. For the base case, we know that the
value of all the gates in the input layer is known to the vertices to which the gates are assigned to
trivially. For the induction hypothesis, let us assume that the output of all the gates in layer j − 1
is known to the vertices that they are assigned to. We will show that the output of all these gates
in layer j − 1, once found, can be routed to the vertices that are assigned the gates in layer j that
they feed into.
    Only for the purpose of routing the output of gates in each layer, we assume that each vertex
v ∈ Vi has degi (v) many identities: all integers from gv,1 to gv,2 (including gv,1 and gv,2 ). The
identities of each vertex can be specified by O(log mi ) bits gv,1 , gv,2 ⩽ mi . The vertices can send
all their identities to their neighbors in 1 additional round.
    The vertices use the preprocessing routine for the routing algorithm, which can be run in Prou (n)
rounds. Next, for each gate g, the vertex v that g is assigned to needs to send the output of g to
O(1) many vertices, which are assigned the gates in layer j that g feeds into. The identities of these
vertices are known to v as it knows circuit Cn,mi (if the gate number is g, (g − 1) mod mi + 1 is
the identity of the vertex that g is assigned to) and the output of each gate is also only 1 bit. The
total number of gates assigned to each vertex v is at most s(n, mi ) · 2 · degi (v), this can be viewed as
O(s(n, mi )) many instances of the routing problem, each of which takes Qrou (n) · O(log n · ϕ−2 ).11
   This routing process is repeated till the last layer of the circuit, and if a triangle is found in
graph Gi the vertex with the output gate of the circuit outputs the existence of the triangle, and
the algorithm terminates.
Recursion. If there is no triangle found in any of the clusters, all the edges (u, v) where u, v
are two good nodes inside the same cluster, i.e., u, v ∈ Vi for some i ∈ [ℓ] are removed. (Note
the definition of a good node is with respect to the cluster it belongs to.) First, we argue that we
remove at least (1 − 3ε) · m edges.
    We know by the parameters on the expander decomposition that the total number of inter-
cluster edges is at most ε · m. We will argue that each edge (u, v) with u, v ∈ Vi that is not removed
can be charged to an inter-cluster edge, so that each inter-cluster edge receives at most two charges.
This will prove that the total number of edges left is at most 3 · ε · m. Let (u1 , v), (u2 , v), . . . , (ua , v)
be all the edges incident to some bad node v in cluster Vi with uj ∈ Vi for all j ∈ [a]. We know that
v has at least a many edges to vertices outside cluster Vi by the definition of bad nodes. We charge
each of these edges to one such inter-cluster edge incident on v, so that each inter-cluster edge
  11
    Here, we assign multiple identites to each vertex, to have a total of degi (v) many identites each, and we claim the
routing algorithm can still be run correctly. This can be easily seen by performing the routing algorithm on another
graph with mi vertices: a replacement product of the original graph in cluster Vi with a family of O(1)-regular
low-degree expanders of conductance Ω(1). Each vertex in the new graph will have a unique identity from [mi ], and
any round of a CONGEST algorithm can be simulated in the original graph in cluster Vi . Refer to Section 4 and
Proposition 4.2 of [ASW19] for details on replacement products and the fact that the mixing time increases by at
most an O(1) factor, respectively.


                                                          64
 receives at most one charge. Globally, each inter-cluster edge (x, y) receives at most two charges,
 as it receives at most one charge from each of its end-points.
     We have shown that at least half the edges are removed, and we recurse on the remaining network
 by computing another expander decomposition and circuit simulation. This recursion is done till
 there are only O(1) edges left in the graph, wherein the existence of a triangle can be detected
 trivially in O(1) rounds. The total number of levels of recursion is at most log m/(log(1/3ε)).
 Correctness. It is easy to see that if the algorithm outputs the existence of a triangle, there is a
 triangle in the graph, as the outputs of the circuits are correct. The edges we remove at each level
 of the recursion are incident on two good nodes from the same cluster Vi . The only way such an
 edge (u, v) can be a part of a triangle is if there exists some vertex w ∈ V with (u, w), (v, w) ∈ E.
 However, when the circuit is simulated in Vi , the edges (u, w) and (v, w) would be included as a
 part of the input, as u, v are good nodes. Hence the existence of a triangle would be detected by
 the circuit. Therefore, when the algorithm declares that there is no triangle after all the levels of
 the recursion, no triangle exists in the graph.
 Total number of rounds. The number of levels of the recursion is O((log n)/(log(c2 /3))). As-
 suming Texp (ε, ϕ, n), Prou (n), Qrou (n), s(n, m) and d(n, m) are increasing functions in n, m, each
 level of the recursion takes:

 (i) Texp (ε, ϕ, n) rounds to compute the expander decomposition.

(ii) O(log n · ϕ−2 ) rounds to propagate the required information to all the nodes in each cluster
     before circuit simulation.

(iii) Prou (n) · O(log n · ϕ−2 ) pre-processing time before circuit simulation via routing requests (as
      τmix = O(log n · ϕ−2 )).

(iv) O(s(n, m)) · Qrou (n) · O(log n · ϕ−2 ) rounds to compute one layer of the circuit, repeated for
     d(n, m) many layers.

 This completes the proof.

    The following result now establishes the barrier for proving CONGEST lower bounds.
 Proposition A.6. If there exists a large enough constant c > 0 and integer n0 , such that for
 all n ⩾ n0 triangle detection in CONGEST requires nc/ log log n rounds, then there is an explicit
 function f : {0, 1}N → {0, 1} such that the following is true. There exists integer N0 such that for
 all N ⩾ N0 , there exists no family of circuits computing fN with depth O(log N ), constant fan-in,
                                 ′
 constant fan-out and size N 1+c / log log N for some constant c′ depending on c only.

 Proof. The proof is a direct application of Lemma A.5 and the results of Propositions A.2 and A.4.
    Firstly, in Proposition A.2, we set ϕ = log−ccond (n)/6. This gives:

                             Texp (ϕ · logccond (n), ϕ, n) ⩽ (log n)cexp · ϕ−4
                              =⇒ Texp (1/6, (log n)−ccond , n) ⩽ (log n)cexp +4ccond .

 This also sets the mixing time of the clusters as O(1) · (log n)2ccond +1 , by Eq (13).
    Next, we set parameter k in Proposition A.4 to be k = log log n/100(cQ + cP ). This gives:

        Prou (n) ⩽ O(log log n) · (n400(cQ +cP )/ log log n · (log n)log log n ) ⩽ n(2+400(cQ +cP ))/(log log n) ,

                                                           65
       Qrou (n) ⩽ O(1) · (log n)log log n ⩽ n1/ log log n ,

for large enough n.
    Let N := 2m log n, and fN be the function that takes as input m edges, each represented by
2 log n bits for both the end-points, and computes whether there is a triangle in the input graph.
Given a circuit of depth O(log N ) = O(log n), and size s(n, m), by Lemma A.5, there is an algorithm
that solves triangle detection in CONGEST in

  (Texp (1/6, (log n)−ccond , n) + O(log2ccond +1 n) · (Prou (n) + Qrou (n) · s(n, m) · d(n, m))) · O(log n)
   = nO(1/ log log n) · s(n, m).                              (by our equations above, and depth O(log n))
                                           ′
By our premise, we get s(n, m) ⩾ nc / log log n for some constant c′ , which is a function of c. This
                                                       ′
proves that the size of the circuits is at least m · nc / log log n ⩾ m1+Ω(1/ log log m) , for an explicit
function on at least N = Θ(m log m) bits.

Barrier aspect of Proposition A.6. We can now provide the main message of this appendix.
Proposition A.6 implies a barrier because of the following: the current lower bounds in circuit
complexity on the size of a circuit with constant fan-in and fan-out computing an explicit func-
tion on N bits using arbitrary Boolean operator gates in O(log N ) depth is (3 + 1/86)N − o(N )
(see [GKW21]). Obtaining any superlinear lower bound on the size of such circuits has been a
major open problem in complexity theory for decades. A lower bound of nΩ(1/ log log n) rounds in
CONGEST for triangle detection then implies an N 1+Ω(1/ log log N ) size lower bounds for an explicit
problem (detecting a triangle) on above circuits, way above the longstanding Θ(N ) threshold of
existing lower bounds.

Remark A.7. Proposition A.6 identifies nΩ(1/ log log n) rounds as a barrier for proving distributed
CONGEST lower bounds for triangle detection. However, the arguments here can imply even more.
    It is plausible that the runtime of the expander routing in Problem 2 (which is the bottleneck
here) can be improved much beyond what is currently known. In fact, it is possible that these
problems can be solved in polylog(n) rounds in CONGEST. Thus, in absence of a lower bound that
rules out possibility of such an algorithm for expander routing, any lower bound for distributed
triangle detection of the form Ω(logc (n)) rounds, for some sufficiently large constant c > 1, has the
potential of breaking current circuit complexity barriers.
   As a result, we believe that at this stage, namely in absence of a concrete lower bound on
Problem 2 for the parameters mentioned earlier, the limit of one can realistically hope for an
unconditional lower bound for distributed triangle detection is polylog (n) and even Ω(log n) rounds.




                                                        66
B    List of Random Variables in the Main Proofs
We compile a list of random variables used throughout our proofs and their meanings here.

 • First, we begin with the random variables associated with inputs from distribution Gr (nr ).

         Random Variable        Definition
                 Gr−1           The inner graph sampled in the hard distribution for r-
                                rounds
                  idX           The identities chosen in Gr for inner vertices in layer X of
                                Gr−1
                  ids           The identities chosen for all the inner vertices
                id(xi )         The identity chosen for inner vertex xi
              type(x, w)        The type of vertex pair x, w ∈ G which lies in [r + 1] ∪ {0}
                 N xini         The input given to inner vertex xi in Gr−1
               N xi →Y          The nr -length vector given to xi of the list of its neighbors
                                to layer Y
              N xi →Y [ℓ]       The type of vertex pair (xi , yℓ ) for ℓ ∈ [nr ]
                 N xi           The 2nr−1 length vector containing both N xi →Y and
                                N xi →Z
                N xi [S]        The type of vertex pair (x, w) for w ∈ S ⊆ Y ∪ Z

 • Next, we talk about the random variables associated with the messages.

         Random Variable        Definition
               Mxi →Y           The nr -length vector denoting list of messages that inner
                                vertex xi sends to neighboring channels in layer Y
              Mxi →Y [ℓ]        The message sent by inner vertex xi to yℓ for ℓ ∈ [nr ] in the
                                first round, with type(xi , yℓ ) ⩽ r
               Mout→xi          The messages received by inner vertex xi from its outer
                                neighbors
                 Mxini          The 2nr−1 length list of messages sent by inner vertex xi to
                                other inner vertices in first round
               Mxini (w)        The message sent by inner vertex xi to some other inner
                                vertex w in the first round
                N xrest
                    i
                                The random variables that inner vertex xi samples in Proto-
                                col 3 comprised of the input in each group that is not fixed,
                                and the messages sent by all outer vertices to xi

 • Finally, we give the random variables associated with the round elimination protocol.

                                                 67
Random Variable   Definition
     N xpub       The random variable containing the types of channels to
                  inner vertex x which are sampled with public randomness
                  in Protocol 1
     Mxpub        The random variable containing all the messages sent by
                  inner vertex x that are sampled publicly in Protocol 1
      Jx          The random variable associated with the collection of αr
                  many subsets of Y ∪ Z for inner vertex x in Distribution 4
                  from (2)-(a)
     J all        The random variable containing collections J x for each in-
                  ner vertex x, used to break correlation between public mes-
                  sages and inner input
     Kx→Y
      t,i         For inner vertex x, other layer Y , type t ∈ [r]∪{0} and value
                  i ∈ [nr−1 ], collection of βr many subsets of Y ∪ Z sampled
                  in (2)-(b) of Distribution 4
      Kall        The random variable containing collections Kx→Y  t,i  for inner
                  vertex x, layer Y with x ∈  / Y , type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0} and value
                  i ∈ [nr−1 ] for breaking correlation between messages to inner
                  vertices and inner inputs
     Lx→Y
      t,i         For inner vertex x, other layer Y , type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0} and
                  value i ∈ [nr−1 ], a set of γr elements of Y sampled in (2)-(c)
                  of Distribution 4
      Lall        The random variable containing sets Lx→Y  t,i for inner vertex
                  x, layer Y with x ∈
                                    / Y , type t ∈ [r] ∪ {0} and value i ∈ [nr−1 ]
                  to break correlations among messages to inner vertices
      aux         Auxiliary random variables J all , Kall and Lall defined for
                  breaking correlation




                                  68
    C     A Schematic Organization of the Main Proofs
    This a schematic organization of the flow of main components of the proofs in our paper (we also
    include Claim 4.15 which is minor component compared to the rest but is technically needed to
    complete the picture here). Each arrow points to the main component(s) used in the proof of
    originating component.

                                                Result 1
                                               (Main result)

                                          Introduced in Section 1
                                            Proved in Section 4




                                              Theorem 1
                                  (Lower bound for the hard distribution)

                                          Introduced in Section 4
                                           Proved in Section 4.5




                                             Lemma 4.16
                                       (Round elimination protocol)

                                         Introduced in Section 4.5
                                           Proved in Section 5.3




        Claim 4.15                             Lemma 5.6
(Distance of Dreal and D
                       ] real )        (Distance of Dreal and Dfake )

 Introduced in Section 4.4               Introduced in Section 5.2
   Proved in Section 4.4                   Proved in Section 6.2




        Lemma 6.2                              Lemma 6.3                           Lemma 6.4
              ]
 (Distance of D real and H )
                          1              (Distance of H1 and H2 )           (Distance of H2 and Dfake )

 Introduced in Section 6.1               Introduced in Section 6.1           Introduced in Section 6.1
   Proved in Section 6.3                   Proved in Section 6.4               Proved in Section 6.5




                                                     69
D     Background on Information Theory
We now briefly introduce some definitions and facts from information theory that are used in our
proofs. We refer the interested reader to the text by Cover and Thomas [CT06] for an excellent
introduction to this field, and the proofs of the statements used in this Appendix.
    For a random variable A, we use supp(A) to denote the support of A and dist(A) to denote
its distribution. When it is clear from the context, we may abuse the notation and use A directly
instead of dist(A), for example, write A ∼ A to mean A ∼ dist(A), i.e., A is sampled from the
distribution of random variable A.

• We denote the Shannon Entropy of a random variable A by H(A), which is defined as:
                                 X
                       H(A) :=          Pr (A = A) · log (1/ Pr (A = A))                      (14)
                                    A∈supp(A)


• The conditional entropy of A conditioned on B is denoted by H(A | B) and defined as:

                                   H(A | B) := E [H(A | B = B)] ,                             (15)
                                                B∼B

  where H(A | B = B) is defined in a standard way by using the distribution of A conditioned on
  the event B = B in Eq (14).

• The mutual information of two random variables A and B is denoted by I(A ; B) and is defined:

                          I(A ; B) := H(A) − H(A | B) = H(B) − H(B | A).                      (16)

• The conditional mutual information I(A ; B | C) is H(A | C) − H(A | B, C) and hence by linearity
  of expectation:

                                  I(A ; B | C) = E [I(A ; B | C = C)] .                       (17)
                                                C∼C


D.1    Useful Properties of Entropy and Mutual Information
We shall use the following basic properties of entropy and mutual information throughout.
Fact D.1. Let A, B, C, and D be four (possibly correlated) random variables.

 1. 0 ⩽ H(A) ⩽ log |supp(A)|. The right equality holds iff dist(A) is uniform.

 2. I(A ; B | C) ⩾ 0. The equality holds iff A and B are independent conditioned on C.

 3. I(A ; B | C) ⩽ H(B) for any random variables A, B, C.

 4. Conditioning on a random variable reduces entropy: H(A | B, C) ⩽ H(A | B). The equality
    holds iff A ⊥ C | B.

 5. Chain rule for mutual information: I(A, B ; C | D) = I(A ; C | D) + I(B ; C | A, D).

 6. Data processing inequality: for a function f (A) of A, I(f (A) ; B | C) ⩽ I(A ; B | C).

We also use the following two standard propositions, regarding the effect of conditioning on mutual
information.

                                                  70
Proposition D.2. For random variables A, B, C, D, if A ⊥ D | C, then,

                                    I(A ; B | C) ⩽ I(A ; B | C, D).

Proof. Since A and D are independent conditioned on C, by Fact D.1-(4), H(A | C) = H(A | C, D)
and H(A | C, B) ⩾ H(A | C, B, D). We have,

                 I(A ; B | C) = H(A | C) − H(A | C, B) = H(A | C, D) − H(A | C, B)
                             ⩽ H(A | C, D) − H(A | C, B, D) = I(A ; B | C, D).


Proposition D.3. For random variables A, B, C, D, if A ⊥ D | B, C, then,

                                    I(A ; B | C) ⩾ I(A ; B | C, D).

Proof. Since A ⊥ D | B, C, by Fact D.1-(4), H(A | B, C) = H(A | B, C, D). Moreover, since
conditioning can only reduce the entropy (again by Fact D.1-(4)),

                 I(A ; B | C) = H(A | C) − H(A | B, C) ⩾ H(A | D, C) − H(A | B, C)
                             = H(A | D, C) − H(A | B, C, D) = I(A ; B | C, D).


D.2    Measures of Distance Between Distributions
We use two main measures of distance (or divergence) between distributions, namely the Kullback-
Leibler divergence (KL-divergence) and the total variation distance.
KL-divergence. For two distributions µ and ν over the same probability space, the Kullback-
Leibler (KL) divergence between µ and ν is denoted by D(µ || ν) and defined as:
                                                        h         µ(a) i
                                    D(µ || ν) := E          log          .                     (18)
                                                  a∼µ             ν(a)

We also have the following relation between mutual information and KL-divergence.

Fact D.4. For random variables A, B, C,
                                   h                                             i
           I(A ; B | C) =   E        D(dist(A | B = B, C = C) || dist(A | C = C)) .
                           (B,C)∼(B,C)


Total variation distance. We denote the total variation distance between two distributions
µ and ν on the same support Ω by ∥µ − ν∥tvd , defined as:

                                           ′        ′
                                                         1 X
                    ∥µ − ν∥tvd := max   µ(Ω  ) − ν(Ω  )  = ·  |µ(x) − ν(x)| .                  (19)
                                  Ω′ ⊆Ω                   2
                                                                       x∈Ω

We use the following basic properties of total variation distance.

Fact D.5. Suppose µ and ν are two distributions for E, then, µ(E) ⩽ ν(E) + ∥µ − ν∥tvd .

   We also have the following (chain-rule) bound on the total variation distance of joint variables.



                                                  71
Fact D.6. For any distributions µ and ν on n-tuples (X1 , . . . , Xn ),
                                           n
                                           X
                      ∥µ − ν∥tvd ⩽                 E       ∥µ(Xi | X<i ) − ν(Xi | X<i )∥tvd .
                                                 X<i ∼µ
                                           i=1

   We also have the following “over conditioning” property.

Fact D.7. For any random variables X, Y, Z,

                 ∥X − Y∥tvd ⩽ ∥XZ − YZ∥tvd = E ∥(X | Z = Z) − (Y | Z = Z)∥tvd .
                                                              Z

Proof. First, we prove the equality between the second term and the third term in the statement.
                                1 X
         ∥XZ − YZ∥tvd =           · Pr[(W, Z)] |Pr[XZ = (W, Z)] − Pr[YZ = (W, Z)]|
                                2
                                     W,Z
                             1 X
                            = ·  |Pr[Z = Z] · (Pr[X = W | Z = Z] − Pr[Y = W | Z = Z])|
                             2
                                     W,Z
                                X                  1X
                            =        Pr[Z = Z] ·      |Pr[X = W | Z = Z] − Pr[Y = W | Z = Z]|
                                                   2
                                 Z                     W
                                X
                            =        Pr[Z = Z] · ∥(X | Z = Z) − (Y | Z = Z)∥tvd
                                 Z
                            = E ∥(X | Z = Z) − (Y | Z = Z)∥tvd .
                                Z

   Now we prove the inequality between the first term and the third term.
                        1 X
        ∥X − Y∥tvd =      · |Pr[X = W ] − Pr[Y = W ]|
                        2
                                W

                     1 X X
                    =  ·     Pr[Z = Z](Pr[X = W | Z = Z] − Pr[Y = W | Z = Z])
                     2
                         W Z
                     1 XX
                    ⩽ ·      Pr[Z = Z] |Pr[X = W | Z = Z] − Pr[Y = W | Z = Z]|
                     2
                                W    Z
                                                                                            !
                        X                        1 X
                    =           Pr[Z = Z] ·        · |Pr[X = W | Z = Z] − Pr[Y = W | Z = Z]|
                                                 2
                        Z                              W
                    = E ∥X | Z = Z − Y | Z = Z∥tvd .
                        Z

   The following Pinsker’s inequality bounds the total variation distance between two distributions
based on their KL-divergence.
                                                                               q
Fact D.8 (Pinsker’s inequality). For any distributions µ and ν, ∥µ − ν∥tvd ⩽ 12 · D(µ || ν).




                                                              72
