                                         On the Complexity of Value Iteration
                                         Nikhil Balaji
                                         University of Oxford
                                         nikhil.balaji@cs.ox.ac.uk

                                         Stefan Kiefer
                                         University of Oxford
                                         stekie@cs.ox.ac.uk

                                         Petr Novotný
                                         Masaryk University
                                         petr.novotny@fi.muni.cz

                                         Guillermo A. Pérez
                                         University of Antwerp
                                         guillermoalberto.perez@uantwerpen.be
arXiv:1807.04920v3 [cs.FL] 27 Apr 2019




                                         Mahsa Shirmohammadi
                                         CNRS & IRIF
                                         mahsa.shirmohammadi@irif.fr

                                               Abstract
                                         Value iteration is a fundamental algorithm for solving Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). It
                                         computes the maximal n-step payoff by iterating n times a recurrence equation which is naturally
                                         associated to the MDP. At the same time, value iteration provides a policy for the MDP that is
                                         optimal on a given finite horizon n. In this paper, we settle the computational complexity of value
                                         iteration. We show that, given a horizon n in binary and an MDP, computing an optimal policy is
                                         EXPTIME-complete, thus resolving an open problem that goes back to the seminal 1987 paper on
                                         the complexity of MDPs by Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis. To obtain this main result, we develop
                                         several stepping stones that yield results of an independent interest. For instance, we show that
                                         it is EXPTIME-complete to compute the n-fold iteration (with n in binary) of a function given
                                         by a straight-line program over the integers with max and + as operators. We also provide new
                                         complexity results for the bounded halting problem in linear-update counter machines.

                                         2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Probabilistic computation; Theory of
                                         computation → Logic and verification; Theory of computation → Markov decision processes

                                         Keywords and phrases Markov decision processes, Value iteration, Formal verification

                                         Funding Stefan Kiefer: is supported by a Royal Society University Research Fellowship.
                                         Petr Novotný: is supported by the Czech Science Foundation, grant no. GJ19-15134Y “Verification
                                         and Analysis of Probabilistic Programs.”
                                         Mahsa Shirmohammadi: is supported by the “AAPS” PEPS JCJC grant.

                                         Acknowledgements We thank James Worrell for helpful comments on early version of this work.


                                          1     Introduction

                                         Markov decision processes (MDP) are a fundamental formalism of decision making under
                                         probabilistic uncertainty [29, 9]. As such, they play a prominent role in numerous domains,
                                         including artificial intelligence and machine learning [34, 33], control theory [10, 1], operations
                                         research and finance [11, 31], as well as formal verification [12, 5], to name a few. Informally,
                                         an MDP represents a system which is, at every time step, in one of the states from a finite
                                         set S. The system evolves in steps: in each step, we can perform an action (or decision) from
                                         a finite set A. When using an action a ∈ A in state s ∈ S, we collect an immediate reward
2   On the Complexity of Value Iteration


    R(s, a) and then transition stochastically to a successor state according to a rational-valued
    distribution P (s, a), which is given as a part of the MDP. This interaction with an MDP
    proceeds over either a finite or infinite horizon. In the finite-horizon case, we are given a
    bound H ∈ N (a horizon) such that the interaction stops after H steps; in the infinite horizon
    case the process goes on forever. To solve an MDP means to find an optimal policy; that is,
    a blueprint for selecting actions that maximizes the expected reward accumulated over a
    finite or infinite horizon. The accumulated rewards are typically discounted by some factor
    0 < γ ≤ 1; for infinite horizon, we need γ < 1 to ensure that the infinite sum is well defined.

    Value iteration. Given the importance of MDPs, it is hardly surprising that they have
    attracted significant interest in the theory community. Past research on MDPs included the
    study of complexity issues [27] as well as the design and analysis of algorithms for solving
    MDPs [22, 24, 38, 39]. In this paper, we provide a fresh look on one of the most familiar
    algorithms for MDPs: value iteration (VI). Introduced by Bellman in the 1950s [6], VI makes
    use of the optimality principle: the maximal n-step reward achievable from a state s, which
    we denote by ~vn (s), satisfies the recurrence
                      (                                            )
                                      X
                                                    0            0
        ~vn (s) = max R(s, a) + γ ·       P (s, a)(s ) · ~vn−1 (s ) ,                        (1)
                   a∈A
                                        s0 ∈S

    with ~v0 (s) = 0. Consequently, a finite-horizon policy is optimal if and only if it chooses, in
    a situation when the current state is s and n steps are remaining, an action maximizing
    the right-hand side (RHS) of (1). Thus, to solve an MDP with a finite horizon H, the VI
    algorithm computes the values ~vn (s) for all 0 ≤ n ≤ H and all states s, by iterating the
    recurrence (1). Using these values, VI then outputs (using some tie-breaking rule) some
    policy satisfying the aforementioned optimality characterization. VI can be deployed also
    for infinite-horizon MDPs: one can effectively compute a horizon H such that action a is
    optimal in state s for an infinite horizon1 if it maximizes the RHS of (1) for n = H [8]. This
    H has a bit-size which is polynomial in the size of the original MDP, but the magnitude of
    H can be exponential in the size of the MDP if the discount factor is given in binary [22].
        VI is one of the most popular MDP-solving algorithms due to its versatility (as shown
    above, it can be used for several MDP-related problems) and conceptual simplicity, which
    makes it easy to implement within different programming paradigms [30, 37], including
    implementation via neural nets [35]. Several variants of VI with improved performance were
    developed [36, 14]. For instance, the recent paper by Sidford et al. [32] presented a new class
    of randomized VI techniques with the best theoretical runtime bounds (for certain values
    of parameters) among all known MDP solvers. The paper also expresses hope that their
    techniques “will be useful in the development of even faster MDP algorithms.” To get insight
    into the underlying structure of VI, which might enable or limit further such accelerations, we
    take a complexity-theoretic vantage point and study the theoretical complexity of computing
    an outcome of a VI execution. That is, we consider the following decision problem ValIt:
    given an MDP with a finite horizon H (encoded as a binary number), does a given action
    a maximize the RHS of (1) for n = H? This problem is inspired by the paper of Fearnley
    and Savani [16], where they show PSPACE-hardness (and thus also completeness) for the
    problem of determining an outcome of policy iteration, another well-known algorithm for


    1
        In infinite-horizon MDPs, there is always an optimal stationary policy, which makes decisions based
        only on the current state. [29]
N. Balaji et al.                                                                                3


MDP solving. To the best of our knowledge, VI has not yet been explicitly subjected to this
type of analysis. However, questions about the complexity of ValIt were implicitly raised by
previous work on the complexity of finite-horizon MDPs, as discussed in the next paragraph.

Finite-horizon MDPs. The complexity of finite-horizon MDPs is a long-standing open
problem. Since “finding an optimal policy” is a function problem, we can instead consider
the decision variant: “In a given finite-horizon MDP, is it optimal to use a given action in
the first step?” As discussed above, this is exactly the ValIt problem in disguise.
     In the seminal 1987 paper on the complexity of MDPs [27], Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis
showed P-completeness of a special case of finite-horizon optimization where the horizon H
has magnitude polynomial in the size of the MDP. At the same time, they noted that in the
general case of binary-encoded H, VI can be executed on an EXPTIME-bounded Turing
machine (since H is represented using log(H) bits, the number of iterations is exponential in
the size of the input). Hence ValIt is in EXPTIME. However, the exact complexity of
the general finite-horizon optimization remained open ever since, with the best lower bound
being the P-hardness inherited from the “polynomial H” sub-problem. Tseng [36] presented
a more efficient (though still exponential) algorithm for finite-horizon MDPs satisfying a
certain stability condition; in the same paper, he comments that “in view of the stability
assumptions needed to obtain an exact solution and the absence of negative results, we are
still far from a complete complexity theory for this problem.”
     In this paper, we address this issue, provide the missing negative results, and provide
tight bounds on the computational complexity of ValIt and finite-horizon MDP optimization.

Our Results
The main result of the paper is that ValIt is EXPTIME-complete (Theorem 1). In the
rest of this section, we first explain some challenges we needed to overcome to obtain the
result. Then we sketch our main techniques and conclude with discussing the significance of
our results, which extends beyond MDPs to several areas of independent interest.

Challenges
 Bitsize of numbers. One might be tempted to believe that ValIt is in PSPACE, since
 the algorithm needs to store only polynomially many values at a time. However, the bitsize
 of these values may become exponentially large during the computation (e.g., the quantity
~vn (s) may halve in every step). Hence, the algorithm cannot be directly implemented by
 a polynomial-space Turing machine (TM). One could try to adapt the method of Allender
 et al. [20, 2] based on an intricate use of the Chinese remainder representation (CRR) of
 integers. However, there is no known way of computing the max operation directly and
 efficiently on numbers in CRR.

Complex optimal policies. Another hope for PSPACE membership would be a possibly
special structure of optimal policies. Fixing any concrete policy turns an MDP into a
Markov chain, whose H-step behavior can be evaluated in polynomial space (using, e.g., the
aforementioned CRR technique of Allender et al.). If we could prove that (A) an optimal
policy can be represented in polynomial space and (B) that the Markov chain induced by
such a policy is polynomially large in the size of the MDP, we would get the following
PSPACE algorithm: cycle through all policies that satisfy (A) and (B), evaluate each of
them, and keep track of the best one found so far. Tseng [36] commented that optimal
4   On the Complexity of Value Iteration


        EXPTIME-bounded        Prop 6      Bounded termination       Thm 7     Straight-Line
          Turing Machine                of simple counter programs           Program powering
           termination
                                                                                      Thm 5
           Finite-Horizon     Thm 3
            reachability                      Synchronizing          Thm 4       Monotone
                                              reachability in                  SLP powering
                              Thm 2      Markov decision processes
           Value Iteration

       Figure 1 Chain of reductions.


    policies in finite-horizon MDPs are “poorly understood”. Hence, there was still hope that
    optimal Markovian deterministic policies may have a shape that satisfies both (A) and (B).
    Unless PSPACE = EXPTIME, our results put such hopes to rest.

    No hardness by succinctness. One might try to prove EXPTIME-hardness using a
    succinctness argument. The results of [27] show that ValIt is P-hard when the horizon
    is written in unary, and many optimization problems over discrete structures incur an
    exponential blow-up in complexity when the discrete structure is encoded succinctly, e.g., by
    a circuit [28]. Giving a horizon H in binary amounts to a succinct encoding of an exponentially
    large MDP obtained by “unfolding” the original MDP into a DAG-like MDP of depth H.
    This unfolded MDP is “narrow” in the sense that it consists of many polynomial-sized layers,
    while standard EXPTIME-hardness-by-succinctness proofs, use succinct structures of an
    exponential “width” and “depth”, accommodating the tape contents of an EXPTIME-
    bounded TM. Hence, straightforward succinctness proofs do not apply here; e.g., there does
    not seem to be a direct reduction from the succinct circuit value problem.

    Our Techniques
    To obtain EXPTIME-hardness of ValIt, we proceed by a sequence of non-trivial reductions.
    Below we outline these reductions in the order in which they appear in the sequence, see
    Figure 1. In the main text, we present the reductions in a different order (indicated by
    the numbering of propositions and theorems), so that we start with MDPs and gradually
    introduce more technical notions.
        We start from a canonical EXPTIME-complete problem: the halting problem for an
    exponential-time TM. We then present a reduction to a halting problem for a class of counter
    programs (CPs; simple imperative programs with integer variables) that allow for linear
    variable updates. In this way, we encode the tape contents into numerical values (6). The
    crucial feature of this reduction is that the produced CP possesses a special simplicity
    property, which imposes certain restrictions on the use of tests during the computation.
        Next, we introduce straight-line programs (SLPs) with max, +, and − operations. SLPs
    are a standard model of arithmetic computation [3] and they can be equivalently viewed
    as arithmetic circuits consisting (in our case) of max, +, and − gates. We also consider
    a sub-class of SLPs with only max, + operations, so called monotone SLPs. We define
    the following powering problem: given a function f : Qn → Qn represented as an SLP, a
    horizon H, an initial argument ~x ∈ {0, 1}n , and two indices 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n, is it true that the
    i-component of f H (~x), i.e. the image of ~x with respect to the H-fold composition of f , is
    greater than the j-component of f H (~x)? Although VI in MDPs does not necessarily involve
    integers, the powering problem for monotone SLPs captures the complexity inherent in
    iterating the recurrence (1). To obtain a reduction from CPs to SLP powering, we construct
N. Balaji et al.                                                                                     5


SLP gadgets with max, + and − (minus) operations to simulate the tests in CPs; the
simplicity of the input CP is crucial for this reduction to work (Theorem 7). To get rid of
the minus operation, we adapt a technique by Allender et al. [4], which introduces a new
“offset” counter and models subtraction by increasing the value of the offset (Theorem 5).
    A final step is to show a reduction from monotone SLP powering to ValIt. The reduction
proceeds via an intermediate problem of synchronizing reachability in MDPs (maximize the
probability of being in a target set of states T after exactly H steps [15]). This divides a
rather technical reduction into more comprehensible parts. We present novel reductions
from monotone SLP powering to synchronizing reachability (Theorem 4), and from the
latter problem to ValIt (Theorem 2). As a by-product, we present a reduction proving
EXPTIME-hardness of finite-horizon reachability in MDPs, arguably the conceptually
simplest objective in probabilistic decision-making (Theorem 3).


Significance
As our main result, we characterize the complexity of computing an outcome of VI, one of the
fundamental algorithms for solving both finite- and infinite-horizon MDPs. As a consequence,
we resolve a long-standing complexity issue [27] of solving finite-horizon MDPs.
    On our way to proving this result, we encounter non-trivial stepping stones which are of
an independent interest. First, we shed light on the complexity of succinctly represented
arithmetic circuits, showing that comparing two output wires of a given (max, +)-circuit
incurs an exponential blow-up in complexity already when employing a very rudimental form
of succinctness: composing a single (max, +)-circuit with H copies of itself, yielding a circuit
of exponential “height” but only polynomial “width.” Second, we obtain new hardness results
for the bounded reachability problem in linear-update counter programs. CPs are related
to several classical abstractions of computational machines, such as Minsky machines and
Petri nets [25], see [13] for a recent breakthrough in this area. Our work establishes a novel
connection between counter programs and MDPs.


Further Related Work
Our work is also related to a series of papers on finite-horizon planning [21, 17, 18, 23].
The survey paper [26] provides a comprehensive overview of these results. These papers
consider either MDPs with a polynomially large horizon, or succinctly represented MDPs
of possibly exponential “width” (the succinctness was achieved by circuit-encoding). The
aforementioned hardness-by-succinctness proofs are often used here. The arbitrary horizon
problem for standard MDPs, which we study, is left open in these papers, and our work
employs substantially different techniques. The complexity of finite-horizon decentralized
MDPs was studied in [7].


 2     Markov Decision Processes and Finite-Horizon Problems

We start with some preliminaries. A probability distribution d : S → [0, 1] over a finite set S is
                       P
a function such that s∈S d(s) = 1. We denote by D(S) the set of all (rational) probability
distributions over S. The Dirac distribution on s ∈ S assigns probability 1 to s.
    A Markov decision process (MDP) M = (S, A, P, R, γ) consists of a finite set S of
states, a finite set A of actions, a transition function P : S × A → D(S), a reward function
R : S × A → Q, and a discount factor γ ∈ (0, 1]. The transition function P assigns to each
6   On the Complexity of Value Iteration


    state s and action a a distribution over the successor states, while the reward function assigns
    to s and a a rational reward.
        A path % is an alternating sequence s0 a1 s1 · · · an sn of visited states and played actions
                                                                                                %
    in M (that starts and ends in a state); write |%| = n for the length of %. We may use s0 → sn
    to denote that path % goes from s0 to sn . We extend the reward function R from single
    state-action pairs to paths by R(%) = 1≤i≤n R(si−1 , ai )γ i−1 .
                                            P

        A policy for the controller is a function σ that assigns to each path a distribution over
    actions. Let PM,s,σ (%) denote the probability of a path % starting in s when the controller
    follows the policy σ. This probability is defined inductively by setting PM,s,σ (s0 ) = 1 if
    s = s0 , and PM,s,σ (s0 ) = 0 otherwise. For a path % = s0 a1 s1 · · · sn−1 an sn , we set
       PM,s,σ (%) = PM,s,σ (s0 · · · sn−1 ) · σ(s0 · · · sn−1 )(an ) · P (sn−1 , an )(sn ) .
    We omit the subscripts from PM,s,σ (·) if they are clear from the context. Additionally, we
    extend PM,s,σ (·) to sets of paths of the same length by summing the probabilities of all the
    paths in the set.
        In this paper, we focus on a special class of policies: A (deterministic) Markov policy is
    a function σ : N × S → A. Intuitively, a controller following a Markov policy plays σ(n, s)
    from s if it is the n-th visited state, irrespective of the other states in the path. Markov
    policies suffice for the problems we consider.

    2.1    Finite-Horizon Problems
    Given an MDP M, the core problem of MDPs is computing the values of states with respect
    to the maximum expected reward. Let ~vn ∈ QS denote the vector of n-step maximum expected
    rewards obtainable from each state of the MDP. That is, for all s ∈ S we have that
                                        
                        X
        ~vn (s) = max    Ps,σ (%) · R(%) .
                   σ
                         |%|=n

     Note that ~v0 = ~0 by this definition. The vector ~vn can be computed by value iteration, i.e.
     by iterating the recurrence stated in Equation (1). From that recurrence, for each n ∈ N and
     state s0 , one can extract an (optimal) Markov policy σ that achieves the maximum value
    ~vn (s0 ) after n steps: for each s ∈ S and for 1 ≤ i ≤ n we have
                                 (                                            )
                                               X
         σ(i − 1, s) = argmax R(s, a) + γ ·        P (s, a)(s0 ) · ~vn−i (s0 ) .
                         a∈A
                                                 s0 ∈S

         Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis posed the finite-horizon reward problem which asks to
     compute such an optimal policy for the controller [27]. Formally, given an MDP M, an
     initial state s0 ∈ S, a distinguished action a ∈ A, and a horizon H ∈ N encoded in binary,
     the finite-horizon reward problem asks whether there exists a policy achieving ~vH (s0 ) by
     choosing a as the first action from s0 . Note that this problem is equivalent to the ValIt
     problem defined in the introduction.
         Consider the MDP N depicted in Figure 2 with γ = 12 . By iterating the indicated
     recurrence, we have that ~v5 (s) = max( 14 ~v4 (s1 ) + 14 ~v4 (s2 ), 12 ~v4 (s1 )) = 41
                                                                                          32 . The value of
    ~v5 (s) is due to the second argument of max (corresponding to action b), hence a policy to
     maximize ~v5 (s) starts with b in s.
         The finite-horizon reward problem can be decided by value iteration in exponential
     time by unfolding recurrence (1) for H steps [29], while the best known lower bound is
     P-hardness [27]. Our main result closes this long-standing complexity gap:
N. Balaji et al.                                                                                                                                    7

                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                   1              1            1
          MDP N                        s2                                      ~vn (s) = max         ~vn−1 (s1 ) + ~vn−1 (s2 ), ~vn−1 (s1 )
                                                                                                   4              4            2
                   a, 0 : 12                                                                 1
                                                  a, b, 2 : 1                 ~vn (s1 ) =2 + ~vn−1 (s)
                                                                                             2
              s                        s3                     t                              1
                                                                              ~vn (s2 ) =2 + ~vn−1 (t)
                     a, b, 0 : 1            a, b, 1 : 1                                      2
  a, 0 : 12                                                                                  1
                     a, b, 2 : 1                                                ~vn (t) =1 + ~vn−1 (s3 )
  b, 0 : 1                                                                                   2
                                                                                         1
                                                                              ~vn (s3 ) = ~vn−1 (s)
              s1                                                                         2


   Figure 2 The transitions are labelled with actions, rewards and their probabilities. For example,
the reward of the transition from s to s1 on action a is 0, and its probability is 12 .

I Theorem 1. The finite-horizon reward problem (and thus also the ValIt problem) is
EXPTIME-complete.
    To prove EXPTIME-completeness of the finite-horizon reward problem, we introduce a
variant of reachability, which we call synchronized reachability [15]. Let t ∈ S be a target
state. For reachability, the objective is to maximize the probability of taking a path from s
to t, whereas in synchronized reachability only a subset of such paths with the same length
are considered.
    Let M be an MDP, s0 an initial state, and a an action. Define p~≤n ∈ QS as the vector of
maximum probabilities of taking a path to t within n steps. Similarly, define p~=n ∈ QS to be
the vector of maximum probabilities of taking such a path with length exactly n. Formally,
for all s ∈ S we have that
                            %
                                                                         %
                                                                                         
    p~≤n (s) = max Ps,σ ({s → t : |%| ≤ n}) and p~=n (s) = max Ps,σ ({s → t : |%| = n}) .
                       σ                                                                           σ

Given a horizon H, encoded in binary, the finite-horizon reachability problem asks
whether an optimal policy achieving p~≤H (s0 ) chooses action a as the first action from s0 ;
the finite-horizon synchronized-reachability problem asks whether an optimal policy
achieving p~=H (s0 ) chooses action a as the first action from s0 .

2.2      Connections Among Finite-Horizon Problems
We now prove the following theorem.
I Theorem 2. The finite-horizon synchronized-reachability problem reduces, in polynomial
time, to the finite-horizon reward problem.
   Consider an MDP M, an initial state s0 , an action a and a target state t. The following
recurrence can be used to compute p~=n (s):
                  (                              )
                    X
                                 0             0
   p~=n (s) = max      P (s, a)(s ) · p~=n−1 (s ) ,                                     (2)
                     a∈A
                                   s0 ∈S

where p~0 (t) = 1 and p~0 (s) = 0 for all s 6= t. We construct a new MDP N obtained from M
by replacing all transitions by two consecutive transitions. The construction is such that
the probability of going from s to t with a path of length n in M is equal to the probability
of going from s to t with a path of length 2n in N . More formally, for all s, s0 and a with
                                                                  −:p                                            1:p            0:1
P (s, a)(s0 ) = p, the transition                         s              s0   is replaced with             s                            s0     if
                                                    1
                                     0:p            γ :1
s = t and with                 s                                  s0   otherwise; where 0 < γ ≤ 1 is an arbitrary chosen
8   On the Complexity of Value Iteration


    discount factor for N , and the intermediate state in both cases is a new state. The MDP N
    in Figure 2 is the result of applying the construction to M in Figure 3 with γ = 12 .
        For the constructed MDP N , one can show that for all states s, an action is optimal to
    maximize p~=2H (s) if and only if it is optimal to maximize ~v2H+1 (s). Consider the MDPs
    from Figure 2 as an example. We have previously argued that a policy maximizing ~v5 (s)
    in N starts with action b. Observe that the optimal first choice to maximize p~4 (s) is also b.
    This implies that an optimal policy of M for synchronized-reachability with H = 2 starts
    with b, too. By the above argument, the finite-horizon synchronized-reachability problem
    reduces to the finite-horizon reward problem.
        Hence, to obtain Theorem 1, it remains to determine the complexity of the finite-horizon
    synchronized-reachability problem. To this aim, we show a close connection between MDPs
    and a class of piecewise-affine functions represented by straight line programs (SLPs). Section 3
    provides the details.

    Finite-horizon reachability. We also show the finite-horizon synchronized-reachability prob-
    lem reduces to the finite-horizon reachability problem. We remark that the natural probability-
    1 variants of these problems have different complexities: specifically, the problem of reaching t
    from s within H steps with probability 1 is in P; however, the analogous problem of reaching
    t from s in exactly H steps with probability 1 is PSPACE-complete [15].
    I Theorem 3. The finite-horizon synchronized reachability problem reduces, in polynomial
    time, to the finite-horizon reachability problem.

     3      Straight-Line Programs and The Powering Problem
    We now establish the connection between MDPs and SLP powering. We start with prelimin-
    aries.
        For all n ∈ N, define the set varn := {x1 , . . . , xn } of variables and the collection of terms
         Tn := {a1 xj1 + · · · + an xjn + b | ai , b ∈ {−1, 0, 1} and 1 ≤ ji ≤ n, for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n}.
    A straight-line program (SLP) of order n is a sequence c1 , . . . , cm of commands of the form
    x ← max(T ), where x ∈ varn and T ⊆ Tn is non-empty. We refer to commands x ← b as
    initializations. Recall that min(x, y) = − max(−x, −y).
        For complexity analyses we shall assume that T , for every command, is given explicitly
    as a list of terms. Each term is also assumed to be explicitly represented as a constant, a
    list of coefficients ai , and a list of indices ji , both lists having length n (i.e. the number of
    variables). The size of T , and also that of the command, corresponds to the length of its list
    of terms; the size of the SLP, the sum of the sizes of its commands.
        A valuation ν is a vector in Zn , where the i-th coordinate gives the value of xi . The
    semantics of a command c is a function JcK : Zn → Zn , transforming a valuation into another.
    An SLP S = c1 , . . . , cm defines the function JSK : Zn → Zn obtained by composing the
    constituent commands: JSK = Jcm K ◦ · · · ◦ Jc1 K. Clearly this is a piecewise-affine function.
    Given a function f : Zn → Zn , we define its m-th power as f m : Zn → Zn where
         fm = f ◦ · · · ◦ f
              | {z }
                 m times

    is the m-fold composition of f .
        We denote by Tn+ the set of terms a1 xj1 +· · ·+an xjn +b where the coefficients a1 , · · · , an , b
    are in {0, 1}. An SLP that only uses terms in Tn+ is called monotone. Note that monotone
    SLPs induce monotone functions from Zn to Zn (subtraction and min are not allowed).
N. Balaji et al.                                                                                     9


3.1     The Powering Problem
For an SLP S of order n, a valuation ν ∈ Nn and m ∈ N (encoded in binary), let ν 0 =
JSKm (ν). Given two variables x, y ∈ varn of the SLP, the powering problem asks whether
ν 0 (x) ≥ ν 0 (y). Since the initial valuations ν are always non-negative, all valuations obtained
by powering monotone SLPs are non-negative. The above problem is P-complete if the
exponent m is written in unary [19].
     Observe that all numbers generated by powering an SLP can be represented using
exponentially-many bits in the bitsize of the exponent. It follows that the powered SLP can
be explicitly evaluated in exponential time. We provide a matching lower bound in Section 4.
Before that, we show the connection of SLP powering to MDPs.

3.2     Synchronized Reachability and SLP Powering
The connection is stated in the following Theorem.

I Theorem 4. The powering problem for monotone SLPs reduces, in polynomial time, to
the finite-horizon synchronized reachability problem in MDPs.

To illustrate this reduction, let us consider the SLP S of order 2:

     x1 ← max(x1 + x2 , x2 + x2 );          x2 ← max(x1 + x1 , x1 + x1 ).

This SLP is normalized, that is to say all its max commands have exactly two arguments
t1 , t2 ∈ Tn+ and furthermore t1 , t2 have exactly two summands. (Note that focusing on
normalized SLPs is no loss of generality.) We are interested in the 2-nd power of S with
initial valuation ν(x1 ) = 0 and ν(x2 ) = 1. In Figure 3, two copies of S are shown on the
right to visualize the concept of powering it. To obtain an MDP, we consider a set of actions
A = {a, b} and have each variable xi become a state. In the example, s and t are the
corresponding states for x1 and x2 . The t1 , t2 arguments of max commands determine the
successors of actions a, b, respectively, where each successor has probability 12 . The command
x1 ← max(x1 + x2 , x2 + x2 ) translates to P (s, a)(s) = P (s, a)(t) = 12 and P (s, b)(s) = 1, as
shown in the MDP in Figure 3. Since ν(x2 ) = 1, we make t a target state. Now the i-th
iteration of value iteration of (2) (corresponding to the i-th step before the horizon) is tightly
connected to the i-th power of the SLP. Indeed, letting νi = JSKi (ν), one can prove that
p~=i (s) = 21i νi (s) and p~=i (t) = 21i νi (t).

SLP vs. monotone SLP powering. It thus remains to provide a lower bound for the
Monotone SLP powering problem. The crucial step, which we cover in Section 4, is providing
lower bounds for the non-monotone variant. The remaining step from non-monotone to
monotone powering can be made by adapting the techniques of Allender et al. [4].

I Theorem 5. The powering problem for arbitrary SLPs reduces, in polynomial time, to the
powering problem for monotone SLPs.


 4      Main Reductions
To show EXPTIME-hardness of all the problems introduced so far, we introduce a class of
counter programs that allow linear updates on counters and show that a (time-)bounded
version of the termination problem for these programs is EXPTIME-complete. Finally, we
reduce this bounded termination problem to the powering problem.
10   On the Complexity of Value Iteration


        x1           x2                               s             t
                            2-nd power                                  starting step
       max          max                               ?          ?

         +           +                           a        b     a, b
                                                                                              a : 21
                                                  1             1
                                                  2
                                                                                              b:1
                                                                2
        x1           x2                               s             t                                   a : 21
                            1-st power                                  1-st step
       max          max                               ?          ?                              s                t

         +           +                           a        b     a, b                                   MDP M
                                                  1             1
                                                  2             2
       x1 : 0      x2 : 1                             s             t
                            initialization                              2-nd step

         Figure 3 An example for the translation from SLPs to MDPs.



        A deterministic linear-update counter program (CP) consists of n counters {ci | 1 ≤ i ≤ n},
     ranging over Z, and a sequence of m instructions. We consider instructions of the form

         p : c1 ← c2 + c3             p : if c1 ≥ c2 goto t             p : c1 ← c2 − c3

     where 1 ≤ p < m and 1 ≤ t ≤ m, and the final instruction is always m : halt. More precisely,
     the instructions allow
       (i) adding or subtracting two counters, assigning the result to a third one, and continuing
           to the next instruction;
      (ii) testing two counters against each other, and jumping to some given instruction if the
           result of the test is positive, continuing to the next instruction otherwise.
     The halt instruction only loops to itself.
         A configuration of a CP is a tuple (p, v1 , . . . , vn ) ∈ {1, . . . , m} × Zn consisting of an
     instruction p and values of the counters (e.g., v1 is the value for the counter c1 ). We equip
     CPs with a fixed initial configuration lying in {1} × Nn . Given a CP, the termination prob-
     lem asks whether the halt instruction is reached. The bounded termination problem
     additionally takes as input an integer N ∈ N, encoded in binary, and asks whether the halt
     instruction is reached within N steps.
         The bounded termination problem is in EXPTIME: in a computation with N steps,
     the magnitude of the counters is bounded by 2N , so each step can be simulated in time
     exponential in the bitsize of N . We will now show that the problem is EXPTIME-hard
     already for a certain subclass of CPs which facilitates the reductions to the powering problem.

     Simple counter programs. A CP is simple if it satisfies the following conditions. First,
     all values in all reachable configurations (p, v1 , . . . , vn ) are non-negative: vi ∈ N for all
     1 ≤ i ≤ n (one may “guard” subtractions by test instructions to achieve this). Second, all test
     instructions q : if ci ≥ cj goto r use counters c1 and c2 exclusively. Moreover, for each such
     instruction q, there are counters cq̄1 , cq̄2 such that in all reachable configurations (q, v1 , . . . , vn )
     we have that
      1. v1 = a1 vq̄1 and v2 = a2 vq̄2 with a1 , a2 ∈ {64, 64 · 10, 64 · 12}. That is, the values of tested
         counters are “scaled-up” versions of the values of other counters.
      2. Additionally, the absolute difference of the values of the tested counters is larger than the
         values of all other counters, in symbols |v1 − v2 | ≥ max{vk | 3 ≤ k ≤ n}.
N. Balaji et al.                                                                                       11


Note that the class of simple CPs is a semantically defined subclass of all CPs. Further
observe that for every test instruction we necessarily have that q̄1 , q̄2 ≥ 3.
   The following proposition kick-starts our sequence of reductions.

I Proposition 6. The bounded termination problem for simple CPs is EXPTIME-complete.

    To prove the proposition, we follow the classical recipe of first simulating a Turing machine
using a machine with two stacks, and then simulating the two-stack machine by a CP. We
note two key differences between our construction and the classical reduction: (1) We use
the expressiveness of linear updates in CPs to simulate pushing and popping on the stack in
a linear number of steps of the CP. (2) We instrument the two-stack machine to ensure that
the height of the two stacks differs by at most 1 along any computation. This is crucial to
allow us to simulate the two-stack machine by a simple linear-update counter program.

4.1    From the Termination Problem to the Powering Problem
We now sketch the main ideas behind the last (and most technically involved) missing link
in our sequence of reductions.

I Theorem 7. The bounded termination problem for simple CPs reduces, in polynomial
time, to the powering problem for SLPs.

The encoding. Given a CP C we construct an SLP S of order ≥ 2n with variables including
{x1 , . . . , x2n }. Let us denote xn+i by Qi for 1 ≤ i ≤ n. The reduction is such that a
configuration (p, v1 , . . . , vn ) of C is encoded as a valuation ν : var2n → Z of the SLP with
the property that ν(xi ) = vi and ν(Qi ) = pν(xi ) = pvi for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. In this way, the
instruction p of the CP is encoded in the variables of the SLP (recall that SLPs are stateless).
    Given this encoding, the main challenge is to realize the transition function of the CP
as a function computed by an SLP. Once this is accomplished, for every m ∈ N, the m-th
power of the SLP S represents the m-step transition function of the CP.

Conditional commands. Intuitively, to encode the transition function we would like to equip
the SLP with conditional commands, whose execution depends on a conditional. Specifically,
we want to implement the following two kinds of conditional updates

   (y ← y ± xk if Qk = pxk ) and (Qk ← p · xk if xi ≥ xj )

in terms of primitive commands of an SLP. In both commands, if the condition is not satisfied,
the command is not executed, and the value of y or Qk remains unchanged. For example,
one can simulate the first type of conditional commands by executing y ← y ± max(0, xk + t),
where t is an expression that is 0 if the test is passed and less than −xk otherwise. Intuitively,
we think of t as “masking” the assignment if the test fails.
    For the following result, which formalizes how we implement conditional commands, we
call a valuation ν valid if there exists q ∈ {1, . . . , m} with ν(xi ) ≥ 0 and ν(Qi ) = qν(xi ) for
all 1 ≤ i ≤ n.

I Lemma 8. Let p ∈ {1, . . . , m} and i, j, k ∈ {1, . . . , n} be distinct. The following equation
holds for all valid valuations ν:
                                                                  (
                                                                    ν(xk ) if ν(Qk ) = pν(xk )
   max(0, ν(xk ) + min(ν(Qk ) − pν(xk ), pν(xk ) − ν(Qk ))) =                                  (3)
                                                                    0       otherwise.
12   On the Complexity of Value Iteration


     Moreover, if |ν(xi ) − ν(xj )| ≥ ν(xk ), then the following holds:
                                                     (
                                                      ν(xk ) if ν(xi ) ≥ ν(xj )
       max(0, ν(xk ) + min(0, ν(xi ) − ν(xj ))) =                                                 (4)
                                                      0        otherwise.

     Proof. The equations follow directly from the assumption that ν is valid, since if ν(Qj ) 6=
     pν(xj ) then we also have |ν(Qj ) − pν(xj )| ≥ ν(xj ). In addition, if |ν(xi ) − ν(xj )| ≥ ν(xk )
     and ν(xi ) < ν(xj ), we will have ν(xk ) + ν(xi ) − ν(xj ) ≤ 0.                               J

        Using the property that the simulated program is simple, Equation (3) can be used to
     simulate the conditional update (y ← y ± xk if Qk = pxk ) where t = min(Qk − pxk , pxk − Qk )
     masks the update. Likewise, Equation (4) can be used to simulate the second type of
     conditional update (Qk ← p·xk if xi ≥ xj ) where the masking expression is t = min(0, xi −xj ).
     Finally, the multiplication-by-a-constant required for the second type of the conditional
     update is achieved via repeated addition.

     Encoding the instructions. We recall that we encode being at the instruction p of the CP
     by a valuation ν such that ν(Qi ) = pν(xi ) for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n.
         Using the aforementioned conditional commands, we can construct the SLP S as the
     composition of m smaller SLPs. Each sub-SLP πp simulates an instruction p from the given
     CP C. Hence S, when applied upon a valid valuation ν (i.e., a properly-encoded configuration
     of C), simulates all of its instructions at once. By using conditional commands, we make
     sure that only one sub-SLP results in a non-zero update: executing πp has no effect on the
     valuation unless pν(xi ) = ν(Qi ) for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n.
         In this way, powering S allows us to simulate consecutive steps of C. In particular, for all
     N ∈ N we have that JSKN (ν)(Q1 ) ≥ m · JSKN (ν)(x1 ), where m is the halt instruction, holds
     if and only if C halts after at most N steps.

      5     Conclusion
     By the virtue of our chain of reductions (see Figure 1), we get the following theorem.

     I Theorem 9. All the following problems are EXPTIME-complete:
        The finite-horizon reward problem for MDPs, and thus also the ValIt problem.
        The finite-horizon reachability and synchronized reachability problems for MDPs.
        The powering problem for SLPs and for monotone SLPs.
        The bounded termination problem for simple counter programs.

        The exact complexity of the following variant of the problem remains open: given an
     MDP and a horizon encoded in binary, determine whether there exists a policy achieving
     some given expected-reward threshold (with no restriction on the actions used to do so).
N. Balaji et al.                                                                                      13


     References
 1   Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y. Ng. Learning first-order markov models for control. In
     L. K. Saul, Y. Weiss, and L. Bottou, editors, Advances in Neural Information Pro-
     cessing Systems 17, pages 1–8. MIT Press, 2005. URL: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
     2569-learning-first-order-markov-models-for-control.pdf.
 2   Eric Allender, Nikhil Balaji, and Samir Datta. Low-depth uniform threshold circuits and the
     bit-complexity of straight line programs. In Erzsébet Csuhaj-Varjú, Martin Dietzfelbinger, and
     Zoltán Ésik, editors, Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science 2014 - 39th International
     Symposium, MFCS 2014, Budapest, Hungary, August 25-29, 2014. Proceedings, Part II,
     volume 8635 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 13–24. Springer, 2014. URL:
     https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-44465-8_2, doi:10.1007/978-3-662-44465-8_2.
 3   Eric Allender, Peter Bürgisser, Johan Kjeldgaard-Pedersen, and Peter Bro Miltersen. On the
     complexity of numerical analysis. SIAM Journal on Computing, 38(5):1987–2006, 2009.
 4   Eric Allender, Andreas Krebs, and Pierre McKenzie. Better complexity bounds for cost register
     automata. Theory of Computing Systems, pages 1–19, 2017.
 5   Christel Baier and Katoen Joost-Pieter, editors. Principles of Model Checking. MIT Press,
     2008.
 6   Richard Bellman. Dynamic Programming. Princeton University Press, 1957.
 7   Daniel S Bernstein, Robert Givan, Neil Immerman, and Shlomo Zilberstein. The complexity
     of decentralized control of Markov decision processes. Mathematics of Operations Research,
     27(4):819–840, 2002.
 8   Dimitri P. Bertsekas. Dynamic Programming: Deterministic and Stochastic Models. Prentice-
     Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 1987.
 9   Dimitri P. Bertsekas. Dynamic Programming and Optimal Control. Athena scientific Belmont,
     MA, 2005.
10   Vincent D Blondel and John N Tsitsiklis. A survey of computational complexity results in
     systems and control. Automatica, 36(9):1249–1274, 2000.
11   Nicole Bäuerle and Ulrich Rieder. Markov Decision Processes with Applications to Finance.
     Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2011.
12   Edmund M. Clarke, Thomas A. Henzinger, Helmut Veith, and Bloem Roderick, editors.
     Handbook of Model Checking. Springer International Publishing, 2018.
13   Wojciech Czerwinski, Slawomir Lasota, Ranko Lazic, Jérôme Leroux, and Filip Mazowiecki.
     The reachability problem for petri nets is not elementary (extended abstract). CoRR,
     abs/1809.07115, 2018. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.07115, arXiv:1809.07115.
14   Peng Dai, Mausam, Daniel S. Weld, and Judy Goldsmith. Topological value iteration algorithms.
     J. Artif. Intell. Res., 42:181–209, 2011. URL: http://jair.org/papers/paper3390.html.
15   Laurent Doyen, Thierry Massart, and Mahsa Shirmohammadi. Limit synchronization in
     Markov decision processes. In Anca Muscholl, editor, Foundations of Software Science and
     Computation Structures - 17th International Conference, FOSSACS 2014, Held as Part of
     the European Joint Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS 2014, Grenoble,
     France, April 5-13, 2014, Proceedings, volume 8412 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
     pages 58–72. Springer, 2014. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-54830-7_4, doi:
     10.1007/978-3-642-54830-7_4.
16   John Fearnley and Rahul Savani. The complexity of the simplex method. In Proceedings of the
     Forty-seventh Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’15, pages 201–208,
     New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM. URL: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2746539.2746558,
     doi:10.1145/2746539.2746558.
17   Judy Goldsmith, Michael L Littman, and Martin Mundhenk. The complexity of plan existence
     and evaluation in probabilistic domains. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth conference on
     Uncertainty in artificial intelligence (UAI’97), pages 182–189. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers
     Inc., 1997.
14   On the Complexity of Value Iteration


     18   Judy Goldsmith and Martin Mundhenk. Complexity issues in Markov decision processes.
          In Proceedings of the 13th Annual IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity, Buffalo,
          New York, USA, June 15-18, 1998, pages 272–280. IEEE Computer Society, 1998. URL:
          https://doi.org/10.1109/CCC.1998.694621, doi:10.1109/CCC.1998.694621.
     19   R. Greenlaw, H.J. Hoover, and W.L. Ruzzo. Limits to Parallel Computation: P-completeness
          Theory. Oxford University Press, 1995. URL: https://books.google.fr/books?id=
          YZHnCwAAQBAJ.
     20   William Hesse, Eric Allender, and David A. Mix Barrington. Uniform constant-depth threshold
          circuits for division and iterated multiplication. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 65(4):695–716, 2002.
          URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-0000(02)00025-9, doi:10.1016/S0022-0000(02)
          00025-9.
     21   Michael L Littman. Probabilistic propositional planning: Representations and complexity. In
          AAAI’97, pages 748–754, 1997.
     22   Michael L. Littman, Thomas L. Dean, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. On the complex-
          ity of solving Markov decision problems. In Philippe Besnard and Steve Hanks, edit-
          ors, UAI ’95: Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual Conference on Uncertainty in Artifi-
          cial Intelligence, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, August 18-20, 1995, pages 394–402. Morgan
          Kaufmann, 1995. URL: https://dslpitt.org/uai/displayArticleDetails.jsp?mmnu=1&
          smnu=2&article_id=457&proceeding_id=11.
     23   Michael L Littman, Judy Goldsmith, and Martin Mundhenk. The computational complexity
          of probabilistic planning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 9:1–36, 1998.
     24   Yishay Mansour and Satinder P. Singh. On the complexity of policy iteration. In Kathryn B.
          Laskey and Henri Prade, editors, UAI ’99: Proceedings of the Fifteenth Conference on
          Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, Stockholm, Sweden, July 30 - August 1, 1999, pages 401–
          408. Morgan Kaufmann, 1999. URL: https://dslpitt.org/uai/displayArticleDetails.
          jsp?mmnu=1&smnu=2&article_id=192&proceeding_id=15.
     25   Ernst W. Mayr. An algorithm for the general petri net reachability problem. In Proceedings
          of the thirteenth annual ACM Symposium on Theory of computing (STOC’81), pages 238–246.
          ACM, 1981.
     26   Martin Mundhenk, Judy Goldsmith, Christopher Lusena, and Eric Allender. Complexity of
          finite-horizon Markov decision process problems. J. ACM, 47(4):681–720, July 2000. URL:
          http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/347476.347480, doi:10.1145/347476.347480.
     27   Christos H. Papadimitriou and John N. Tsitsiklis. The complexity of Markov decision processes.
          Math. Oper. Res., 12(3):441–450, 1987. URL: https://doi.org/10.1287/moor.12.3.441,
          doi:10.1287/moor.12.3.441.
     28   Christos H. Papadimitriou and Mihalis Yannakakis. A note on succinct representations of
          graphs. Information and Control, 71(3):181–185, 1986. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/
          S0019-9958(86)80009-2, doi:10.1016/S0019-9958(86)80009-2.
     29   Martin L. Puterman. Markov Decision Processes. Wiley-Interscience, 2005.
     30   Tim Quatmann and Joost-Pieter Katoen. Sound value iteration. In Hana Chockler and Georg
          Weissenbacher, editors, Computer Aided Verification, pages 643–661. Springer International
          Publishing, 2018.
     31   Manfred Schäl. Markov decision processes in finance and dynamic options. In Handbook
          of Markov Decision Processes, International Series in Operations Research & Management
          Science, pages 461–487. Springer, 2002.
     32   Aaron Sidford, Mengdi Wang, Xian Wu, and Yinyu Ye. Variance Reduced Value
          Iteration and Faster Algorithms for Solving Markov Decision Processes, pages 770–
          787. SIAM, 2018. URL: https://epubs.siam.org/doi/abs/10.1137/1.9781611975031.
          50, arXiv:https://epubs.siam.org/doi/pdf/10.1137/1.9781611975031.50, doi:10.1137/
          1.9781611975031.50.
     33   Olivier Sigaud and Olivier Buffet. Markov Decision Processes in Artificial Intelligence. John
          Wiley & Sons, 2013.
N. Balaji et al.                                                                                       15


34   R.S. Sutton and A.G Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. Adaptive Computation
     and Machine Learning. MIT Press, 2018.
35   Aviv Tamar, YI WU, Garrett Thomas, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Value iteration
     networks. In D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. V. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Garnett, editors,
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29, pages 2154–2162. Curran Associates,
     Inc., 2016. URL: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/6046-value-iteration-networks.pdf.
36   Paul Tseng. Solving H-horizon, stationary Markov decision problems in time proportional to
     log(H). Operations Research Letters, 9(5):287–297, 1990.
37   Zhimin Wu, Ernst Moritz Hahn, Akin Günay, Lijun Zhang, and Yang Liu. GPU-accelerated
     value iteration for the computation of reachability probabilities in mdps. In Gal A. Kaminka,
     Maria Fox, Paolo Bouquet, Eyke Hüllermeier, Virginia Dignum, Frank Dignum, and Frank van
     Harmelen, editors, ECAI 2016 - 22nd European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages
     1726–1727. IOS Press, 2016. URL: https://doi.org/10.3233/978-1-61499-672-9-1726,
     doi:10.3233/978-1-61499-672-9-1726.
38   Yinyu Ye. A new complexity result on solving the Markov decision problem. Mathematics of
     Operations Research, 30(3):733–749, 2005.
39   Yinyu Ye. The simplex and policy-iteration methods are strongly polynomial for the Markov
     decision problem with a fixed discount rate. Mathematics of Operations Research, 36(4):593–603,
     2011.
16   On the Complexity of Value Iteration


                                             Technical Appendix
      A        Proof of Theorem 2
     In this section, we will show that there is a polynomial-time many-one reduction from the
     finite-horizon synchronized-reachability problem to the finite-horizon reward problem — for
     any discount factor γ.

     Proof of Theorem 2. Consider an instance of the finite-horizon synchronized-reachability
     problem, i.e., an MDP M = (S, A, P, ·, γ), an initial state s0 , a target vertex t, and horizon
     H. In polynomial time we can construct a new MDP M0 = (S 0 , A, P 0 , R, γ) with an initial
     state s00 and horizon H 0 such that:
          S 0 = S × {even, odd};
          P 0 is such that for each s, s0 ∈ S and a ∈ A we have: P 0 ((s, even), a)(s0 , odd) = P (s, a)(s0 )
          and P 0 ((s, odd), a)(s, even) = 1; for all other arguments, P 0 (·, ·)(·) returns zero;
          finally, s00 = (s0 , even).
     For M0 we construct (also in polynomial time), the reward function R as follows: for each
     (s, a) ∈ S × A such that s 6= t we have R((s, even), a) = 0 and R((s, odd), a) = 1/γ. If s = t,
     then R((s, even), a) = 1 and R((s, odd), a) = 0. This ensures that under any strategy σ 0 in
     M0 the i-step (expected) value, which we denote by ~vi,σ0 (s0 ), is equal to

          (1 − γ i )
           1 − γ2
     if i is even, and otherwise it is equal to
          (1 − γ i−1 )
                       + γ i−1 · Ps00 ,σ0 ({s00 , . . . , s0i−1 : s0i−1 = t0 }),
            1 − γ2
     where t0 = (t, even). Finally, we set H 0 = 2H + 1.
        Intuitively, M0 is formed by subdividing each probabilistic transition into two transitions
     by using newly added “middle” states (those of the form S × {odd}). Hence, there is a
     one-to-one correspondence between runs of some length ` in M and finite paths of length 2`
     in M0 . The correspondence naturally extends to sets of runs and strategies (since there is
     no real choice in states of the form S × {odd}). Moreover, under corresponding strategies,
     the probabilities of corresponding sets of runs are identical. Hence, for all 0 ≤ p ≤ 1 and all
     j ∈ N there exists a strategy σ in M such that Ps0 ,σ ({s0 , . . . , sj : sj = t}) ≥ p in M if and
     only if there is a strategy σ 0 in M0 such that Ps00 ,σ0 ({s00 , . . . , s2j : s2j = t0 }) ≥ p in M0 . But
     by the discussion in the previous paragraph, such a strategy exists if and only if there is σ 00
     in M0 such that
                                (1 − γ 2j )
          ~v2j+1,σ00 (s00 ) ≥               + γ 2j · p.
                                 1 − γ2
     It follows that an action a is an optimal first action for the finite-horizon synchronized-
     reachability problem in M (with horizon H) if and only if it is an optimal first action for
     the finite-horizon reward problem in M0 (with horizon H 0 ).                             J

      B        Proof of Theorem 3
     We show that there is a polynomial-time many-one reduction from the finite-horizon
     synchronized-reachability problem to the finite-horizon reachability problem.
N. Balaji et al.                                                                                        17


Proof of Theorem 3. Given an instance (M, t, s0 , H) of the finite-horizon synchronized-
reachability problem — where t is the target state, s0 is an initial state, and H is a
binary-encoded horizon — we compute an instance (M0 , {g}, s0 , H + 1) of the finite-horizon
reachability problem where the MDP M0 is a modification of M. In particular, g, b (standing
for “good” and “bad”, respectively) are two fresh states, both sinks in M0 . For all other
states and all actions a we define a modified transition function P 0 : with probability 13
action a leads to the new target g, and with probability 23 it does whatever it did in M;
formally, we put P 0 (s, a)(g) = 13 and P 0 (s, a)(s0 ) = 23 P (s, a)(s0 ) for all states s, s0 in M.
Finally, we introduce a fresh action, f , which leads to g and b, both with probability 12 ,
when played from t; formally, we put P 0 (t, f )(g) = P 0 (t, f )(b) = 12 and P 0 (s, f )(b) = 1 for
all s 6= t. Observe that from state t and at time H it is best to play f , as 12 > 13 . Strictly
before time H, any optimal strategy does not play f — regardless of the current state
— as playing two different consecutive actions instead leads to g with probability at least
1 − ( 23 )2 = 59 > 21 ; rather, any optimal strategy maximizes the probability of reaching state t
at time H (because then it is beneficial to play f ). It follows that any optimal strategy (for
synchronization) in M corresponds naturally to an optimal strategy (for reachability) in M0 ,
and vice versa. Specifically, the first action played in the two strategies is the same. This
gives the reduction.                                                                               J


 C      Proof of Theorem 5

We show how to remove all but one last subtraction — which is then subsumed by the
comparison — in a Max-Plus-Minus SLP.

Proof of Theorem 5. Let S be a (general) SLP of order n. Without loss of generality,
we suppose S consists only of (binary) addition, subtraction, and max commands. To
eliminate subtractions, we closely follow the proof of Theorem 8 in Allender et al. [4]. We
construct a monotone SLP S 0 of order n + 1 from S by first introducing a new variable z
that will help us maintain the invariant that for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n and all 1 ≤ m ≤ N we have
JSKm (ν)(xi ) = JS 0 Km (ν)(xi ) − JS 0 Km (ν)(z).
    We proceed as follows: First we initialize z ← 0. Whenever we encounter a command
xk ← xi ± xj in S, we replace this with the following sequence of commands in S 0 .


                                                                xk ← xi + z
     xk ← xi + xj
                                                                  z ← z + xj
     x` ← x` + z, ∀` 6= k         (Add)                                                       (Sub)
                                                                 x` ← x` + xj , ∀` 6= j, k
      z ←z+z
                                                                xj ← xj + xj

For addition commands, i.e. if xk ← xi + xj , replace it by the sequence of commands (Add);
for subtraction commands, i.e. if xk ← xi − xj , by the sequence of commands (Sub).
    We leave the max commands in the SLP S unchanged in S 0 . Notice that the sequence
of commands above are monotone (i.e. they include no subtraction commands), and the
number of commands used in S 0 is at most (n + 3) times the number of commands used in S
plus an additional command to initialize z. To complete the proof, it suffices to note that
for every command in S, the corresponding sequence of {max, +} commands in S 0 satisfy
the invariant that the value of every variable xi for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n of S, is obtained as the
difference of variables xi and z in S 0 .                                                 J
18   On the Complexity of Value Iteration


                                           110                        110
                                                 pointer `
                                           101                        110




                              height = 7




                                                                            height = 7
                                           110                        100
                                           110                        100
                                           100                         ×
                                           100                         ×
                                            ×                          ×
                      counter c3 storing stack s1        counter c4 storing stack s2

        Figure 4 The stack s1 contains the word abaa and stack s2 contains the word ba. If
     the state of the Turing machine is q then the overall configuration of the Turing machine is
     aabahqiba. Here, ` = 86 as the height of both stacks is 7.




      D      Proof of Proposition 6

     The proof is by a reduction from the termination problem of a O(2n )-time bounded Turing
     machine. We suppose the tape alphabet of the Turing machine is {a, b, } with  denoting
     the empty-cell symbol. For convenience, we also assume that the machine always overwrites
     empty-cell symbols it reads and replaces them with some sequence of symbols meant to
     internally represent an empty-and-read cell. This is clearly no loss of generality. Moreover it
     implies that cells with a’s and b’s are never separated by ’s.
         The tape can be encoded into the two stacks s1 and s2 , such that the top of the stack s1
     encodes the contents of the tape cell the head of the Turing machine is currently at; the top
     of s2 , those of the tape cell immediately right of it; the bottom of s1 , the leftmost part of the
     simulated tape; the bottom of s2 , its rightmost part. The stack alphabet we use consists of
     3 binary codes 110, 101, 100, corresponding to the symbols from the Turing-machine tape
     a, b, . We then keep the contents of s1 and s2 in counters c3 and c4 by interpreting the
     binary codes as little-endian binary numbers (that is, we write bits from left to right and
     the right-most bits are the least significant) and keeping the tops of the stacks in the most
     significant bits of the counters. The technical difficulty of the proof lies in making sure that
     the resulting counter program is simple and in simulating push and pop instructions efficiently
     by using linear updates on the counters. Apart from counters c3 , c4 used to simulate the
     stacks as previously described, we use counters c1 , c2 for tests as well as additional counters
     described below.
         Let i ∈ {1, 2}. The contents of the stack si (encoded by counter c2+i ) end after the first
     end-of-stack symbol 100. That is, since 100 represents an empty cell in the Turing-machine
     tape, the rest of the tape (and stack) contents are considered to be trash. Note that this
     means our stacks have a virtual height, the number of symbols before an end-of-stack symbol,
     and an actual height, the actual number of symbols. Throughout our simulation, we will
     make sure both stacks always have the same height h. Additionally, we will keep a counter `
     whose value will always be a power of 8 divided by 2. More precisely, we will maintain the
     invariant ` = 8h /2. Intuitively, ` will be used as a pointer to the first bit (from left to right,
     thus its most significant bit) of the second element (from top to bottom) of both stacks as
     encoded in the corresponding counters. Finally, we will also make sure h ≥ 2 always holds by
     initializing both stacks with two 100 symbols that will never be popped. (Additionally, all
     the trash below these two symbols in the stack will be just invalid 000 codes.) See Figure 4
     for an illustration of the proposed encoding. Henceforth, for all j, we denote by vj the value
N. Balaji et al.                                                                                   19


of the counter cj . Observe that the above definitions imply the following invariant always
holds.
   8` < v2+i < 16` and v2+i 6∈ {8`, 10`, 12`}                                               (5)
Indeed 8`, 10`, and 12`, can be thought of as simulated stacks with , b, and a, as their
respective topmost symbols and invalid 000 symbols below. Therefore, one can test the
symbol σ at the top of a simulated stack si by using the corresponding counter test based on
the following equivalences.
    σ = a ⇐⇒ 12` ≤ v2+i < 14`
      σ = b ⇐⇒ 10` ≤ v2+i < 12`                                                             (6)
    σ =  ⇐⇒ 8` ≤ v2+i < 10`
Unfortunately, doing as described above may not always yield a simple linear-update counter
program. In the sequel we will describe how to simulate pushing and popping symbols from
the stacks as well as how to test popped symbols to obtain a simple counter program.

D.1     Pushing
To push a symbol σ into s1 , the counter program executes the following instructions: ` ← 8`;
c3 ← c3 + s`; c4 ← 8c4 ; where s is 8, 10, or 12, depending on whether σ is , b, or a,
respectively. Note that multiplication is not an allowed operation for our linear-update
counter programs, so, for instance, the instruction ` ← 8` has to be realized via a (constant)
number of addition instructions. Roughly speaking, three new most-significant bits are “freed”
in c3 and then set by adding to it a stack whose topmost symbol is the one we want to push.
Then, we left-shift (multiply by 8, to be technically correct) the contents of the other counter
since we have updated the height pointer. The operations are executed mutatis mutandis
when pushing a symbol into s2 .

D.2     Popping and testing
To pop a symbol from a stack, we set to zero the 3 most significant bits of the counter
simulating the popped stack and then left-shift it. Additionally, prior to popping, we test the
symbol at the top of the stack. Once more, let i ∈ {1, 2}. Instead of using the equivalences
from Equation (6), we observe that thanks to the invariant from Equation (5) and because
of our encoding we have that
    max{v3 , v4 , `} ≤ 16` ≤ 64|v2+i − 12`|, and
                                                                                            (7)
    max{v3 , v4 , `} ≤ 16` ≤ 64|v2+i − 10`|.
The left inequalities follow from the fact that v2+i < 16` and ` is positive. For the right
inequalities we have the following lemma.
I Lemma 10. For all i ∈ {1, 2} and both t ∈ {10, 12} it holds that ` ≤ 4|v2+i − t`|.
Proof. Since all codes have a 1 as their most significant bit, and since the symbol below
the top of the stack is always a, b, or , (recall that we push two  into the stack from the
beginning and never pop them) then we have the following refinement of Equation (6) where
σ denotes the top of the simulated stack.
    σ = a ⇐⇒ 13` ≤ v2+i < 14`
      σ = b ⇐⇒ 11` ≤ v2+i < 12`                                                             (8)
    σ =  ⇐⇒ 9` ≤ v2+i < 10`
20   On the Complexity of Value Iteration


     It follows that the claim holds whenever v2+i > t`. Observe that by the above inequalities
     v2+i is never t`.
         Let us now focus on the cases when v2+i < t`. This can only happen if b is on the top of
     the stack and t = 12 or if  is on the top of the stack and t ∈ {10, 12}. Note that it suffices
     to consider the cases when v2+i encodes a stack with topmost symbol b or  and t is 12 or
     10, respectively. We have the following equivalences
                                
                  h blocks of 3
                z      }|       {
           ` = 000 100 000 . . .
                                      2
        10` = (101 100 000 . . . )2
        12` = (110 100 000 . . . )2

     Additionally, because of our encoding (see Equation (8)) we also have the following.
                  h=log8 (2`)
                                 
                z     }|       {
        v2+i ≤ 101 110 110 . . .                       if the top symbol is b                 (9)
                                          2
        v2+i = (100 100 000 . . . )2                    if the top symbol is                  (10)

        For the first case, i.e. v2+i encodes a stack with b as the symbol in its top and t = 12.
     For Inequality (9), on the right-hand side we present the largest integer realizable via our
     encoding, i.e., the contents of the stack are (from top to bottom) baa . . . We let A denote
     the right-hand side of the Inequality (9). Observe that
                             
                   h
             z     }|       {
        A + 000 001 000 . . . ≤ 12`.
                                  2


     The desired result thus follows from Inequality (9) and the fact that the second summand in
     the above equation is 4` . For the second case, i.e. v2+i encodes a stack with  on its top and
     t = 10, we proceed similarly. It suffices to note that v2+i + ` ≤ 10`.                        J


         It follows that we can copy 64v2+i and 64t` (for t ∈ {10, 12}) into counters c1 and c2 and
     test them instead of c2+i and ` directly. More precisely, we execute the following

          : c1 ← 64c2+i
          : c2 ← 64 · 12 · `
          : if c1 ≥ c2 goto p
          : c2 ← 64 · 10 · `
          : if c1 ≥ c2 goto q
        r : ...

     where from instruction p onward we handle the case where the topmost symbol is 110
     (encoding an a); from q, the case where it is 101 (encoding a b); and from r, the case where it
     is 100 (encoding ). From p, we first make sure the pop is correctly simulated by executing
     p : c2+i ← c2+i − 12`; c2+i ← 8c2+i . Popping b from q is handled similarly.
N. Balaji et al.                                                                                          21


D.3      Simplicity
To conclude the proof, we observe that the above instructions — in particular, the ones
simulating the popping and testing — satisfy the properties required of the tests for the
program to be simple (see Equation (7)). Note that on faithful simulations of a Turing
machine, all reachable configurations of the constructed counter program have non-negative
counter values. Hence, the program is indeed simple.                                    J


 E       Proof of Theorem 7
In this section, we show that the Powering problem is EXPTIME-complete. To this end,
we reduce the bounded termination problem for simple linear-update counter programs to
the powering problem.
     Let us consider a linear-update counter program C with n counters and m instructions.
Without loss of generality, we will assume that the addition and subtraction instructions are
all of the form ci ← ci ± cj . That is, the assigned counter ci appears as the left operand of
the instruction. Indeed, for any instruction ci ← cj ± ck that does not conform to this (i.e.
i=6 j), we can replace it by a sequence of three conforming instructions that achieves the
same effect: a “reset” via subtraction ci ← ci − ci ; a “copy” via addition ci ← ci + cj ; and,
finally, the intended operation ci ← ci ± ck . Since no test instruction is introduced, this
transformation preserves simplicity of the program. Recall that the halt instruction, i.e. the
m-th instruction of C, is of the form m : if c1 ≥ c1 goto m. That is, m is “absorbing”.
     We will now describe how the Max-Plus-Minus SLP S is constructed. The SLP has two
distinct variables z, o whose values will be initially set to 0 and 1, respectively. Additionally, we
will make sure that the values of these variables remain constant with respect to applications
of S. For convenience, we will use multiplication by integer constants in the description
of the SLP. These are to be interpreted as sequences of addition commands. (We can
obtain multiplication by binary constants using polynomially-repeated doubling.) Apart from
the variables x1 , . . . , xn , Q1 , . . . , Qn introduced in the main text, we use auxiliary variables
di , d0i , ei , si , s0i , s00i for each 1 ≤ i ≤ n.

E.1      Linear updates
First, for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n we initialize variables di by appending to S the following command

     di ← z.

Now, for all addition and subtraction instructions

     p : ci ← ci ± cj

from C we append to the SLP the following commands
        (
    0     xj if Qj = pxj
   di ←
          0 otherwise

and

     di ← di ± d0i
     ei ← (p + 1) · di .
22   On the Complexity of Value Iteration


     Note that the first command is a conditional command, and so we are making use of its
     implementation from Lemma 8 (recall that C is simple, and thus the lemma indeed applies).
         Observe that if the di are not updated by commands in the rest of the SLP, then we have
     that, for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, di is non-zero only if ν(Qj ) = pν(xj ). Hence, if the valuation of the
     variables before the application of P is a correct encoding of a configuration of C then, for
     all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, di is non-zero if and only if the current simulated instruction will affect the
     value of ci by a non-zero value of di .

     E.2    Tests and jumps
     For all test-and-jump instructions

        p : if ci ≥ cj goto q

     from C we append, for all 1 ≤ k ≤ n, the following commands to S
              (
         00     xk if xi ≥ xj
        sk ←
                0   otherwise,
              (
               s00k if Qj = pxj
        s0k ←
               0 otherwise,

     and

        sk ← s0k · (q − p − 1).

     If i = j, then we forego the first conditional commands and just set s00k to the value of xk .
          Some remarks about the above commands are in order. First, the command updating s00k
     is not completely covered by Lemma 8 since we may have k ∈ {i, j}. The second command
     is also not explicitly implemented in Lemma 8. It should, however, be easy to see that
     the second command is indeed implementable using our chosen encoding using the same
     Max-Plus-Min expression used for the first part of Lemma 8 (one possible way is to use
     similar approach as for modifying the addition in counter programs above, i.e. to first reset
     s0k using subtraction and then use addition to perform the copy). Let us now extend Lemma 8
     to cover the first command.
     I Lemma 11. Let p ∈ {1, . . . , m} and i, j, k ∈ {1, 2} be such that i 6= j and k ∈ {i, j}. The
     following equation holds for all valid valuations ν that encode configurations of a simple
     linear-update CM, i.e. ν(xi ) = vi and ν(Qi ) = pν(xi ) for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, before executing a
     test-and-jump instruction q : if ci ≥ cj goto r.
                                                           (
                                                             ν(xk ) if ν(xi ) ≥ ν(xj )
         ak · max(0, ν(xq̄k ) + min(0, ν(xi ) − ν(xj ))) =                                       (11)
                                                            0       otherwise.

     (Here ak is as defined in Section 4.)
     Proof. By simplicity of the CM, and since k ∈ {i, j}, we know that there exists xq̄k such that
     ν(xk ) = ak ν(xq̄k ), i.e. xk is the ak -scaled-up version of xq̄k . Hence, it suffices to show that
     the left-hand side of Equation (11) evaluates to ak ν(xq̄k ) if ν(xi ) ≥ ν(xj ) and to 0 otherwise.
         We have that ν(xq̄k ) + ν(xi ) − ν(xj ) ≤ 0 whenever ν(xi ) < ν(xj ) by simplicity since
     |ν(xj ) − ν(xi )| ≥ x` for all ` 6= i, j and in particular for ` = q̄k . Hence, the outermost max
     yields a positive number only if ν(xi ) > ν(xj ) and 0 otherwise. Furthermore, it yields ν(xq̄k )
     because the inner min evaluates to 0 if ν(xi ) ≥ ν(xj ) does indeed hold.                         J
N. Balaji et al.                                                                                     23


The appended commands are such that, if the sk are not updated by commands in the rest
of the SLP, then we have that, for all 1 ≤ k ≤ n, sk is non-zero only if ν(Qj ) = pν(xj ) and
ν(xi ) ≥ ν(xj ). It follows that if the valuation of the variables before applying S satisfies our
encoding then sk holds the “jump difference” (precisely, the difference q − p − 1 if vi ≥ vj
holds for the simulated configuration and 0 otherwise) that should be applied to all Qi so
as to obtain the new correct encoding for the next configuration of C. Note that, we have
overshot by −1 if the test of the simulated instruction is passed. This will be compensated
for in the sequel.

E.3    Final counter and PC update
To conclude our construction of S we have to affect the xi by the di and update the Qi
to account for the change of configuration in C. We can do the latter via the following
commands appended for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n.

   Qi ← Qi + xi
   xi ← xi + di
   Qi ← Qi + ei
   Qi ← Qi + si

Note that the first command increases the “program counter” by exactly one, i.e. if ν(Qi ) =
pν(xi ) before the command, then ν(Qi ) = (p + 1)ν(xi ) after it. Intuitively, if the simulated
instruction was p, then we move to p + 1. That is, unless si is non-zero. Otherwise, we move
to the instruction dictated by the test-and-jump instruction that was just simulated. The
second and third commands take into account the update of the value of counter xi into our
state-encoding too.
    It is easy to see that, for all N ∈ N, S satisfies

   JSKN (ν)(Qi ) ≥ m · JSKN (ν)(xi )

for any 1 ≤ i ≤ n if and only if C halts in at most N steps. To conclude the proof it suffices
to observe that we can add a variable that is assigned m-times the value of xi at the end of
the SLP to obtain an instance of SLPPow whose answer is positive if and only if the above
inequality holds.                                                                           J
