                                         Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter
                                         and Connectivity Problems∗
                                         Jelle J. Oostveen #
                                         Dept. Information and Computing Sciences, Utrecht University, The Netherlands

                                         Erik Jan van Leeuwen #
                                         Dept. Information and Computing Sciences, Utrecht University, The Netherlands

                                                 Abstract
                                         We initiate the investigation of the parameterized complexity of Diameter and Connectivity in
                                         the streaming paradigm. On the positive end, we show that knowing a vertex cover of size k allows
                                         for algorithms in the Adjacency List (AL) streaming model whose number of passes is constant
                                         and memory is O(log n) for any fixed k. Underlying these algorithms is a method to execute a
                                         breadth-first search in O(k) passes and O(k log n) bits of memory. On the negative end, we show
arXiv:2207.04872v2 [cs.DS] 18 Jul 2024




                                         that many other parameters lead to lower bounds in the AL model, where Ω(n/p) bits of memory
                                         is needed for any p-pass algorithm even for constant parameter values. In particular, this holds
                                         for graphs with a known modulator (deletion set) of constant size to a graph that has no induced
                                         subgraph isomorphic to a fixed graph H, for most H. For some cases, we can also show one-pass,
                                         Ω(n log n) bits of memory lower bounds. We also prove a much stronger Ω(n2 /p) lower bound for
                                         Diameter on bipartite graphs.
                                             Finally, using the insights we developed into streaming parameterized graph exploration al-
                                         gorithms, we show a new streaming kernelization algorithm for computing a vertex cover of size k.
                                         This yields a kernel of 2k vertices (with O(k2 ) edges) produced as a stream in poly(k) passes and
                                         only O(k log n) bits of memory.

                                         2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Parameterized complexity and exact
                                         algorithms; Theory of computation → Streaming, sublinear and near linear time algorithms; Theory
                                         of computation → Lower bounds and information complexity

                                         Keywords and phrases Stream, Streaming, Graphs, Parameter, Complexity, Diameter, Connectivity,
                                         Vertex Cover, Disjointness, Permutation

                                         Funding Jelle J. Oostveen: This author is partially supported by the NWO grant OCENW.KLEIN.114
                                         (PACAN).


                                             1    Introduction

                                         Graph algorithms, such as to compute the diameter of an unweighted graph (Diameter) or
                                         to determine whether it is connected (Connectivity), often rely on keeping the entire graph
                                         in (random access) memory. However, very large networks might not fit in memory. Hence,
                                         graph streaming has been proposed as a paradigm where the graph is inspected through a
                                         so-called stream, in which its edges appear one by one [40]. To compensate for the assumption
                                         of limited memory, multiple passes may be made over the stream and computation time is
                                         assumed to be unlimited. The complexity theory question is which problems remain solvable
                                         and which problems are hard in such a model, taking into account trade-offs between the
                                         amount of memory and passes.


                                         ∗
                                             This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review but is not the Version of
                                             Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements, or any corrections. The Version of Record
                                             is available online at: https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00453-024-01246-z. An extended abstract of
                                             this work appeared in the proceedings of IPEC 2022.
2   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems


        Many graph streaming problems require Ω(n) bits of memory [35, 36] for a constant
    number of passes on n-vertex graphs. Any p-pass algorithm for Connectivity needs Ω(n/p)
    bits of memory [40]. Single pass algorithms for Connectivity or Diameter need Ω(n log n)
    bits of memory on sparse graphs [52]. A 2-approximation of Diameter requires Ω(n3/2 )
    bits of memory on weighted graphs [36]. A naive streaming algorithm for Connectivity or
    Diameter stores the entire graph, using O(m log n) = O(n2 log n) bits and a single pass.
    For Connectivity, union-find yields a 1-pass, O(n log n) bits of memory, algorithm [46].
        An intriguing aspect on Diameter and Connectivity is that classic algorithms for them
    rely on breadth-first search (BFS) or depth-first search (DFS). These seem difficult to execute
    efficiently in a streaming setting. It was a longstanding open problem to compute a DFS
    tree using o(n) passes and o(m log n) bits of memory. This barrier was recently broken [45],
    through an algorithm that uses O(n/k) passes and O(nk log n) bits of memory, for any k.
    The situation for computing single-source shortest paths seems similar [32], although good
    approximations exist even on weighted graphs (see e.g. [46, 33]). We do know that DFS
    algorithms cannot be executed in logarithmic space [50]. In streaming, any BFS algorithm
    that explores k layers of the BFS tree must use at least k/2 passes or Ω(n1+1/k /(log n)1/k )
    space [36]. Hence, much remains unexplored when it comes to graph exploration- and graph
    distance-related streaming problems such as BFS/DFS, Diameter, and Connectivity. In
    particular, most lower bounds hold for general graphs. As such, a more fine-grained view of
    the complexity of these problems has so far been lacking.
        In this paper, we seek to obtain this fine-grained view using parameterized complexity [27].
    The idea of using parameterized complexity in the streaming setting was first introduced
    by Fafianie and Kratsch [34] and Chitnis et al. [22]. Many problems are hard in streaming
    parameterized by their solution size [34, 22, 19]. Crucially, however, deciding whether a graph
    has a vertex cover of size k has a one-pass, O(k 2 log k log n)-memory kernelization algorithm
    by Chitnis et al. [20], and a 2k -passes, O(k log n)-memory direct algorithm by Chitnis and
    Cormode [19]. Bishnu et al. [10] then showed that knowing a vertex cover of size k is
    useful in solving other deletion problems using p(k) passes and f (k) log n memory, notably
    H-free deletion; this approach was recently expanded on by Oostveen and van Leeuwen [49].
    This leads to the more general question how knowing a (small) H-free modulator, that is,
    a set X such that G − X has no induced subgraph isomorphic to H (note that H = P2 in
    Vertex Cover [k]1 ), would affect the complexity of streaming problems and of BFS/DFS,
    Diameter, and Connectivity in particular. We are not aware of any investigations in this
    direction.
        An important consideration is the streaming model (see [40, 38, 44, 47] or the survey by
    McGregor [46]). In the Edge Arrival (EA) model, each edge of the graph appears once in the
    stream, and the edges appear in some fixed but arbitrary order. Most aforementioned results
    use this model. In the Vertex Arrival (VA) model the edges arrive grouped per vertex, and
    an edge is revealed at its endpoint that arrives latest. In the Adjacency List (AL) model
    the edges also arrive grouped per vertex, but each edge is present for both its endpoints.
    This means we see each edge twice and when a vertex arrives we immediately see all its
    adjacencies (rather than some subset dependent on the arrival order, as in the VA model).
    This model is quite strong, but as we shall see, unavoidable for our positive results. We do
    not consider dynamic streaming models in this paper, although they do exist. Note that all
    these streaming models concern edge streams, so even though we may talk about ‘arrival of
    a vertex’ this really means ‘arrival of the edges incident to a vertex’, and vertices are not


    1
        See Section 2 for the notation.
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                               3


separately present in the graph stream.


Our Contributions The main takeaway from our work is that the vertex cover number
likely sits right at the frontier of parameters that are helpful in computing Diameter and
Connectivity. As our main positive result, we show the following.

▶ Theorem 1. Given a graph G as an AL stream and a vertex cover of G of size k in
memory, Diameter [k] and Connectivity [k] can be solved using O(2k k) passes and
O(k log n) bits of space or using one pass and O(2k + k log n) bits of space.

    The crux to our approach is to perform a BFS in an efficient manner, using O(k) passes
and O(k log n) space. Knowledge of a vertex cover is not a restricting assumption, as one may
be computed using similar memory requirements [20, 19]. We will also show how to extend
the single-pass result to work without a vertex cover being given, at the cost of increasing
the memory use to O(4k + k log n) bits of space.
    As a contrasting result, we will show that in the VA model, even a constant-size vertex
cover does not help in computing Diameter and Connectivity. Moreover, the bound on
the vertex cover seems necessary, as we can prove that any p-pass algorithm for Diameter
requires Ω(n2 /p) bits of memory even on bipartite graphs and any p-pass algorithm for
Connectivity requires Ω(n/p) bits of memory, both in the AL model. This indicates that
both the permissive AL model and a low vertex cover number are truly needed.
    In some cases, we are also able to prove that a single-pass algorithm requires Ω(n log n)
bits of memory.
    More broadly, knowledge of being H-free (that is, not having a fixed graph H as an
induced subgraph) or having an H-free modulator does not help even in the AL model. Here,
H ̸⊆i G denotes that H is not an induced subgraph of G.

▶ Theorem 2. For any fixed graph H with H ̸⊆i P4 and H ̸= 3P1 , P3 + P1 , P2 + 2P1 , any
streaming algorithm for Diameter in the AL model that uses p passes over the stream must
use Ω(n/p) bits of memory even on the class of H-free graphs.

     We note that these results hold for H-free graphs (without the need for a modulator).
The case when H ⊆i P4 is straightforward to solve with O(log n) bits of memory, as the
diameter is either 1 or 2 (an induced path of length 3 is a P4 ). If the graph has diameter 1,
it is a clique. This can be tested in a single pass by counting the number of edges.

▶ Theorem 3. For any fixed graph H with H ̸= P2 + sP1 for s ∈ {0, 1, 2} and H ̸= sP1 for
s ∈ {1, 2, 3} and any fixed constant k ≥ 3, any streaming algorithm for Diameter in the AL
model that uses p passes over the stream must use Ω(n/p) bits of memory even on the class
of graphs G with a given set of vertices X with |X| = k such that G − X is H-free. If G − X
must be connected and H-free, then additionally H ̸= P3 .

   We note that the case when H = P2 or H = P1 is covered by Theorem 1. Cobipartite
graphs seem to be a bottleneck class. The cases when H = 2P1 or when H = P3 and G − X
must be connected lead to a surprising second positive result.

▶ Theorem 4. Given a graph G = (V, E) as an AL stream and a set X ⊆ V of size k in
memory such that G−X is a disjoint union of ℓ cliques, Diameter [k, ℓ] and Connectivity
[k, ℓ] can be solved using O(2k kℓ) passes and O((k + ℓ) log n) bits of space or one pass and
O(2k ℓ + (k + ℓ) log n) bits of space.
4   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems


        The approach for this result is similar as for Theorem 1. Moreover, we show a comple-
    mentary lower bound in the VA model, even for ℓ = 1 and constant k.
        To summarize our results in words, generalizing Theorem 1 using the perspective of
    an H-free modulator does not seem to lead to a positive result (Theorem 3). Instead,
    connectivity of the remaining graph after removing the modulator seems crucial. However,
    this perspective only helps for Theorem 4, while the problem remains hard for most other
    H-free modulators and even for the seemingly simple case of a modulator to a path (we will
    show this in Theorem 24). While Theorem 4 would also hint at the possibility of using a
    modulator to a few components of small diameter, this also leads to hardness (we show this
    in Corollary 20).
        We emphasize that all instances of Diameter in our hardness reductions are connected
    graphs. Hence, the hardness of computing Diameter is separated from the hardness of
    computing Connectivity.
        For Connectivity, we also give two broad theorems that knowledge of being H-free or
    having an H-free modulator does not help even in the AL model.

    ▶ Theorem 5. For any fixed graph H that is not a linear forest containing only paths of
    length at most 5, any streaming algorithm for Connectivity in the AL model that uses p
    passes over the stream must use Ω(n/p) bits of memory even on the class of H-free graphs.

    ▶ Theorem 6. For any fixed graph H that is not a linear forest containing only paths of
    length at most 1 and any fixed constant k ≥ 2, any streaming algorithm for Connectivity
    in the AL model that uses p passes over the stream must use Ω(n/p) bits of memory even on
    the class of graphs G with a given set of vertices X with |X| = k such that G − X is H-free.

        Our hardness results for H-free modulators for both Diameter and Connectivity have
    meaning for several standard graph parameters, we explicitly introduce and mention these
    parameters in the main body of the paper.
        As a final result, we use our insights into graph exploration on graphs of bounded vertex
    cover to show a result on the Vertex Cover problem itself. In particular, a kernel on
    2k vertices for Vertex Cover [k] can be obtained as a stream in O(k 3 ) passes in the EA
    model using only O(k log n) bits of memory. In the AL model, the number of passes is
    only O(k 2 ). This kernel still may have O(k 2 ) edges, which means that saving it in memory
    would not improve over the result of Chitnis et al. [20] (which uses O(k 2 log k log n) bits of
    memory), up to logarithmic factors and constants. Indeed, a better kernel seems unlikely to
    exist [26]. However, the important point is that storing the (partial) kernel in memory is not
    needed during its computation. Hence, it may be viewed as a possible first step towards a
    streaming algorithm for Vertex Cover [k] using O(k log n) bits of memory and poly(k)
    passes, which is an important open problem in the field, see [19]. Our kernel is constructed
    through a kernel by Buss and Goldsmith [14], and then finding a maximum matching in an
    auxiliary bipartite graph (following Chen et al. [17]) of bounded size through repeated DFS
    applications.

    Related work There has been substantial work on the complexity of graph-distance and
    reachability problems in the streaming setting. For example, Guruswami and Onak [39]
    showed that any p-pass algorithm needs n1+Ω(1/p) /pO(1) memory when given vertices s, t to
    test if s, t are at distance at most 2p + 2 in undirected graphs or to test s-t reachability in
    directed graphs. Further work on directed s-t reachability [6] recently led to a lower bound
                  √
    that any o( log n)-pass algorithm needs n2−o(1) bits of memory [18]. Other recent work
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                                 5


considers p-pass algorithms for ϵ-property testing of connectivity [53, 42, 4], including strong
memory lower bounds n1−O(ϵ·p) on bounded-degree planar graphs [5]. Further problems in
graph streaming are extensively discussed and referenced in these works; see also [3].
    In the non-streaming setting, the Diameter problem can be solved in O(nm) time by
BFS. There is a lower bound of n2−ϵ for any ϵ > 0 under the Strong Exponential Time
Hypothesis (SETH) [51]. Parameterizations of Diameter have been studied with parameter
vertex cover [13], treewidth [1, 43, 13], and other parameters [24, 8], leading to a 2O(k) n1+ϵ
time algorithm on graphs of treewidth k [13]. Running time 2o(k) n2−ϵ for graphs of treewidth
k is not possible under SETH [1]. Subquadratic algorithms are known for various hereditary
graph classes; see e.g. [15, 23, 28, 29, 30, 31, 37] and references in [23].


 2     Preliminaries
We work on undirected, unweighted graphs. We denote a computational problem A with A [k],
where [.] denotes the parameterization. A parameter k is an integer given as additional input.
In parameterized complexity the aim is to find algorithms with running time f (k) · nO(1) ,
where f is some computable function. This notion was introduced by Downey and Fellows [27],
and we refer the reader to [25] for more on parameterized complexity. In our setting, our
aim will be to find streaming algorithms with a space complexity of O(f (k) log n) for some
computable function f . This space complexity class is dubbed Fixed Parameter Streaming
by Chitnis and Cormode [19].
   Diameter is to compute maxs,t∈V d(s, t) where d(s, t) denotes the distance between s
and t. Connectivity asks to decide whether or not the graph is connected. A twin class
consists of all vertices with the same open neighbourhood. In a graph with vertex cover size
k, we have O(2k ) twin classes. For two graphs G, H, G + H denotes their disjoint union.
We also use 2G to denote G + G; 3G is G + G + G, etc. H ̸⊆i G denotes that H is not an
induced subgraph of G. A linear forest is a disjoint union of paths. A path on a vertices is
denoted Pa and has length a − 1.

     Disjn (Disjointness)
                                          n
     Input: Alice has a string x ∈ {0, 1} given by x1 x2 . . . xn . Bob has a string
               n
     y ∈ {0, 1} given by y1 y2 . . . yn .
     Question: Bob wants to check if ∃1 ≤ i ≤ n such that xi = yi = 1. (Formally, the
     answer is NO if this is the case.)

    The communication complexity necessary between Alice and Bob to solve Disjointness
is well understood, and can be used to prove lower bounds on the memory use of streaming
algorithms. This was first done by Henzinger et al. [40].

     Permn (Permutation)
     Input: Alice gets a permutation π : [n] → [n], Bob gets an integer j ∈ [n log n].
     Question: Is the j-th bit of the concatenation of π(1), π(2), . . . , π(n) equal to 1?
     That is, is the γ = (j mod log n)-th bit of the image of the ψ = ⌈ logj n ⌉-th index
     equal to 1?

   The values γ and ψ essentially break j down into the quotient (ψ) and the remainder (γ)
with divisor log n. In essence, ψ tells us in which ‘block’ of log n bits Bob should look, while
γ tells us where in a block Bob should look. Let it be clear that ψ ∈ [n] and γ ∈ [log n]. For
computation, one can compute γ = (j +log n−⌈ logj n ⌉×log n). The problem of Permutation
was created and applied first to the streaming setting by Sun and Woodruff [52]. The following
6   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems


    formulations by Bishnu et al. [9] come in very useful.

    ▶ Proposition 7. (Rephrasing of items (ii) of [9, Proposition 5.6]) If we can show a reduction
    from Disjn to problem Π in streaming model M such that in the reduction, Alice and Bob
    construct one model-M pass for a streaming algorithm for Π by communicating the memory
    state of the algorithm only a constant number of times to each other, then any streaming
    algorithm working in the model M for Π that uses p passes requires Ω(n/p) bits of memory,
    for any p ∈ N [21, 11, 2].

    ▶ Proposition 8. (Rephrasing of item (iii) of [9, Proposition 5.6]) If we can show a reduction
    from Permn to a problem Π in the streaming model M such that in the reduction, Alice
    and Bob construct one model-M pass for a streaming algorithm for Π by communicating
    the memory state of the algorithm only a constant number of times to each other, then any
    streaming algorithm working in the model M for Π that uses 1 pass requires Ω(n log n) bits
    of memory.

     If we can show a reduction from either Disjointness or Permutation, we call a problem
    ‘hard’, as it does not admit algorithms using only poly-logarithmic memory.
         Any upper bound for the EA model holds for all models, and an upper bound for the
    VA model also holds for the AL model. On the other hand, a lower bound in the AL model
     holds for all models, and a lower bound for the VA model also holds for the EA model.

     3      Upper Bounds for Diameter
    We give an overview of our upper bound results for Diameter in Table 1. The memory-
    efficient results rely on executing a BFS on the graph, which is made possible by both the
    parameter and the use of the AL model. The one-pass results rely on the possibility to save
    the entire graph in a bounded fashion. Our upper bounds assume the deletion set related to
    the parameter is given, that is, it is in memory.

     Parameter (k)                Passes     Memory (bits)             Model    Theorem
     Vertex Cover                 O(2k k)    O(k log n)                AL       11
                                  1          O(2k + k log n)           AL       12
     Distance to ℓ cliques        O(2k ℓk)   O((k + ℓ) log n)          AL       15
                                  1          O(2k ℓ + (k + ℓ) log n)   AL       16
         Table 1 Overview of the algorithms and their complexity for Diameter and Connectivity.




    ▶ Lemma 9. In a graph with vertex cover size k, any simple path has length at most 2k.

    Proof. Let G be a graph with vertex cover size k. Consider some simple path P in the graph.
    Any vertex in the independent set of G (i.e. not in the vertex cover) that is on the path P
    only has neighbours in the vertex cover. Hence, for each vertex in the independent set the
    path visits, we also visit a vertex in the vertex cover. As the vertex cover has size k, any
    simple path can visit at most 2k + 1 vertices, as then all vertices in the vertex cover have
    been visited.                                                                             ◀

    Lemma 9 is useful in that the diameter of such a graph can be at most 2k if the graph is
    connected. Our algorithm will simulate a BFS for 2k rounds, deciding on the distance of a
    vertex to all other vertices.
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                                  7


▶ Lemma 10. Given a graph G as an AL stream with a vertex cover X of size k, we can
compute the distance from a vertex v to all others using O(k) passes and O(k log n) bits of
memory.

Proof. We simulate a BFS originating at v for at most 2k rounds on our graph, using a
pass for each round. Contrary to a normal BFS, we only remember whether we visited the
vertices in X and their distances, to reduce memory complexity.
    For every vertex w ∈ X, we save its tentative distance d(w) from v; if this is not yet
decided, this field has value ∞. Our claim will be that after round i, the value of d(w) for
vertices w within distance i from v is correct. We initialize the distance of v as d(v) = 0 (we
store d(v) regardless of whether v ∈ X).
    Say we are in round i ≥ 1. We execute a pass over the stream. Say we view a vertex
w ∈ X ∪ {v} in the stream with its adjacencies. If w has a distance of d(w), we update the
neighbours u of w in X to have distance d(u) = min(d(u), d(w) + 1). If instead we view a
vertex w ∈ / X ∪ {v} in the stream, we do the following. Locally save all the neighbours and
look at their distances, and let z be the neighbour with minimum d(z) value. For every
u ∈ N (w) we update the distance as d(u) = min(d(z) + 2, d(u)). This simulates the distance
of a path passing through w (note that this may not be the shortest path, but this may be
resolved by other vertices). Executing this procedure for every vertex of G takes a single
pass, as by the AL model we see all the adjacencies of a vertex when it arrives in the stream.
This completes the procedure for round i.
    Notice that we use only O(k log n) bits of memory during the procedure, and that the
total number of passes is indeed O(k) as we execute 2k rounds, using one pass each.
    For the correctness, let us first argue the correctness of the claim after round i, the value
of d(w) of vertices w ∈ X within distance i from v is correct. We proceed by induction,
clearly the base case of 0 is correct. Now consider some vertex w at distance i from v.
Consider a shortest path from v to w. Look at the last vertex on the path before visiting w.
If this vertex is in X, then by induction, this vertex has a correct distance after round i − 1,
and so, in round i this vertex will update the distance of w to be i. If this vertex is not in X,
then it has a neighbour with distance i − 2, which is correct after round i − 2 by induction,
and so, the vertex not in X will (have) update(d) the distance of w to be i in round i.
    The correctness of the algorithm now follows from the claim, together with Lemma 9,
and the fact that we can now output all distances using a single pass by either outputting
the value of the field d(w) for a vertex w ∈ X, or by looking at all neighbours of a vertex
w∈ / X and outputting the smallest value +1.                                                   ◀

   Related is a lower bound result by Feigenbaum et al. [36], which says that any BFS
procedure that explores k layers of the BFS tree must use at least k/2 passes or super-linear
memory. This indicates that memory- and pass-efficient implementations of BFS, as in
Lemma 10, are hard to come by.
   We can now use Lemma 10 to construct an algorithm for finding the diameter of a graph
parameterized by vertex cover, essentially by executing Lemma 10 for every twin class, which
considers all options for vertices in the graph.

▶ Theorem 11. Given a graph G as an AL stream with vertex cover X of size k, we can
solve Diameter [k] in O(2k k) passes and O(k log n) bits of memory.

Proof. We enumerate all the twin classes of the neighbourhood in X of vertices (which we
can do with k bits), and for each such a class, we find if there is a vertex realizing this
class in a pass. Then, we call the algorithm of Lemma 10 with this vertex as v. Instead of
8   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems


    outputting all distances, we are only interested in the largest distance found (which may be
    +∞). We also call Lemma 10 for every x ∈ X with x as the vertex v. We keep track of the
    largest distance found over all calls to Lemma 10, and output this value as the diameter.
        The correctness follows from the correctness of Lemma 10, together with the fact that
    considering each twin class of the neighbourhood in X combined with all vertices in X
    actually considers all possible vertices that may occur in G, and so we also consider one of
    the vertices of the diametric pair in one of these iterations.                            ◀

        We show an alternative one-pass algorithm, by saving the graph as a representation by
    its twin classes, thereby completing the proof of Theorem 1.

    ▶ Theorem 12. Given a graph G as an AL stream, we can solve Diameter [k] in one pass
    and O(4k + k log n) bits of memory, or correctly report that a vertex cover of size k does not
    exist. When a vertex cover of size k is given, the memory use is O(2k + k log n).

    Proof. In our pass, we greedily construct a vertex cover of size 2k by maintaining a maximal
    matching. If at any point the matching exceeds 2k vertices, we report that no vertex cover
    of size k exists. We can characterize vertices not in the vertex cover by their adjacencies
    towards the vertex cover, i.e. the binary string of at most 2k bits with a 1 if the vertex is
    adjacent. We call this binary string the characterization of a vertex. In the pass, we also keep
    track of the adjacency matrix of edges within the vertex cover, and the characterization of
    vertices not in the vertex cover. Seeing a vertex, we either add it to the vertex cover if it has
    a neighbour that is not in the vertex cover (add that edge to the matching), in which case
    we can update the edges within the vertex cover. Otherwise, a vertex has only neighbours in
    the vertex cover, which means we can save its characterization. Any edge in the vertex cover
    will be registered, as when the second of its two vertices is added to the vertex cover, we will
    register the presence of this edge. Any edge with one endpoint v not in the vertex cover will
    be registered when saving the characterization of v, which, at that point in the stream, can
    only have neighbours in the vertex cover (otherwise it would have been added too).
        There are only O(22k ) different characterizations of adjacencies to the vertex cover of
    size 2k, and hence, for each we can save one or two bits whether there is a vertex with this
    neighbourhood and whether there is more than one. The procedure above can decide such
    properties locally using O(k log n) bits. The adjacency matrix of the vertex cover takes O(k 2 )
    bits. So, we can save all this information and the vertex cover itself using O(4k + k log n)
    bits. When a vertex cover is given, there are only O(2k ) different characterizations and so
    we use only O(2k + k log n) bits.
        Next we argue that this information is enough to decide on Diameter. We can use
    a simple enumeration technique to find the diameter of the graph. To do this, for every
    pair, we find the distance between them, and keep track of the largest distance found. For a
    given pair of vertices (given by their adjacencies towards the vertex cover, or a vertex in the
    vertex cover itself), we can decide on the distance between them using a procedure similar to
    Lemma 10 but internally instead of making actual passes over the stream.                       ◀

       We have seen all the elements of Theorem 1.

    Proof of Theorem 1. This follows immediately from Theorem 11 and 12.                          ◀

        Next, we show that the idea of simulating a BFS extends to another similar setting, where
    instead of a bounded vertex cover we have a bounded deletion distance to ℓ cliques. The
    good thing about cliques is that we need not search in them, the distances in a clique are
    known if we know the smallest distance to some vertex in the clique. However, we will need
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                                  9


to save the smallest distance to each clique to propagate distances in the network as different
vertices in a single clique can have many different adjacencies to the deletion set. This is the
reason we require a bounded number of cliques.

▶ Lemma 13. In a graph G with deletion distance k to ℓ cliques, any shortest path between
two vertices is of length at most 3k + 1, if it exists.

Proof. Let G be a graph with deletion distance k to ℓ cliques. Consider some shortest path
between two vertices v, w. Any vertex on this path that is not v, w in one of the ℓ cliques
must have as one of its neighbours on the path a vertex in the deletion set. If the path
contains more than one edge from a single clique, it is not a shortest path. Hence, the path
has length at most 3k + 1.                                                                ◀

   Lemma 13 indicates that we can use a similar approach in simulating a BFS of bounded
depth to find distances.

▶ Lemma 14. Given a graph G as an AL stream with deletion distance k to ℓ cliques, with
the given deletion set X, we can decide on the distance from one vertex v to all others using
O(k) passes and O((k + ℓ) log n) bits of memory.

Proof. Similar to Lemma 10, we simulate a BFS originating at v of at most 3k + 1 rounds,
using a pass for each round. We only remember distances for vertices in the deletion set,
and the smallest distance in each clique. This way the memory complexity remains small.
    The setup of the algorithm is as follows. For every vertex in the deletion set X, and
for every clique, we save its distance from v, if this is not yet decided this field has value
+∞. For a clique, this value means the smallest distance from v to some vertex of the clique.
Let us denote d(w) as the value of this field for a vertex w ∈ X or a clique with which we
associate a (non-existent) vertex w. Our claim is that after round i, the fields d(w) for w
within distance i from v are correct. We initialize d(v) = 0, and if it is contained in a clique,
then set d(w) = 0 for the associated vertex w.
    Let us describe the workings of a round, say round i ≥ 1. We make a pass over the stream,
and for each vertex we do the following. If we see a vertex w ∈ X with distance d(w), we
update the distances of its neighbours u ∈ N (w) as min(d(u), d(w) + 1). If we see a vertex c
contained in some clique with associated vertex w, we look at its neighbours in N (c) ∩ X. If
a neighbour u of c has d(u) + 1 ≤ d(w), we update d(w), as c realizes this distance in the
clique. Therefore, we update the neighbours u ∈ N (c) ∩ X with d(u) = min(d(u), d(w) + 1).
Otherwise, d(w) is not realized by c, but by another vertex of the clique, and so, we can
update the neighbours u of c in X with d(u) = min(d(u), d(w) + 2). This concludes what we
do in a round.
    Notice that we can always identify which clique a vertex not in X belongs to, as the AL
stream provides all its neighbours.
    The correctness of this algorithm quickly follows from the correctness of Lemma 10
combined with how we handle cliques here, and Lemma 13. Let it also be clear that we use
O(k) passes and use O((k + ℓ) log n) bits of memory.                                           ◀

   Using Lemma 14 we can decide the diameter of the graph by calling it many times for
the possible vertices in the graph.

▶ Theorem 15. Given a graph G as an AL stream with deletion distance k to ℓ cliques,
with the given deletion set X, we can solve Diameter [k, ℓ] using O(2k ℓk) passes and
O((k + ℓ) log n) bits of memory.
10   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems


     Proof. We can enumerate all the twin classes of neighbourhoods in X (with k bits), and for
     each class use a pass to find at most ℓ vertices which realize this neighbourhood in X (at
     most one from each clique, two vertices from the same clique with the same neighbourhood
     in X are equivalent). We call the algorithm of Lemma 14 for each of these vertices as v,
     and also for each of the vertices of X as v. We keep track of the largest distance found, and
     output it as the diameter after all calls. This results in an algorithm using O(2k ℓ · k) passes
     and O((k + ℓ) log n) bits of memory.
        The correctness follows from the correctness of Lemma 14, together with the fact that we
     consider all vertices as a start node, up to equivalence. This is because we can characterize
     each vertex by its adjacencies towards X together with the clique it is contained in, which
     identifies the vertex up to equivalence on the closed neighbourhood.                          ◀

         The performance of the algorithm in Theorem 15 is distinctly worse than that of The-
     orem 11, however, it does allow for more flexibility in the input in some specific cases. Note
     that the number of passes especially is exponential in k, but only linear in ℓ, so a graph that
     is very close to a number of big cliques is well suited to apply this algorithm to.
         For this setting, there also is a one pass but high memory approach.

     ▶ Theorem 16. Given a graph G as an AL stream with deletion distance k to ℓ cliques, with
     the given deletion set X, we can solve Diameter [k, ℓ] using one pass and O(2k ℓ+(k+ℓ) log n)
     bits of memory.

     Proof. The approach here is similar to that of Theorem 12. In our pass, we save the deletion
     set X and its internal edges. Next to this, every vertex not in X can be characterized by
     its adjacencies towards X, together with what clique it is in. Therefore, each vertex can be
     characterized by k + log ℓ bits, and for each option, we save whether we have 0, 1, or more of
     this vertex (this takes two bits). We need O(ℓ log n) bits to be able to identify which clique
     a vertex is in, as we can save a representative for each clique and identify a vertex by its
     adjacency to one of the representatives. We can find this information in our pass because it
     is an AL stream, and this takes O(2 · 2k+log ℓ + (k + ℓ) log n) = O(2k ℓ + (k + ℓ) log n) bits of
     memory.
         To solve Diameter, we now only need to execute a procedure like that in Lemma 14 for
     every pair of vertices, deciding on the distance between them. The theorem follows.            ◀

        We have now seen all the elements of Theorem 4. We are not aware of any algorithms to
     compute the parameter distance to ℓ cliques.

     ▶ Theorem 4. Given a graph G = (V, E) as an AL stream and a set X ⊆ V of size k in
     memory such that G−X is a disjoint union of ℓ cliques, Diameter [k, ℓ] and Connectivity
     [k, ℓ] can be solved using O(2k kℓ) passes and O((k + ℓ) log n) bits of space or one pass and
     O(2k ℓ + (k + ℓ) log n) bits of space.

     Proof. This follows immediately from Theorem 15 and 16.                                        ◀

      4     Lower Bounds for Diameter
     We work with reductions from Disjn , and we construct graphs where Alice controls some of
     the edges, and Bob controls some of the edges, depending on their respective input of the
     Disjn problem, and some parts of the graph are fixed. The aim is to create a gap in the
     diameter of the graph, that is, the answer to Disjn is YES if and only if the diameter is
     above or below a certain value. The lower bound then follows from Proposition 7. Here n
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                                        11


      Parameter (k) / Graph class             Size            Bound                     Theorem
      General and Bipartite Graphs                            (AL, n2 /p, p)-hard       26, 27
      Vertex Cover                            ≥3              (VA, n/p, p)-hard         17
      Distance to ℓ cliques                   k ≥ 2, ℓ ≥ 1    (VA, n/p, p)-hard         18
      FVS, FES                                ≥0              (AL, n/p, p)-hard         22
                                              ≥0              (AL, n log n, 1)-hard     29
      Distance to matching                    ≥3              (AL, n/p, p)-hard         20
      Distance to path                        ≥2              (AL, n/p, p)-hard         24
                                              ≥2              (AL, n log n, 1)-hard     31
      Distance to depth ℓ tree                k ≥ 3, ℓ ≥ 2    (AL, n/p, p)-hard         20
                                              k ≥ 0, ℓ ≥ 5    (AL, n/p, p)-hard         22
                                              k ≥ 0, ℓ ≥ 7    (AL, n log n, 1)-hard     29
      Dist. to ℓ comps. of diam. x            k, x ≥ 2        (AL, n/p, p)-hard         20
      Domination Number                       ≥3              (AL, n/p, p)-hard         20
      Maximum Degree                          ≥3              (AL, n/p, p)-hard         22
                                              ≥3              (AL, n log n, 1)-hard     29
      Split graphs                                            (AL, n/p, p)-hard         25
   Table 2 An overview of the lower bounds for Diameter, with the parameter (k) on the left.
These results hold for connected graphs. (M, m, p)-hard means that any algorithm using p passes in
model M (or weaker) requires Ω(m) bits of memory. FVS stands for Feedback Vertex Set number,
FEN for Feedback Edge Set number.



may be the number of vertices in the graph construction, but may also be different (possibly
forming a different lower bound). Our lower bounds hold for connected graphs. An overview
of all hardness results for Diameter is given in Table 2.
    We start by proving simple lower bounds for the VA model when our problem is paramet-
erized by the vertex cover number, and when our problem is parameterized by the distance
to ℓ cliques. This shows that we actually need the AL model to achieve the upper bounds in
Section 3. The constructions are illustrated in Figure 1 and Figure 2. Generally, a-vertices
(b-vertices) and their incident edges are controlled by Alice (Bob).
▶ Theorem 17. Any streaming algorithm for Diameter on graphs of vertex cover number
at least 3 in the VA model that uses p passes over the stream requires Ω(n/p) bits of memory.
Proof. Let x, y be the input to Disjn of Alice and Bob, respectively. Assume we have a
streaming algorithm for Diameter in the VA model. We construct a graph as illustrated
in Figure 1. First Alice reveals to the stream n vertices v1 , . . . , vn with no edges, then she
reveals the vertex c which is connected to all the n vertices. Now we associate the n vertices
with the indices of x and y, associate vertex vi with index i. Alice reveals a vertex a, and for
each index i she reveals an edge between a and vi when the entry at the index i in x is a 1.
After this, she passes the memory state of the algorithm to Bob. Bob now reveals a vertex b
and similar to Alice, reveals an edge between b and vi when the entry at index i in y is a 1.
This completes the construction of the graph, and thus the stream. Let it be clear that this
is a VA stream that Alice and Bob can construct without knowing input of the other. The
graph is always connected because if either Alice or Bob has an all-zeroes input, the problem
of Disjn is trivially solvable (so Disjn is equally hard ignoring this case)2 .


2
    In fact, there are stronger assumptions that one can make while the complexity of Disjn remains the
12   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems


                                                                         a                     b
                a                            b




                                                                      v0 v1 v2     ···             vn+1
                                c

         Figure 1 VA lower bound for diameter with               Figure 2 VA lower bound for diameter with
     vertex cover size 3, called ‘Simple VA’. The ver-       distance 2 to 1 clique, called ‘Clique VA’. A
     tices in the middle are indexed 1, . . . , n. An edge   dashed edge is present when the entry at the
     incident to a (b) is present when the entry of          corresponding index is 1. The vertices inside the
     Alice (Bob) at the corresponding index is 1. The        grey area form a clique. Hence, deletion distance
     vertex c ensures the graph is connected.                to a clique is 2 (remove a and b).


         We now claim that the diameter of this graph is at most 3 when the answer to Disjn is
     NO, and otherwise the diameter is 4.
         Let us assume that the answer to Disjn is NO, that is, there is an index i such that
     xi = yi = 1. Then clearly, the distances between a, b and c are all 2, by viewing the paths
     using vi as an intermediate vertex. Hence the diameter is at most 3, which can be formed by
     some path from e.g. a to vi to c to some vj that is non-adjacent to a.
         Now assume the answer to Disjn is YES, that is, there is no index i such that xi = yi = 1.
     Now consider the distance between a and b. To get from a to b, we need to go from a to
     some vi (which is non-adjacent to b by the assumption), then go to c and to another vj
     which is adjacent to b (but not a), to go to b. This path has length 4, and must exist by the
     non-all-zeroes input assumption, and forms a shortest path from a to b in this graph. So the
     diameter of the graph is 4.
         In conclusion, we constructed a connected graph of size n + 3 with a vertex cover number
     of 3 (taking {a, b, c} suffices) that can be given as a VA stream to a streaming algorithm for
     Diameter to solve the Disjn problem. The theorem follows from Proposition 7.                ◀


     ▶ Theorem 18. Any streaming algorithm for Diameter on graphs of distance 2 to ℓ = 1
     clique in the VA model that uses p passes over the stream requires Ω(n/p) bits of memory.

     Proof. Let x, y be the input to Disjn of Alice and Bob, respectively. Assume we have a
     streaming algorithm for Diameter in the VA model. We construct a graph as illustrated in
     Figure 2. Start with a clique on n + 2 vertices, v0 , . . . , vn+1 . Let a, b be two vertices not in
     the clique, and add the edges (a, v0 ) and (b, vn+1 ). Then, for any i, Alice adds the edge (a, vi )
     when xi = 1 and Bob adds the edge (b, vi ) when yi = 1. This completes the construction.
     Alice and Bob construct the VA stream as follows. First Alice reveals v0 , . . . , vn+1 and then
     reveals a (for which she knows what edges should be present). Then Alice passes the memory
     of the algorithm to Bob, who reveals b, which completes the stream. Notice that the graph
     is always connected by the fixed edges (a, v0 ) and (b, vn+1 ).
         We now claim that the diameter of this graph is 2 when the answer to Disjn is NO, and
     otherwise the diameter is at least 3.


       same, see [16] or [2].
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                                      13




                    a                                                          b




                                                   c

      Figure 3 AL lower bound for diameter, called ‘Simple AL’. The edges in the middle are indexed
1, . . . , n. An edge incident on a (b) is present when the entry of Alice (Bob) at the corresponding
index is 1. The vertex c ensures the graph is connected.


    Let us assume that the answer to Disjn is NO, that is, there is an index i such that
xi = yi = 1. Notice how the distance between a and b is now 2, because both are connected
to vi . The distance between any other pair of vertices is also at most 2, because all vertices
except a and b form a clique.
    Now assume the answer to Disjn is YES, that is, there is no index i such that xi = yi = 1.
The shortest path between a and b in this instance must use some edge in the clique, as these
vertices do not have a common neighbour. Hence, the distance between a and b is at least 3.
    In conclusion, we constructed a connected graph of size n + 4 with a distance 2 to ℓ = 1
clique (taking {a, b} suffices) that can be given as a VA stream to a streaming algorithm for
Diameter to solve the Disjn problem. The theorem follows from Proposition 7.                 ◀

    The lower bounds in Figure 1 and Figure 2 do not work for the AL model because there
are vertices that may be adjacent to both a and b, so neither Alice nor Bob can produce the
adjacency list of such a vertex alone. For the ‘Simple VA’ construction, we can ‘fix’ this by
extending these vertices to edges but this is destructive to the small vertex cover number of
the construction, see Figure 3. It should be clear that AL reductions require care: the set of
edges incident to a vertex has to be fully determined when Alice or Bob wants to reveal it.
▶ Theorem 19. Any streaming algorithm for Diameter that works on the ‘Simple AL’
construction in the AL model using p passes over the stream requires Ω(n/p) bits of memory.
Proof. Let x, y be the input to Disjn of Alice and Bob, respectively. We construct a graph
as illustrated in Figure 3. The graph consist of 2n + 3 vertices. This is a matching M on 2n
vertices. We make a vertex c adjacent to all vertices of M . Next to this, we have vertices a
and b of which the adjacencies towards one end of M are dependent on the input of Alice
and Bob, respectively. An edge between a and ith edge on the ‘left’ side of M is present
when Alice has a 1 on index i in x. An edge between b and ith edge the ‘right’ side of M is
present when Bob has a 1 on index i in y. Assuming we have an algorithm that can work on
this graph, to construct an AL stream for the algorithm, Alice can first reveal a, c, and all
vertices on the left side of M , then pass the memory of the algorithm to Bob, who reveals
b and all the vertices on the right side of M . This completes one pass of the stream. The
graph is always connected because if either Alice or Bob has an all-zeroes input, the problem
of Disjn is trivially solvable (so Disjn is equally hard ignoring this case).
    We now claim that the diameter of the ‘Simple AL’ graph is at most 3 when the answer
to Disjn is NO, and otherwise the diameter is at least 4.
    Let us assume that the answer to Disjn is NO, that is, there is an index i such that
xi = yi = 1. Notice that the distance from c to any vertex is at most 2. The distance from a
14   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems


     to b is 3 by taking the ith matching edge. The distances from a to any other vertex is at
     most 3 by going through c, and the same holds for b. So the diameter is at most 3.
         Now assume the answer to Disjn is YES, that is, there is no index i such that xi = yi = 1.
     Consider the distance between a and b. As there is no index where both have a 1, the shortest
     path from a to b must use c as an intermediate vertex. But then this path has length at least
     4. So the diameter is at least 4.
        We conclude that any algorithm that can solve the Diameter problem on the graph
     construction ‘Simple AL’ in the AL model in p passes, must use Ω(n/p) bits of memory by
     Proposition 7.                                                                             ◀

        The following follows from Theorem 19 by observing some properties of the ‘Simple AL’
     construction in Figure 3.

     ▶ Corollary 20. Any streaming algorithm for Diameter in the AL model that uses p passes
     over the stream must use Ω(n/p) bits of memory, even on graphs for which the algorithm is
     given a

     1. Deletion Set to Matching of size at least 3,
     2. Deletion Set to ℓ components of diameter x of size at least 2, x ≥ 2,
     3. Dominating Set of size at least 3,
     4. Deletion Set to a depth ℓ tree of size at least 3, ℓ ≥ 2.

     Proof. The corollary follows from Theorem 19, together with observing that the construction
     of ‘Simple AL’ is

     1. a matching when removing {a, b, c},
     2. one component of diameter 2 when removing {a, b},
     3. dominated by the set of vertices {a, b, c},
     4. a tree of depth 2 when we add a vertex d adjacent to the left part of M 3 , and remove
        {a, b, c}.

                                                                                                            ◀

        Next, we construct a lower bound for a special case, when the input graph is a tree, see
     Figure 4.

     ▶ Theorem 21. Any streaming algorithm for Diameter that works on the ‘Windmill’
     construction in the AL model using p passes over the stream requires Ω(n/p) bits of memory.

     Proof. Let x, y be the input to Disjn of Alice and Bob, respectively. We construct a graph
     as illustrated in Figure 4. The graph consist of 5n + 6 vertices. We start with a path P on 6
     vertices, call the vertex on one of the ends the center. To this center, we will ‘glue’ n gadgets,
     which may vary depending on the input of Alice and Bob, so associate an index i with each
     gadget. Each gadget adds 5 vertices to the graph. Let us describe one such gadget. Consider
     two triplets of vertices ai,1 , ai,2 , ai,3 (Alice) and bi,1 , bi,2 , bi,3 (Bob), and connect ai,3 to bi,1
     with an edge. For Alice, if the entry at index i is a 0, she inserts the edges (ai,1 , ai,2 ) and
     (ai,1 , ai,3 ), and if it is a 1, she inserts (ai,1 , ai,2 ) and (ai,2 , ai,3 ). Bob does the same for his
     triplet. We ‘glue’ this gadget into the graph by identifying ai,1 to be the same vertex as the
     center vertex in the graph. Assuming we have an algorithm that works on this graph, to


     3
         Notice that adding d does not change any of the distances.
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                                     15


construct an AL stream containing this graph, Alice first reveals the path P , and all her own
vertices ai,2 , ai,3 for all i, with all the incident edges. Then she passes the memory of the
algorithm to Bob who reveals the vertices bi,1 , bi,2 , bi,3 for all i, with all the incident edges.
This completes one pass of the stream. Notice that the graph is connected.
    We now claim that the diameter of the ‘Windmill’ graph is at least 10 when the answer
to Disjn is NO, and otherwise the diameter is at most 9.
    Let us assume that the answer to Disjn is NO, that is, there is an index i such that
xi = yi = 1. Then, the distance from the end of the path P to bi,3 is exactly 10, and this is
the only simple path between these vertices, so it is the shortest path. Hence, the diameter
is at least 10.
    Now assume the answer to Disjn is YES, that is, there is no index i such that xi = yi = 1.
Then, the distance from the center vertex to any other vertex ai,j or bi,j is at most 4, as at
least one of the triplets for each index forms a tree-like shape and not a path. Therefore, the
diameter is at most 9, formed by the shortest path from the end of the path P to some bi,3 .
    We conclude that any algorithm that can solve the Diameter problem on the graph
construction ‘Windmill’ in the AL model in p passes, must use Ω(n/p) bits of memory by
Proposition 7.                                                                                   ◀

    The following follows from Theorem 21 by observing properties of the ‘Windmill’ con-
struction.

▶ Corollary 22. Any streaming algorithm for Diameter in the AL model that uses p passes
over the stream must use Ω(n/p) bits of memory, even on graphs for which the algorithm is
given

1. that the input is a bounded depth tree,
2. that the Maximum Degree is a constant of at least 3.

Proof. The corollary follows from Theorem 21, together with observing that ‘Windmill’ is

1. a bounded depth tree,
2. a lower bound that still works when we convert the center vertex into a binary tree of
   depth c = O(log n) and extend the path to size 5 + c accordingly (this makes the diameter
   distinction to be 9 + 2c or 10 + 2c).

                                                                                                  ◀

                                         ai,1

                           0
                                                                  A
                                                ai,3          B
                                  ai,2

                                                bi,1                   P
                           1

                                  bi,2                 bi,3

                                         index i

   Figure 4 AL lower bound for diameter consisting of a tree, called ‘Windmill’. The difference in
an entry 1 or 0 is shown on the left. The gadget for index i combines a 0/1-gadget for Alice and a
0/1-gadget for Bob. It makes two 1 entries at this index a path of length 5, and a tree structure of
depth at most 4 otherwise. These n gadgets are then identified at ai,1 and a tail is added.
16   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems


        Next we look at the case when the input graph is close to a path.

                               a                                                a




                      pi,4          pi,8
               pi,2          pi,6




                               b
                                                                                b


         Figure 5 AL lower bound for diameter consisting of a path and 2 vertices, called ‘Diamond’.
     Note that a is connected to b with an edge (indicated with a dashed line here). On the left the
     gadget for a single index i is shown, where the dotted edges are present when the entry at index i is
     0 (for Alice incident on a, for Bob incident on b). On the right, the construction is sketched in full.


     ▶ Theorem 23. Any streaming algorithm for Diameter that works on the ‘Diamond’
     construction in the AL model using p passes over the stream requires Ω(n/p) bits of memory.

     Proof. Let x, y be the input to Disjn of Alice and Bob, respectively. We construct a graph
     as illustrated in Figure 5. We construct a graph on 10n + 3 vertices. We start with two
     vertices a and b, connected by an edge. Create n + 1 vertices connected to a and b with an
     edge and label them c0 , . . . cn . We create a gadget for index i between ci−1 and ci for every
     1 ≤ i ≤ n. For index i, we insert a path Pi = pi,1 , . . . , pi,9 on 9 vertices with pi,1 connected
     to ci−1 and pi,9 to ci with an edge. The edges (a, pi,2 ) and (a, pi,6 ) are present if and only if
     xi = 0 for Alice, and the edges (b, pi,4 ) and (b, pi,8 ) are present if and only if yi = 0 for Bob.
     Assuming we have an algorithm that works on this construction, to construct an AL stream
     containing this graph, Alice first reveals all vertices except b and pi,4 and pi,8 for all i (the
     edges are fixed, or the input of Alice decides the edges, for these vertices), then passes the
     memory state of the algorithm to Bob who reveals exactly b and pi,4 and pi,8 for all i. This
     completes one pass of the stream. Notice that the graph is connected.
         We now claim that the diameter of the ‘Diamond’ graph is at least 8 when the answer to
     Disjn is NO, and otherwise the diameter is at most 7.
         Let us assume that the answer to Disjn is NO, that is, there is an index i such that
     xi = yi = 1. Then, consider pi,5 . The distance from this vertex to a or b is exactly 6. So, the
     distance from pi,5 to some other pj,5 for j ̸= i is at least 8.
         Now assume the answer to Disjn is YES, that is, there is no index i such that xi = yi = 1.
     Then for any 1 ≤ i ≤ n and 1 ≤ j ≤ 9 the distance from pi,j to one of either a or b is at most
     3. So every vertex in the graph has distance at most 3 to either a or b. But then, as a and b
     are connected with an edge, the diameter must be at most 7.
         We conclude that any algorithm that can solve the Diameter problem on the graph
     construction ‘Diamond’ in the AL model in p passes, must use Ω(n/p) bits of memory by
     Proposition 7.                                                                                    ◀

         The following follows from Theorem 23 by observing properties of the ‘Diamond’ con-
     struction.

     ▶ Corollary 24. Any streaming algorithm for Diameter in the AL model that uses p passes
     over the stream must use Ω(n/p) bits of memory, even on graphs for which the algorithm is
     given a Deletion Set to a path of size at least 2.
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                                                       17


Proof. The corollary follows from Theorem 23, together with observing that ‘Diamond’ is a
path when we remove {a, b}.                                                            ◀


                          a0n     ···     a02   a01                 b01   b02    ···     b0n




                          an     ···      a2    a1    a0       b0   b1    b2    ···      bn




   Figure 6 AL lower bound for diameter on split graphs, called ‘Split’. Depending on the input,
some a′i either has an edge to a0 or ai when xi = 0 or 1. The same holds for b′i with yi . The grey
area forms a clique, and each ai is connected to all b′j where i ̸= j, and the same holds for bi and a′j .

    Next we show that the Diameter problem in the AL model is hard on split graphs.

▶ Theorem 25. Any streaming algorithm for Diameter that works on split graphs in the
AL model using p passes over the stream requires Ω(n/p) bits of memory.

Proof. Let x, y be the input to Disjn of Alice and Bob, respectively. We construct a graph
as illustrated in Figure 6. We construct a graph on 4n + 2 vertices. The split graph we
construct has as a clique on 2n + 2 vertices, let this be the vertices a0 , . . . , an , b0 , . . . , bn .
The independent set consists of the vertices a′1 , . . . , a′n , b′1 , . . . , b′n . The following edges are
present regardless of the input: we connect a0 to all b′i , 1 ≤ i ≤ n, and similarly b0 to all
a′i , 1 ≤ i ≤ n. We also connect each ai to all b′j where j ̸= i for 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Similarly, we
connect each bi to all a′j where j ̸= i for 1 ≤ i ≤ n. The other edges are input dependent.
For each index i, the edge (ai , a′i ) is inserted when xi = 1 and otherwise the edge (a0 , a′i )
is inserted. Similarly, for each i, the edge (bi , b′i ) is inserted when yi = 1 and otherwise the
edge (b0 , b′i ) is inserted. This completes the construction. Note that it is a split graph as the
vertices a0 , . . . , an , b0 , . . . , bn form a clique and a′1 , . . . , a′n , b′1 , . . . , b′n form an independent
set. Assuming we have an algorithm that works on split graphs, to construct an AL stream
containing this graph, Alice reveals all the a-vertices. Then she passes the memory of the
algorithm to Bob, who reveals all the b-vertices. This completes one pass of the stream.
Notice that Alice and Bob do not require information on the input of the other, as only
input-independent edges connect a-vertices to b-vertices.
      We claim that the diameter of this graph is at most 2 if the answer to Disjn is YES and
otherwise the diameter is at least 3.
      Let us assume the answer to Disjn is NO, that is, there is an index i such that xi = yi = 1.
Consider the distance between a′i and b′i in this instance. Notice that because xi = yi = 1,
there is no vertex in the clique connected to both vertices. As both vertices are connected to
some vertex in the clique, the distance between them must be 3.
      Now assume the answer to Disjn is YES, that is, there is no index i such that xi = yi = 1.
We show that the diameter is at most 2. The distance between vertices in the clique is at
most 1. The distance from any a′i or b′i to some vertex in the clique is at most 2, because
each a′i or b′i is always connected to at least one vertex in the clique. The distance from
any a′i to another a′j is 2 because of b0 , similarly, the distance from any b′i to another b′j
is 2 because of a0 . Let 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n be two (possibly the same) indices, and consider the
18   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems


     distance between a′i and b′j . If either xi = 0 or yj = 0 then the distance is 2 because of a0 or
     b0 . Otherwise, both have a 1 at the corresponding index. But then we know that i ̸= j, and
     so a′i , ai , b′j is a path in the graph of length 2. Hence, the diameter of the graph is at most 2.
          We conclude that any algorithm that can solve the Diameter problem on split graphs in
     the AL model in p passes, must use Ω(n/p) bits of memory by Proposition 7.                       ◀

          We can now prove Theorem 2 and Theorem 3. Intuitively, if H contains a cycle or a vertex
      of degree 3, a modification of ‘Windmill’ is H-free; if H is a linear forest, a modification of
     ‘Split’ is (almost) H-free.

     ▶ Theorem 2. For any fixed graph H with H ̸⊆i P4 and H =   ̸ 3P1 , P3 + P1 , P2 + 2P1 , any
     streaming algorithm for Diameter in the AL model that uses p passes over the stream must
     use Ω(n/p) bits of memory even on the class of H-free graphs.

     Proof. If H contains a cycle as a subgraph, then the result follows from Theorem 21. Hence,
     we may assume that H does not contain a cycle as a subgraph, and thus is a forest.
         If H contains a tree with a vertex of degree at least three, then the result follows from a
     slight modification of Theorem 21. Start from the version of the construction where each
     vertex has degree at most 3 (per Corollary 22) and let c denote the center vertex. Note that
     the diametral pair in the construction is the other end v ̸= c of the path P (recall that c
     is one of its ends) and another leaf of the tree. Hence, we can add edges (which shorten
     distances) as long as this property is preserved. Consider the tree to be rooted at v. Make
     the two children of c (which are not on P by the choice of the root) adjacent, and recurse
     down the tree, consistently making children adjacent if there are two. The resulting graph
     has no K1,3 as an induced subgraph, and thus is H-free. Hence, we may assume that H also
     does not contain a vertex of degree at least three, and thus is a linear forest.
         We now reduce the open cases to just H = 4P1 and H = P4 + P1 and later show hardness
     for those cases. If H contains a 2P2 as an induced subgraph, then the result follows from
     Theorem 25, as split graphs are 2P2 -free. Hence, H does not contain 2P2 as an induced
     subgraph. In particular, we may assume that all paths in H are of length at most 3. If H is
     the union of a P4 and either at least two other paths or another path of length at least 2,
     then it contains a 4P1 . In the other cases when H is the union of a P4 and other paths, it
     is P4 + P2 (which contains a 2P2 , and thus was already excluded) or P4 + P1 . If H is the
     union of a P3 and at least two other paths, it contains a 4P1 . If H is the union of a P3 and
     another path of length at least 1, then it contains a 2P2 and thus was already excluded.
     The case when H is P3 + P1 has been excluded by assumption. Hence, we may assume
     that H contains only paths of length at most 1. If H contains a P2 , then it cannot contain
     another P2 , as 2P2 would be an induced subgraph, nor can it be P2 + P1 which is an induced
     subgraph of P4 , nor can it be P2 + sP1 for s ≥ 2 which is P2 + 2P1 (excluded by assumption)
     or contains a 4P1 . If H does not contain a P2 , then it is sP1 for some s. However, P1 and
     2P1 are induced subgraphs of P4 , 3P1 is excluded by assumption, and sP1 for s ≥ 4 contains
     4P1 as an induced subgraph. Hence, the open cases have been successfully reduced.
         To tackle the remaining cases, H = 4P1 or H = P4 + P1 , we modify the construction
     of Theorem 25. Let (C, I) be the split partition implied by the construction. In that
     construction, it can be readily seen that the vertices a′1 , . . . , a′n can be turned into a clique A′
     and the vertices b′1 , . . . , b′n can be turned into a clique B ′ without affecting the correctness of
     the reduction. Observe that the resulting graph is 4P1 -free, as it is a union of three cliques.
     To see that it is also P4 + P1 -free, note that in any induced subgraph isomorphic to P4 + P1 ,
     the P4 must contain two consecutive vertices in A′ , say a′i and a′j for some i =        ̸ j, and two
     consecutive vertices c, c′ in C (the case when it contains two consecutive vertices in B ′ and
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                                          19


C is symmetric). Note that c, c′ ̸∈ {b0 , b1 , . . . , bn } or c′ (the end of the P4 ) would be adjacent
to a′i or a′j . Moreover, c, c′ ̸∈ {a0 , a1 , . . . , an }, as they would jointly cover B ′ , leaving no
room for the P1 . The theorem follows.                                                                 ◀

▶ Theorem 3. For any fixed graph H with H ̸= P2 + sP1 for s ∈ {0, 1, 2} and H ̸= sP1 for
s ∈ {1, 2, 3} and any fixed constant k ≥ 3, any streaming algorithm for Diameter in the AL
model that uses p passes over the stream must use Ω(n/p) bits of memory even on the class
of graphs G with a given set of vertices X with |X| = k such that G − X is H-free. If G − X
must be connected and H-free, then additionally H ̸= P3 .

Proof. We start with the case when G − X has to be a connected graph. By Theorem 2,
only the cases when H ⊆i P4 and H = 3P1 , H = P3 + P1 , H = P2 + 2P1 still need to be
proven.
    If H is a P4 , then the result follows from Theorem 19, because in that construction for
some X of size 2, G − X is a union of triangles where the triangles have a single common
vertex c. Hence, we may assume H has only paths of length at most 2. If H is P3 + P1 ,
then the result follows again from Theorem 19, because in that construction the vertex c
is dominating, yet must be in any induced P3 . We also note that by assumption, H =    ̸ P3 .
Hence, we may assume H only has paths of length at most 1. These cases are all resolved by
assumption.
    In case G − X does not have to be connected, the only relevant case is when H = P3 . In
that case, the result follows from Theorem 19, because in that construction for some X of
size 3, G − X is a matching.                                                              ◀

    We can also prove a quadratic bound for general graphs; see Figure 7 for the construction.

▶ Theorem 26. Any streaming algorithm for Diameter on general (dense) graphs in the
AL model using p passes over the stream requires Ω(n2 /p) bits of memory.

Proof. Let N = n2 . Let x, y be the input to DisjN of Alice and Bob, respectively. We
construct a graph as illustrated in Figure 7. We construct a graph on 7n + 2 vertices, but
O(n2 ) edges. The input of Alice and Bob will control the edges in a bipartite graph each. Let
a1 , . . . an and a′1 , . . . , a′n be the bipartite graph A for Alice. Alice now views her input x as
an adjacency matrix for the n2 potential edges in A, but inverse, so an edge is present if and
only if the corresponding entry is a 0. We also add a (universal) vertex uA which we connect
to all vertices in A. For Bob, do the same with vertices b1 , . . . , bn and b′1 , . . . , b′n forming a
bipartite graph B. Bob also views his input y as an adjacency matrix (in exactly the same
order as Alice!) for the n2 potential edges in B, but inverse, so an edge is present if and only
if the corresponding entry is a 0. We also add a vertex uB which we connect to all vertices in
B. To complete the construction, we create a set S of n vertices s1 , . . . , sn and we connect
si to ai and bi for each 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Then, we also create a set T of 2n vertices t1 , . . . , tn and
t′1 , . . . , t′n , where we connect t′i with ti and a′i and b′i . This completes the construction. Given
an algorithm which works on such a graph, Alice and Bob can construct an AL stream by
having Alice first reveal all vertices in S, A, T and uA with their incident edges, then passing
the memory state to Bob who reveals all vertices in B and uB with their incident edges.
This completes one pass of the stream. Notice that the graph is connected.
       We now claim that the diameter of this construction is at least 5 when the answer to
DisjN is NO, and otherwise the diameter is at most 4.
       Let us assume that the answer to Disjn is NO, that is, there is an index i′ such that
xi′ = yi′ = 1. Let i, j be the pair of indices such that the edges (ai , a′j ) and (bi , b′j ) are
decided by xi′ and yi′ respectively. In this case, both these edges are not present in the
20   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems


                                               A              S                B
                                        a01   Alice a1       s1      b1    Bob      b01
                                                             s2




                                        a0n             an   sn      bn            b0n

                                                   uA                     uB

                                                             t01




                                        T
                                              t1
                                                              t0n
                                              t2



                                              tn



         Figure 7 AL lower bound for diameter where Alice and Bob have n2 bits but the graph has O(n)
     vertices. The bits are seen as an adjacency matrix in the bipartite graphs A and B, identically: the
     red edge a′i to aj in A is the same index as the red edge bj to b′i in B. Edges are present when the
     entry is a 0. Then, each si , tj pair can discern whether or not at least one of the edges ai to a′j or bi
     to b′j is present, hence deciding whether or not both Alice and Bob have a 1 at that entry.


     graph. Hence, the shortest path from si to tj must use either uA or uB , or use at least 3
     edges in A or B (because A and B are bipartite graphs). Hence, the distance from si to tj
     must be at least 5.
         Now assume the answer to Disjn is YES, that is, there is no index i′ such that xi′ = yi′ = 1.
     Then, for every 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n pair there exists a path from si to tj of length 4, because either
     or both of the edges (ai , a′j ), (bi , b′j ) are present in the graph. One can check that all other
     distances are at most 4 as well4 .
         We conclude that any algorithm that can solve the Diameter problem on general
     (dense) graphs in the AL model in p passes, must use Ω(N/p) = Ω(n2 /p) bits of memory by
     Proposition 7.                                                                                    ◀

        Splitting up uA and uB into two vertices each, and making the tails from t′i to ti at least
     three edges longer for each i makes the lower bound work for bipartite graphs.

     ▶ Corollary 27. Any streaming algorithm for Diameter on bipartite graphs in the AL model
     using p passes over the stream requires Ω(n2 /p) bits of memory.

     Proof. The proof follows from adjusting the construction in Theorem 26. If we split up uA
     and uB into two vertices uA , u′A and uB , u′B each and have each only connect to one side of
     A, B respectively, the graph construction forms a bipartite graph. To make the diameter
     distinction still work, we have to extend the paths in T such that the distance from ti to t′i


     4
         If the reader is not convinced, notice that we could always extend the tails ti , t′i to consist of a longer
         path, making paths other that those that originate from T negligible.
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                                           21


is at least 4 (this makes the diameter always be formed by a si , tj -path and not some other
path).                                                                                     ◀

4.1     Permutation lower bounds
In this section, we extend the list of our lower bounds by showing some reductions from
Permn , which prove lower bounds for 1-pass algorithms, showing that they must use
Ω(n log n) bits. In particular, we show that there are constructions similar to the ‘Windmill’
and ‘Diamond’ constructions from the previous section that work for the Permutation
problem.
                                                              t8




                                                              t1


                                                                               ui,1
                       Bob
                                                                                      ui,3
                                                                    ui,2              ui,4

                     Alice

                                                                               vi,4
                                                                               vi,1

                       Bob
                                                                        vi,2      vi,3

    Figure 8 Construction we call ‘Windmill-Perm’. First we have a tail t1 . . . t8 . On the top Bob
places the 1-construction only for the ψ-th index (blue edges, top). On the bottom Bob places
the 1-construction when the γ-th bit of i is 1 (blue edges, bottom). Alice attaches ui,4 to vπ(i),4
(red edges, middle). The dotted segments are not edges, this is for ease of representation only, i.e.
ui,1 = t1 for every i.


▶ Theorem 28. Any streaming algorithm for Diameter that works on the ‘Windmill-Perm’
construction in the AL model using 1 pass over the stream requires Ω(n log n) bits of memory.
Proof. Let π, j be the input to Permn , and let γ and ψ be the values associated with j (see
the definition of Permn ). We create a graph construction called ‘Windmill-Perm’ on 7n + 8
vertices, see Figure 8. Start with a path t = t1 , . . . , t8 on 8 vertices. For each index i, let
ui,1 , ui,2 , ui,3 and vi,1 , vi,2 , vi,3 be two triplets. If i is the ψ-th index, Bob inserts the edges
(ui,1 , ui,2 ) and (ui,2 , ui,3 ), otherwise, Bob inserts the edges (ui,1 , ui,2 ) and (ui,1 , ui,3 ). For
the other triplet, if the γ-th bit of i is a 1, Bob inserts the edges (vi,1 , vi,2 ) and (vi,2 , vi,3 ),
and otherwise Bob inserts the edges (vi,1 , vi,2 ) and (vi,1 , vi,3 ). Now add two vertices ui,4
and vi,4 and the edges (ui,3 , ui,4 ) and (vi,4 , vi,1 ). Now Alice inserts edges depending on her
22   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems


     permutation π. For each i, Alice inserts the edge (ui,4 , vπ(i),4 ), i.e. the first triplet of index i
     gets connected to the second triplet of index π(i). We complete the construction by ‘glueing’
     the vertices ui,1 onto t1 , these are the same vertex. Notice that this is a connected graph
     because a permutation is a bijective function. Given a streaming algorithm that works on
     such a graph, Alice and Bob can construct an AL stream corresponding to this graph by
     having Alice first reveal the vertices ui,4 , vi,4 for each i (and their edges, which Alice knows),
     and then passing the memory state of the algorithm to Bob who reveals the rest of the
     vertices and their edges. This completes one pass of the stream.
         We now claim that the diameter of this graph is at least 14 when the answer to Permn
     is YES, and otherwise the diameter is at most 13.
         Assume the answer to Permn is YES, that is, the γ-th bit of the image of the ψ-th index
     under π is 1. The triplet uψ,1 , uψ,2 , uψ,3 must have the edges (uψ,1 , uψ,2 ) and (uψ,2 , uψ,3 ) by
     construction. Then the edge (uψ,4 , uπ(ψ),4 ) is present because of Alice, and this leads to a
     triplet with the edges (vπ(ψ),1 , vπ(ψ),2 ) and (vπ(ψ),2 , vπ(ψ),3 ) by the assumption that this is
     a YES instance. Therefore, the distance from vπ(ψ),3 to t8 is 14, and so the diameter is at
     least 14.
         Now assume that the answer to Permn is NO, that is, the γ-th bit of the image of the
     ψ-th index under π is not 1. As the ψ-th index is the only u-triplet that forms a path and
     not a tree, and by the assumption the v-triplet it is connected to does not have the shape of
     a path, the distance from all vertices (except t8 ) to t1 is at most 6. Hence, the diameter is at
     most 13 because t8 lies at distance 7 from t1 .
         We conclude that any 1-pass algorithm in the AL model that can solve the Diameter
     problem on the ‘Windmill-Perm’ construction, must use Ω(n log n) bits of memory by
     Proposition 8.                                                                                      ◀

     ▶ Corollary 29. Any streaming algorithm for Diameter in the AL model that uses 1 pass
     over the stream must use Ω(n log n) bits of memory, even on graphs for which the algorithm
     is given

     1. that the input is a bounded depth tree,
     2. that the Maximum Degree is a constant of at least 3.

     Proof. The corollary follows from Theorem 28 together with observing that ‘Windmill-Perm’
     is

     1. a tree of constant depth,
     2. a lower bound construction that still works if we extend t1 to a binary tree and extend the
        tail t to consist of 8 + log n vertices (this makes the diameter distinction to be between
        13 + 2 log n and 14 + 2 log n).

                                                                                                            ◀

         Next we show a similar adaptation of the ‘Diamond’ construction.

     ▶ Theorem 30. Any streaming algorithm for Diameter that works on the ‘Diamond-Perm’
     construction in the AL model using 1 pass over the stream requires Ω(n log n) bits of memory.

     Proof. Let π, j be the input to Permn , and let γ and ψ be the values associated with j (see
     the definition of Permn ). We create a graph construction called ‘Diamond-Perm’ on 14n + 3
     vertices, see Figure 9. The construction starts of with two vertices b, b′ connected with an edge.
     We then add n + 1 vertices c0 , . . . , cn each of which we connect to both b and b′ . For each
     index i we do the following. We create four (disjoint) paths (ui,1 , ui,2 , ui,3 ), (ui,4 , ui,5 , ui,6 ),
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                                                              23




                                                                                 b′




                         ui,1          ui,3                                 ui,4             ui,6
                                ui,2                                                  ui,5
                                                                            ai
                  ci                                    vπ(i),2                                           vπ(i),5        ci+1
                                              vπ(i),1             vπ(i),3                       vπ(i),4        vπ(i),6




                                                                                 b



    Figure 9 An adaptation for permutation of the ‘Diamond’ construction, called ‘Diamond-Perm’.
Blue dashed edges are present in the 0-case for Bob. Alice attaches top and bottom halves to each
other with the bold red edges, depending on π. The vertices b and b′ are connected with an edge, as
indicated by the dashed-dotted lines.
24   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems


     (vi,1 , vi,2 , vi,3 ), and (vi,4 , vi,5 , vi,6 ). If i is not the ψ-th index, Bob inserts the edges (b′ , ui,2 )
     and (b′ , ui,5 ). If the γ-th bit of i is a 0, Bob inserts the edges (b, vi,2 ) and (b, vi,5 ). The
     rest of the edges depend on the permutation of Alice. For each i, Alice creates the vertex
     ai and inserts the edges (ci−1 , ui,1 ), (ui,3 , vπ(i),1 ), (vπ(i),3 , ai ), (ai , ui,4 ), (ui,6 , vπ(i),4 ), and
     (vπ(i),6 , ci+1 ). Notice that, ignoring b, b′ , this graph forms a path, as a permutation is a
     bijective function. This completes the construction. Given a streaming algorithm that works
     on this construction, Alice and Bob can produce an AL stream by having Alice reveal the
     vertices c0 , . . . , cn , and ai , ui,1 , ui,3 , vi,1 , vi,3 , ui,4 , ui,6 , vi,4 , vi,6 for every 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Then she
     passes the memory state of the algorithm to Bob who reveals the rest of the vertices including
     b, b′ . This completes one pass of the stream.
          We now claim that the diameter of this graph is at least 10 when the answer to Permn
     is YES, and otherwise the diameter is at most 9.
          Assume the answer to Permn is YES, that is, the γ-th bit of the image of the ψ-th index
     under π is 1. Consider aψ . The edges (b′ , uψ,2 ) and (b′ , uψ,5 ) are not present by construction.
     Also, the edges (b, vπ(ψ),2 ) and (b, vπ(ψ),5 ) are not present by construction. Therefore, the
     distance from aψ to b and b′ is 8. Then, the diameter is at least 10 because there are always
     vertices at distance at least 2 from both b and b′ .
          Now assume that the answer to Permn is NO, that is, the γ-th bit of the image of the
     ψ-th index under π is not 1. Then, for every 1 ≤ i ≤ n between ci−1 and ci either or both
     of the edge pairs (b′ , ui,2 ), (b′ , ui,5 ) and (b, vπ(i),2 ), (b, vπ(i),5 ) must be present, because the
     edges (b′ , ui,2 ), (b′ , ui,5 ) are only absent for the ψ-th index, and the γ-th bit under the image
     of π is not a 1. Hence, the distance from any vertex to one of b or b′ is at most 4. As b and
     b′ are connected with an edge, the diameter is at most 9.
          We conclude that any 1-pass algorithm in the AL model that can solve the Diameter
     problem on the ‘Diamond-Perm’ construction, must use Ω(n log n) bits of memory by
     Proposition 8.                                                                                                       ◀

     ▶ Corollary 31. Any streaming algorithm for Diameter in the AL model that uses 1 pass
     over the stream must use Ω(n log n) bits of memory, even on graphs for which the algorithm
     is given a Deletion Set to a path of size at least 2.

     Proof. The corollary follows from Theorem 30, together with observing that ‘Diamond-Perm’
     is a path when we remove {b, b′ }.                                                     ◀

      5       Connectivity
     In this section, we show results for Connectivity. Connectivity is an easier problem
     than Diameter, that is, solving Diameter solves Connectivity as well, but not the other
     way around. Hence, lower bounds in this section also imply lower bounds for Diameter (in
     non-connected graphs). In general graphs, a single pass, O(n log n) bits of memory algorithm
     exists by maintaining connected components in a Disjoint Set data structure [46], which
     is optimal in general graphs [52]. The interesting part about Connectivity is that some
     graph classes admit fairly trivial algorithms by a counting argument. For example, if the
     input is a forest, we can decide on Connectivity by counting the number of edges, which
     is a 1-pass, O(log n) bits of memory, algorithm. An overview of the results in this section is
     given in Table 3.
         The following upper bounds follow from applications of the Disjoint Set data structure.

     ▶ Observation 32. Given a graph G as an AL stream with vertex cover number k, we can
     solve Connectivity [k] in 1 pass and O(k log n) bits of memory.
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                                      25


 Parameter (k) / Graph class       Size    Bound                                                       Thm
 General Graphs                            (EA, n log n, 1)-str. by Disjoint Set data structure [46]   -
                                           (EA, n log n, 1)-hard by Sun and Woodruff [52]              -
 Vertex Cover Number                ≥0     (AL, k log n, 1)-str.: Disjoint Set on Vertex Cover         32
                                    ≥2     (VA, n/p, p)-hard by Henzinger et al. [40]                  -
 Distance to ℓ cliques              ≥0     (AL, (k + ℓ) log n, 1)-str.: Disjoint Set data structure    33
 FVS                                =0     (EA, log n, 1)-str. by counting.                            -
                                    ≥1     (AL, n/p, p)-hard                                           35
 FES                                ≥0     (EA, log n, 1)-str. by counting.                            -
 Distance to matching               ≥2     (AL, n/p, p)-hard                                           35
 Distance to path                   ≥0     (EA, k log n, 1)-str. by checking connection to path        -
 Distance to depth ℓ tree           ≥0     (EA, k log n, 1)-str. by checking connection to tree        -
 Domination Number                  ≥2     (AL, n/p, p)-hard                                           35
 Distance to Chordal                ≥1     (AL, n/p, p)-hard                                           35
 Maximum Degree                     ≥2     (AL, n/p, p)-hard, (AL, n log n, 1)-hard                    36, 39
 Bipartite Graphs                          (AL, n/p, p)-hard, (AL, n log n, 1)-hard                    36, 39
 Interval Graphs                           (VA, n/p, p)-hard                                           37
 Split graphs                              (EA, n/p, p)-str. by finding degree 0 vertex                -
                                           (VA, n/p, p)-hard                                           38
   Table 3 Overview of the results for Connectivity. All hardness results listed here are through
reductions from Disjointness. (M, m, p)-hard means that any algorithm using p passes in model
M (or weaker) requires Ω(m) bits of memory. (M, m, p)-str. means that there is an algorithm
that uses p passes in model M (or stronger) using O(m) bits of memory. FVS stands for Feedback
Vertex Set number, FEN for Feedback Edge Set number. We state most upper bounds only as
observations.



Proof. When the vertex cover is known, we can keep track of a Disjoint Set data structure
on the k vertices of the vertex cover. Seeing any vertex that connects two or more vertices of
the vertex cover in the stream translates directly to taking the union of the corresponding
sets in the data structure. If at the end of the stream the data structure contains only one
set and we have not seen a degree-0 vertex, the graph is connected.
    When the vertex cover is not given, and only its size, we can greedily maintain an
approximate vertex cover of size at most 2k by maintaining a maximal matching, while
executing the above procedure on this set.                                                  ◀

▶ Observation 33. Given a graph G as an AL stream with a deletion set X of size k to ℓ
cliques, we can solve Connectivity [k, ℓ] in 1 pass and O((k + ℓ) log n) bits of memory.

Proof. We use a Disjoint Set data structure on all vertices in X and a representative vertex
for each clique, say the lowest numbered vertex of that clique. The space used by the data
structure is O((k + ℓ) log n) bits. For a vertex in X we only process the edges to other vertices
in X in the data structure. For a vertex in a clique (∈/ X) we register the edges to vertices in
X and its lowest number neighbour ∈    / X. This takes at most (k + 1) log n bits, and is enough
to take unions in the data structure corresponding to the connections seen by this vertex.
    At the end of the stream, if the data structure contains only one set, the graph is
connected.                                                                                     ◀

   Next is a simple lower bound for the AL model.
26   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems




                        a                                                        b




        Figure 10 AL lower bound for connectivity, called ‘Simple AL-Conn’. On contrary to the similar
     diameter lower bound, edges are present when the corresponding entry is a 0.


     ▶ Theorem 34. Any streaming algorithm for Connectivity that works on the ‘Simple
     AL-Conn’ construction in the AL model using p passes over the stream requires Ω(n/p) bits
     of memory.
     Proof. Let x, y be the input to Disjn of Alice and Bob, respectively. We construct a graph
     as illustrated in Figure 10. Let M be a matching on n + 1 edges, and associate each edge with
     an index 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Now we add two vertices a, b of Alice and Bob respectively, and connect
     a and b to the (n + 1)-th edge. The edge from a to the i-th edge in M is present if and only
     if xi = 0, for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. The same happens for b, where the edge from b to the i-th edge
     in M is present if and only if yi = 0, for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. This completes the construction,
     it has 2n + 4 vertices. Given a streaming algorithm that works on a family including this
     construction, Alice and Bob construct the AL stream as follows. First, Alice reveals a and
     the vertices on the left of M . Then she passes the memory state of the algorithm to Bob
     who reveals b and the vertices on the right of M , which completes one pass of the stream.
         We now claim that the graph is connected if and only if the answer to Disjn is YES.
         Let us assume that the answer to Disjn is NO, that is, there is an index i such that
     xi = yi = 1. Then clearly the i-th edge is not connected to the rest of the graph (which
     includes a and b).
         Now assume the answer to Disjn is YES, that is, there is no index i such that xi = yi = 1.
     Notice that there is always a path from a to b via the (n + 1)-th edge of M . Furthermore, by
     the assumption, for each index 1 ≤ i ≤ n either Alice or Bob (or both) has a 0, which means
     the i-th edge is connected to either a or b. Hence, the graph is connected.
         We conclude that any algorithm that can solve the Connectivity problem on the graph
     construction ‘Simple AL-Conn’ in the AL model in p passes, must use Ω(n/p) bits of memory
     by Proposition 7.                                                                          ◀

        The following follows from Theorem 34 by observing properties of the ‘Simple AL-Conn’
     construction.
     ▶ Corollary 35. Any streaming algorithm for Connectivity in the AL model that uses
     p passes over the stream must use Ω(n/p) bits of memory, even on graphs for which the
     algorithm is given a
        Feedback Vertex Set of size at least 1,
        Deletion Set to Matching of size at least 2,
        Dominating Set of size at least 2.
     Proof. The corollary follows from Theorem 34, together with observing that the construction
     of ‘Simple AL-Conn’ is
        a forest when removing {a},
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                                                         27


     a matching when removing {a, b},
     dominated by the set of vertices {a, b}.

                                                                                                                     ◀

    An interesting lower bound is for a unique case: graphs of maximum degree 2. We
mentioned that for a forest we have a simple counting algorithm for Connectivity, so the
hardness must be for some graph which consists of one or more cycles. Although Theorem 34
implies Connectivity is hard for graphs with a Feedback Vertex Set of constant size, we
now show that in the specific case of maximum degree 2-graphs, the problem is still hard,
see Figure 11 for an illustration of the construction. We note that this reduction is similar to
the problem tackled by Verbin and Yu [53] and Assadi et al. [4], but our result is slightly
stronger in this setting, as it concerns a distinction between 1 or 2 disjoint cycles.

a0            ai,1             ai,4                                                                              an+1
                        0                                0                                 1


                ai,2        ai,3
                        i                              i+1                               i+2
                bi,2        bi,3



b0           bi,1       0          bi,4                  1                                 1                     bn+1

    Figure 11 AL lower bound for connectivity, called ‘Cycles’. The graph consists of one or multiple
cycles depending on the output of Disjn . The black edges are always present. The red (blue) edges
between a-vertices (b-vertices) are controlled by Alice (Bob) and are in a crossing (horizontal) or
vertical configuration depending on whether the i-th entry of Alice (Bob) is 0 or 1.


▶ Theorem 36. Any streaming algorithm for Connectivity that works on graphs of
maximum degree 2 in the AL model using p passes over the stream requires Ω(n/p) bits of
memory.

Proof. Let x, y be the input to Disjn of Alice and Bob, respectively. We create a construction
as shown in Figure 11. We create a graph on 8n + 4 vertices. Associate 8 vertices ai,1 , . . . , ai,4
and bi,1 , . . . , bi,4 with each index i. Let us call the remaining four vertices a0 , b0 , an+1 , bn+1 ,
and insert the edges (a0 , b0 ) and (an+1 , bn+1 ). Then for each index i, we do the following.
Insert the edges (ai,2 , bi,2 ), (ai,3 , bi,3 ), (ai,1 , ai−1,4 ), (bi,1 , bi−1,4 ), (ai,4 , ai+1,1 ), (bi,4 , bi+1,1 ),
where ai−1,4 , bi−1,4 are replaced with a0 , b0 when i = 1, and ai+1,1 , bi+1,1 are replaced with
an+1 , bn+1 when i = n. These are all the fixed edges. For each i, Alice also inserts (ai,1 , ai,3 )
and (ai,2 , ai,4 ) when xi = 0 or inserts (ai,1 , ai,2 ) and (ai,3 , ai,4 ) when xi = 1. Bob inserts
(bi,1 , bi,4 ) and (bi,2 , bi,3 ) when yi = 0, or inserts (bi,1 , bi,2 ) and (bi,3 , bi,4 ) when yi = 1. This
completes the construction. Given an algorithm that works on a family including this
construction, Alice and Bob construct an AL stream as follows. First, Alice reveals the
vertices a0 , an+1 and ai,k for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, 1 ≤ k ≤ 4, then passes the memory state to Bob
who reveals the vertices b0 , bn+1 and bi,k for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, 1 ≤ k ≤ 4. This completes one
pass of the stream. Notice that Alice and Bob do not need information about the input of
the other to do this, as there are only fixed edges between a- and b-vertices. Also notice that
this graph always consists of (a disjoint union of) one or more cycles regardless of the input
to Disjn , as every vertex in the graph has degree 2.
28   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems


         We now claim that the graph is connected if and only if the answer to Disjn is YES.
         Let us assume that the answer to Disjn is NO, that is, there is an index i such that
     xi = yi = 1. It is easy to see that there is no path between ai,1 and either ai,4 or bi,4 ,
     and similarly, there is no path between bi,1 and either ai,4 or bi,4 . Hence the graph is not
     connected.
         Now assume the answer to Disjn is YES, that is, there is no index i such that xi = yi = 1.
     We will construct a simple path from a0 to either an+1 or bn+1 . If this succeeds, then the
     graph must be a single cycle, as we can continue to the other of an+1 or bn+1 and walk the
     other way to b0 , never crossing the first path because every vertex has degree 2. These two
     paths together with the edges (a0 , b0 ), (an+1 , bn+1 ) form a single cycle. Starting at a0 , we
     can view a path going ‘right’, crossing each index i step by step. At an ai,1 , there are only
     two possible cases: either we walk through ai,2 , ai,3 , bi,2 , bi,3 in some order and end in ai,4 ,
     or we have a path to bi,4 (using only vertices of index i). In both cases, we can advance to
     the next i. At an bi,1 , there are also only two cases: either there is an edge to bi,4 or there is
     a path through bi,2 , ai,2 to ai,4 . In both cases, we can advance to the next i. Hence, we can
     find a path walking through each i advancing to the next, which must mean we end up in
     either an+1 or bn+1 , and we are done.
         We conclude that any algorithm that can solve the Connectivity problem on the graph
     construction ‘Cycles’ in the AL model in p passes, must use Ω(n/p) bits of memory by
     Proposition 7.                                                                                   ◀

        We note that we can make the result of Theorem 36 (and 39) hold for bipartite graphs of
     maximum degree 2 by subdividing every edge, making the graph odd cycle-free, and thus
     bipartite.
        The proofs of Theorems 5 and 6 follow.
     ▶ Theorem 5. For any fixed graph H that is not a linear forest containing only paths of
     length at most 5, any streaming algorithm for Connectivity in the AL model that uses p
     passes over the stream must use Ω(n/p) bits of memory even on the class of H-free graphs.
     Proof. If H contains a cycle of length not equal to 6 as a subgraph, then the result follows
     from Theorem 34, because that construction is Cℓ -free for any ℓ =  ̸ 6. By subdividing the
     middle (matching) edges, the construction can be made Cℓ -free for any fixed ℓ > 2. Hence,
     we may assume that H does not contain a cycle and thus is a forest. If H contains a vertex
     of degree at least 3, then the result follows from Theorem 36, because that construction
     has maximum degree 2. Hence, we may assume that H is a linear forest. If H contains a
     P7 , then the result follows from a slight adaptation of the construction of Theorem 34. By
     making the vertices a and b of that construction adjacent, the resulting graph cannot have a
     P7 as an induced subgraph, while not affecting the correctness of the construction.       ◀

     ▶ Theorem 6. For any fixed graph H that is not a linear forest containing only paths of
     length at most 1 and any fixed constant k ≥ 2, any streaming algorithm for Connectivity
     in the AL model that uses p passes over the stream must use Ω(n/p) bits of memory even on
     the class of graphs G with a given set of vertices X with |X| = k such that G − X is H-free.
     Proof. This is an immediate corollary of Theorem 34. In that construction, after removing
     vertices a and b, the remainder is a disjoint union of P2 ’s.                          ◀

        Interval and split graphs are hard in the VA model, see Figures 12 and 13.
     ▶ Theorem 37. Any streaming algorithm for Connectivity that works on interval graphs
     in the VA model using p passes over the stream requires Ω(n/p) bits of memory.
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                                               29


                ai                                                            v1 v2     ···       vn
                                           ai
     ui                    vi



                                                     bi

                bi                                                               a            b

     Figure 12 VA lower bound for connectivity on interval
 graphs, called ‘Interval’. We see the gadget for index i,             Figure 13 VA lower bound for con-
 where the dotted lines are present when the corresponding         nectivity on split graphs, called ‘Split-
 value is 0. In essence, the intervals ai and bi are short         Conn’. The dashed edges towards vi
 or long depending on the input of Alice and Bob. The n            are present when there is a 0 at index
 gadgets are placed consecutively.                                 i.


Proof. Let x, y be the input to Disjn of Alice and Bob, respectively. We create a construction
as shown in Figure 12. We create an interval graph on 4n vertices. For each i, we create the
vertices ui , vi , ai , bi . We insert the edges (ui , ai ), (vi , bi ), and (vi−1 , ui ) (for i = 1 we do not
insert this last edge). Alice inserts the edge (ai , vi ) if and only if xi = 0. Bob inserts the edges
(bi , ui ) and (bi , ai ) if and only if yi = 0. This completes the construction. Notice that this is
an interval graph, as illustrated by the interval representation of index i in Figure 12. Given
an algorithm that works on a family including this construction, Alice and Bob construct an
VA stream as follows. First, Alice reveals all vertices ui , ai , vi (and the edges between them)
for each i. Then she passes the memory of the algorithm to Bob who reveals each bi . This
completes one pass of the stream. Notice that Alice does not need to know the input of Bob
for Disjn , and neither does Bob have to know the input of Alice, as it is a VA stream.
      We now claim that the graph is connected if and only if the answer to Disjn is YES.
      Let us assume that the answer to Disjn is NO, that is, there is an index i such that
xi = yi = 1. Then clearly, there is no path between ui and vi , and so the graph is not
connected.
      Now assume the answer to Disjn is YES, that is, there is no index i such that xi = yi = 1.
Now we claim that there is a path from u1 to vn using every ui and vi , and hence the graph
is connected. Indeed, if there is such a path then the graph is connected, as each ai and
bi are always adjacent to ui and vi , respectively. There is such a path because, for each
1 ≤ i ≤ n at least one of the edges (ui , bi ) or (ai , vi ) is present, creating a path between ui
and vi . Combining these paths for each i gives us the path we were looking for, as the edges
(vi−1 , ui ) exist for each 2 ≤ i ≤ n.
      We conclude that any algorithm that can solve the Connectivity problem on the graph
construction ‘Interval’ in the VA model in p passes, must use Ω(n/p) bits of memory by
Proposition 7.                                                                                              ◀


▶ Theorem 38. Any streaming algorithm for Connectivity that works on split graphs in
the VA model using p passes over the stream requires Ω(n/p) bits of memory.

Proof. Let x, y be the input to Disjn of Alice and Bob, respectively. We create a construction
as shown in Figure 13. We create an split graph on n + 2 vertices. Let v1 , . . . , vn be n vertices
in the independent set. Let a, b be two vertices that form the clique. Alice inserts the edges
(a, vi ) when xi = 0, and Bob inserts the edges (b, vi ) when yi = 0, for each 1 ≤ i ≤ n. This
completes the construction. Given an algorithm that works on the construction, Alice and
Bob construct a VA stream as follows. First, Alice reveals v1 , . . . , vn (without edges at this
30   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems


     a0              ai,1 bi,1                 bi,4 ai,4                                                           an+1
                                       0                           0                            1

                      bi,2             i          bi,3
                     ai,2                         ai,3           i+1                         i+2


                  a0π(i),2                        a0π(i),3
                                     π(i)
                  b0π(i),2                        b0π(i),3      π(i + 1)                   π(i + 2)



     a00         a0π(i),1 b0π(i),1     0    b0π(i),4 a0π(i),4      1                            1                   a0n+1

         Figure 14 AL permutation lower bound for connectivity, called ‘Cycles-Perm’. The graph consists
     of one or multiple cycles depending on the input of Permn . Red edges between a-vertices are
     controlled by Alice, blue edges between b-vertices by Bob.


     point) and then reveals a. She then passes the memory of the algorithm to Bob, who reveals
     b, which completes one pass of the stream.
         It can be easily seen that there is an isolated vertex if and only if there is an index i such
     that xi = yi = 1. Split graphs are connected if and only if there is no isolated vertex.
         We conclude that any algorithm that can solve the Connectivity problem on split
     graphs in the VA model in p passes, must use Ω(n/p) bits of memory by Proposition 7. ◀

         For split graphs, in any model, Connectivity admits a one-pass, O(n) bits of memory
     algorithm by counting if there is a vertex of degree 0 (and so also for any p a p-pass algorithm
     using O(n/p) bits by splitting up the work in p parts)5 . If there can be no isolated vertices,
     then a split graph is always connected.

     5.1        Permutation Lower Bound
     As an additional result, we give another reduction for graphs of maximum degree 2. Sun
     and Woodruff [52] have already shown a Permutation lower bound for Connectivity in
     general graphs. We show that the ‘Cycles’ construction can be extended to lower bounds
     using the Permn problem, showing hardness for graphs of maximum degree 2.

     ▶ Theorem 39. Any streaming algorithm for Connectivity that works on graphs of
     maximum degree 2 in the AL model using 1 pass over the stream requires Ω(n log n) bits of
     memory.

     Proof. Essentially, we adapt the construction of Theorem 36 to work for Permn . Let
     π, j be the input to Permn , and let γ and ψ be the values associated with j (see the
     definition of Permn ). We construct a graph on 16n + 4 vertices, consisting of one or
     more cycles. For each index i, we create the vertices ai,1 , ai,2 , ai,3 , ai,4 , a′i,1 , a′i,2 , a′i,3 , a′i,4 and
     bi,1 , bi,2 , bi,3 , bi,4 , b′i,1 , b′i,2 , b′i,3 , b′i,4 , where we connect the each a-vertex with its corresponding
     b-vertex (i.e. (a′i,2 , b′i,2 ) is an edge). Next to this, we also create 4 vertices a0 , a′0 , an+1 , an+1 ,
     where (a0 , a′0 ) and (an+1 , a′n+1 ) are edges. The rest of the edges are dependent on the input
     to Permn . For an index i, if it is the ψ-th index, Bob inserts the edges (bi,1 , bi,2 ) and
     (bi,3 , bi,4 ). If it is not the ψ-th index, Bob inserts the edges (bi,1 , bi,3 ) and (bi,2 , bi,4 ). Also,


     5
           This assumes the vertices are labelled 1 . . . n and do not have arbitrary labels.
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                                                     31


 for an index i, if its γ-th bit is a 1, Bob inserts the edges (b′i,1 , b′i,2 ) and (b′i,3 , b′i,4 ). If the
 γ-th bit is a 0, Bob inserts the edges (b′i,1 , b′i,4 ) and (b′i,2 , b′i,3 ). Alice links ‘the top’ of i with
‘the bottom’ of π(i). For each index i, Alice inserts the following edges, (ai−1,4 , ai,1 ) (or
(a0 , ai,1 ) when i = 1), (ai,4 , ai+1,4 ) (or (ai,4 , an+1 ) when i = n), (ai,2 , a′π(i),2 ), (ai,3 , a′π(i),3 ),
(a′π(i−1),4 , a′π(i),1 ) (or (a′0 , a′π(i),1 ) when π(i) = 1), (a′π(i),4 , a′π(i+1),4 ) (or (a′π(i),4 , a′n+1 ) when
 π(i) = n).6 This concludes the construction. The graph consists of one or more cycles
 because every vertex has degree 2. Given an algorithm that works on a family including
 this construction, Alice and Bob construct an AL stream as follows. First, Alice reveals
 all a-vertices, then passes the memory of the algorithm to Bob, who reveals all b-vertices,
which completes one pass of the stream. This is correct, as a-vertices are only connected to
 b-vertices with edges independent of the input to Disjn .
     We claim that the graph is not connected if and only if the answer to Permn is YES. The
 graph is not connected if and only if there is an index i such that ‘the top’ and ‘the bottom’
 are both a 1-construction. This can only be the case when an index i is the ψ-th index on
‘the top’, and the γ-th bit is a 1 on ‘the bottom’. However, ‘the bottom’ corresponds to the
 index π(i) because of the edges of Alice, which means that the γ-th bit of the image under π
 of ψ is a 1. Hence, this occurs if and only if the answer to Permn is YES.
     We conclude that any 1-pass algorithm in the AL model that can solve the Connectivity
 problem on graphs of maximum degree 2, must use Ω(n log n) bits of memory by Proposition 8.
                                                                                                                   ◀

   The results of Theorem 39 also holds for bipartite graphs of degree 2. To see this,
subdivide every edge, making the graph odd cycle-free, and thus bipartite.

    6   Vertex Cover kernelization
In this section7 , we parameterize the Vertex Cover problem by the solution size k. We
now show how our insights into parameterized, streaming graph exploration can aid in
producing a new kernelization algorithm for Vertex Cover [k]. The basis for our result is a
well-known kernel for the Vertex Cover [k] problem of Buss and Goldsmith [14], consisting
of O(k 2 ) edges. Constructing this kernel is simple: find all vertices with degree bigger than
k, and remove them from the graph, and decrease the parameter with the number of vertices
removed, say to k ′ . Then, there is no solution if there are more than k · k ′ edges. Therefore,
we have a kernel consisting of O(k 2 ) edges. We are able to achieve this same kernel in the AL
model, as counting the degree of a vertex is possible in this model. Interestingly, we do not
require O(k 2 log n) bits of memory to produce a stream corresponding to the kernel of O(k 2 )
edges. This result is also possible in the EA model, by allowing vertices up to degree 2k.

▶ Theorem 40. Given a graph G as an AL stream, we can make an AL stream corresponding
to an O(k 2 )-edge kernel for the Vertex Cover [k] problem using two passes and O(k log n)
bits of memory. When we work with an EA stream, we can make an EA stream corresponding
to an O(k 2 )-edge kernel using four passes and O(k log n) bits of memory.

Proof. Let G be a graph, with n vertices and m edges, given as an AL stream, and let k be
the solution size parameter for the Vertex Cover [k] problem. Note that we can count


6
  We note that formally, we insert many edges twice, but this is to make the description more under-
  standable. Alice does not actually insert these edges twice.
7
  This section is based on the master thesis “Parameterized Algorithms in a Streaming Setting” by the
  first author.
32   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems


     the degree of every vertex when it appears in the stream, as we are given all adjacencies of a
     vertex consecutively. Therefore, in one pass over the stream we can count the degree of every
     vertex, and save each vertex with a degree bigger than k in a set S, as long as |S| ≤ k. In
     this same pass, we keep track of two more counters: the total number of edges in the stream
     m′ (which is 2m), and the number of unique edges we remove r. We find r by incrementing
     a local (to a vertex) counter r′ when we see edges towards vertices not in S, and add r′ to r
                                                ′
     if we decide to add the vertex to S. If m2 − r > k · (k − |S|), return NO. Otherwise, make a
     pass over the stream, and output only those edges between vertices not in S.
         The output must be an AL stream, as we only remove edges from an AL stream to
     produce it. Let is also be clear that we use two passes over the stream.
         The set S takes O(k log n) bits of memory, as finding more than k vertices will result
     in returning NO. Counting the total number of edges takes O(log m) = O(log n) bits of
     space, and other constant number of counters are the same size or smaller. Therefore, this
     procedure uses O(k log n) bits of memory.
         The behaviour of this procedure is equivalent of the kernelization algorithm of Buss and
     Goldsmith [14], as it finds exactly those vertices with degree higher than k, and ‘removes’
     them by adding them to S and ignoring edges incident to them in the output. Checking
     the instance size is done correctly, as the new parameter k ′ is equivalent to k − |S|, and the
                                                                  ′
     number of remaining edges is equal to m − r, which is m2 − r. The value of r is counted
     correctly because we only count unique edges by ignoring those towards vertices already in
     S. Therefore, this kernelization procedure is correct.
         For the case of the EA stream, we essentially do the same as in the AL model, but in
     this model we end up with a slightly larger kernel. In our first pass, we greedily construct a
     vertex cover X of size 2k or conclude that there is no solution to Vertex Cover [k]. Now,
     we know that all vertices not in X must have degree at most 2k. So, in the second pass we
     count the degree of all vertices in X, and if a degree exceeds 2k we the add vertex to S. This
     takes only O(k log n) bits of memory. If at some point |S| > k we also stop and conclude
     there is no solution to Vertex Cover [k], as all vertices of degree at least 2k must be in
     any solution. In a third pass, we count the total number m of edges in the stream, and the
     number of unique edges we remove r (this is not possible during the second pass because we
     might count edges double when it has both endpoints in S). Now if m − r > 2k · (k − |S|),
     we can conclude there is no solution to Vertex Cover [k], as each vertex has maximum
     degree 2k.
         Now to output the kernel as an EA stream, we make a fourth pass and only output those
     edges not incident to vertices in S. In this procedure we only use O(k log n) bits of memory
     for counting and X. The resulting kernel has at most 2k · (k − |S|) = O(k 2 ) edges.         ◀

         Next, we show how to use Theorem 40 to produce a kernel of even smaller size, using only
     O(k log n) bits of memory. This requires Theorem 40 to convert the original graph stream
     into the kernel input for the next theorem, which only increases the number of passes by a
     factor 2 or 4 (we have to apply Theorem 40 every time the other procedure uses a pass).
         Chen et al. [17] show a way to convert the kernel of Buss and Goldsmith into a 2k-vertex
     kernel for Vertex Cover [k], using the NT-Theorem by Nemhauser and Trotter [48].
     We will adapt this method in the streaming setting, and give a concise description of this
     procedure below. The following theorem, as formulated this way by Chen et al. [17], is due
     to Nemhauser and Trotter [48] and Bar-Yehuda and Even [7].
                                                       √
     ▶ Proposition 41 (NT-Theorem). There is an O( nm) time algorithm that, given a graph
     G of n vertices and m edges, constructs two disjoint subsets C0 and V0 of vertices in G such
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                                       33


that

(1) The union of any minimum vertex cover of G[V0 ] and C0 forms a minimum vertex cover
    for G.
(2) Any minimum vertex cover of G[V0 ] contains at least |V0 |/2 vertices.

    The proof of the NT-Theorem by Bar-Yehuda and Even [7] shows us how to do find V0
and C0 for any arbitrary graph G. One creates a bipartite graph B from G by making two
copies of all vertices V, V ′ , and an edge (x, y) in G translates to the edges (x, y ′ ), (x′ , y) in
B. One then finds a maximum matching M of B to find a minimum vertex cover of B, as
described by Bondy and Murty [12, Page 74, Theorem 5.3]. Let us shortly go over what
it entails. If our bipartite graph has vertex sets V, V ′ and a maximum matching M , then
we can find a minimum vertex cover X with |X| = |M | in the following manner. Denote
all unmatched vertices in V with U , and let Z ⊆ V ∪ V ′ be the set of vertices connected
to U with an M -alternating path (a path such that edges in M and not in M alternate).
Denoting S = Z ∩ V and T = Z ∩ V ′ , then X is given by X = (V \ S) ∪ T . Now, the set C0
is given by all vertices v ∈ G for which both v, v ′ ∈ B are contained in X, and V0 contains
the vertices v ∈ G for which exactly one of v, v ′ ∈ B is contained in X.
    Chen et al. [17] describe how to use the above procedure to get a smaller kernel from the
kernel by Buss and Goldsmith [14]. Start with G as the kernel by Buss and Goldsmith [14],
and execute the above procedure to find the sets C0 and V0 in G. Then, the kernel is given
by G′ = G[V0 ] with new parameter value k ′ = k1 − |C0 |, where k1 is the parameter value of
the kernel by Buss and Goldsmith. Chen et al. [17] show that G′ has at most 2k vertices
and is a kernel with parameter value k ′ .
    We now show how to execute this procedure in the streaming setting, both in the AL and
EA models. Note that in the EA model, Theorem 40 yields a kernel which is not exactly the
kernel by Buss and Goldsmith, but still has O(k 2 ) edges. This property is sufficient for the
above procedure to work, even though it is not exactly the kernel by Buss and Goldsmith.

▶ Lemma 42. Given a graph G as a stream in model AL or EA, we can produce a stream in
the same model corresponding to the Phase 1 bipartite graph B of [7, Algorithm NT] using
two passes and O(log n) bits of memory.

Proof. Given a graph G = (V, E), Phase 1 of [7, Algorithm NT] asks for the bipartite graph
B with vertex sets V, V ′ and edges EB such that V ′ = {v ′ | v ∈ V } and EB = {(x, y ′ ) |
(x, y) ∈ E}. This is essentially two copies of all vertices and each edge in the original graph
makes two edges, between the corresponding (original,copy)-pairs.
    The process of creating a stream corresponding to B is quite simple: first we use a pass
and, for every edge (x, y), we output (x, y ′ ), and then we use another pass and, for every
edge (x, y), we output (x′ , y). If the input is an EA stream, then the output must be as well,
as no edge is output twice. If the input stream is an AL stream, the output must be an AL
stream too, as we are consistent in which copy of the vertex we address. That is, the output
AL stream first reveals all vertices in V and then all those in V ′ . All adjacencies of these
vertices are present in the stream, as all the adjacencies were present in the input stream.
    We can see that this uses two passes and O(log n) bits of memory (to remember what
pass we are in, and to read an edge). It is trivial that the bipartite graph B is constructed
correctly, as for every edge (x, y) we output the edges (x, y ′ ) and (x′ , y).               ◀

   Before we continue to find the maximum matching in such a graph B produced by
Lemma 42, we need a few observations to restrict the size of the matching we want to find.
From the conversion to a 2k kernel by Chen et al. [17], we can conclude that for the sets
34   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems


     C0 and V0 of the NT-Theorem it must hold that |V0 | ≤ 2k − 2|C0 | (as this shows the kernel
     size). But then it must also be that |V0 | + |C0 | ≤ 2k, and V0 and C0 together include all
     vertices in the found minimum vertex cover in B. So, the maximum matching M of B we
     search for has size O(k).
         To find the maximum matching we execute a DFS procedure, which can be done with
     surprising efficiency in this restricted bipartite setting.
     ▶ Theorem 43. Given a bipartite graph B as an AL stream with O(k 2 ) vertices, we can
     find a maximum matching of size at most O(k) using O(k 2 ) passes and O(k log n) bits of
     memory. For the EA model this can be done in O(k 3 ) passes.
     Proof. We first use a pass to find a maximal matching M in the graph. This can be done
     in a single pass because we can construct a maximal matching in a greedy manner, picking
     every edge that appears in the stream for which both vertices are unmatched.
         Then, we iteratively find an M -augmenting path P (a path starting and ending in a
     unmatched vertices, alternating between edges in and not in M ), and improve the matching
     by switching all edges on P (i.e., remove from M the edges on P in M , and add to M the
     edges on P not in M ). Note that any such P has length O(k), as otherwise M would exceed
     size O(k). It is known that a matching M in a bipartite graph is maximum when there is no
     M -augmenting path [41]. We can also find an M -augmenting path only O(k) times, as the
     size of the matching increases by at least 1 for each M -augmenting path.
         Let us now describe how we find an M -augmenting path, given some matching M of size
     O(k). We find M -augmenting paths by executing a Depth First Search (DFS) from each
     unmatched vertex. Note that we alternate between traversing edges in M and not in M
     in this search. In contrary to a normal DFS, we do not save which vertices we visited, as
     this would cost too much memory. Instead, we mark edges in M as visited, together with
     the vertex from which we started the search. If an edge e ∈ M has been visited once in the
     search tree, there is no need to visit it again, as the search that visited e would have found
     an M -augmenting path containing e if it exists. Let us discuss the exact details on the size
     of the search tree and recursion.
         As any M -augmenting path has length at most O(k), the depth of the search tree is also
     O(k). Looking at any vertex, it might have O(k 2 ) neighbours in the given bipartite graph.
     However, only O(k) of its neighbours can be in M . As visiting an unmatched vertex must end
     the M -augmenting path, the search tree size is only increased by visiting matched vertices.
     Therefore, the search comes down to the following process. From the initial unmatched
     vertex, we can explore to at most O(k) vertices (those in the matching) or any unmatched
     vertex which would end the search. If we explore to a matched vertex, the next step must
     traverse the edge in the matching to make an M -augmenting path, which is deterministic.
     Then we again can explore to O(k) matched vertices, or any unmatched vertex which would
     end the search. This process continues. As we only visit each matched vertex at most once,
     we can see that the number of vertices the search visits is bounded by O(k). In each node
     along the currently active path of the search tree, we can keep a counter with value O(k 2 )
     (using O(log(k 2 )) = O(log k) bits) to keep track of what edge we consider next. These
     counters take up O(k · log k) = O(k log n) space. In any node, if we wish to consider the next
     edge incident to a vertex v with a counter value x, we inspect the x-th edge incident to v
     in the stream. If it turns out we cannot visit that vertex (have already visited it), we can
     increment the counter and find the next edge to consider in the same pass (as the (x + 1)-th
     edge incident to v must be later in the stream than the x-th edge incident to v). Therefore,
     finding the next edge to visit in the search only takes a single pass. Notice that we return to
     nodes in the search tree at most O(k) times in total, because only visiting matched vertices
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                                 35


can result in a ‘failed’ search recursion. So, a search that visits all matched vertices uses
O(k) passes, and this is the maximum number of passes for a single search.
    We start our search at most once from each unmatched vertex that has at least one
edge (for which we can keep another counter to keep track), which means we do at most
O(k 2 ) searches. However, for each of these searches we start from different vertices, we still
keep saved the set of visited matched vertices. If a search from a vertex visits a matched
vertex and does not find an M -augmenting path, then neither will a search from a different
vertex by visiting that matched vertex again. In particular, this is because the graph is
bipartite, because, when we start from an unmatched vertex on e.g. the ‘right’ side, we have
to end on an unmatched vertex on the ‘left’ side, while all vertices we visit on the path are
matched vertices. So, the current path does not interfere with the ability to successfully find
an endpoint, which makes another search visiting the same matched edge have exactly the
same result. Having to do O(k 2 ) searches would indicate that we need to use O(k 2 ) passes,
at least one for every search. However, in the AL model, if we consider the x-th vertex, and
in the pass we use for it, we do no successful visit to a vertex (all adjacencies are matched
and already visited), then in the same pass we can consider the (x + 1)-th vertex, because all
edges incident to the (x + 1)-th vertex in the stream appear later than the edges incident
to the x-th vertex in the stream. Hence, in the AL model, over all O(k 2 ) starting vertices,
we only use O(k) passes, because only (partially) successful searches increase the number of
passes, and we can only visit O(k) vertices in total. In the EA model, we require at least
one pass for each vertex we want to start searching from, and so the total number of passes
is O(k 2 ).
    We conclude that with O(k) passes in the AL model, and O(k 2 ) passes in the EA model,
and O(k log n) bits of memory we can execute a DFS to find an M -augmenting path (if it
exists).
    As mentioned, we can search for an M -augmenting path only O(k) times, as the existence
of more M -augmenting paths would result in returning NO. Therefore, we can find a maximum
matching in B using O(k 2 ) passes and O(k log n) bits of memory in the AL model. In the
EA model, we require O(k 3 ) passes to accomplish this.                                       ◀

   Next, we show how to convert such a maximum matching as found by Theorem 43 into a
minimum vertex cover for B, as asked by [7, Algorithm NT], for which we can use a DFS
procedure as in Theorem 43 as a subroutine.

▶ Lemma 44. Given a bipartite graph B as an AL stream and a maximum matching M of
size O(k), we can find a minimum vertex cover X for B with |X| = |M |, using O(k) passes
and O(k log n) bits of memory. For the EA model, this takes O(k 2 ) passes.

Proof. We adapt a theorem by Bondy and Murty [12, Page 74, Theorem 5.3] to the streaming
setting to achieve this lemma. Let us repeat again what it entails. If our bipartite graph has
vertex sets V, V ′ and a maximum matching M , then we can find a minimum vertex cover X
with |X| = |M | in the following manner. Denote all unmatched vertices in V with U , and
let Z ⊆ V ∪ V ′ be the set of vertices connected to U with an M -alternating path (a path
such that edges in M and not in M alternate). If S = Z ∩ V and T = Z ∩ V ′ , then X is
given by X = (V \ S) ∪ T .
    As T ⊆ X and |X| = |M |, we can find and save T by executing a DFS procedure just like
in Theorem 43, without exceeding O(k log n) bits of memory. This takes O(k) passes in the
AL model and O(k 2 ) passes in the EA model, and O(k log n) bits of memory. Also, V \ S
must only contain matched vertices, as U ⊆ S. Therefore, in the same DFS procedure to find
T , we can also save for every matched vertex in V if it is reachable through an M -alternating
36   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems


     path. Then V \ S is simply given by all matched vertices in M for which we did not save
     that they were reachable. We conclude that we can find X, the minimum vertex cover such
     that |X| = |M |, in O(k) passes (AL model) or O(k 2 ) passes (EA model) and O(k log n) bits
     of memory.                                                                               ◀

        The final result is as follows, which consists of putting the original stream through each
     step for every time we require a pass, i.e. the number of passes of each of the parts of this
     theorem combine in a multiplicative fashion.

     ▶ Theorem 45. Given a graph G as an AL stream, we can produce a kernel of size 2k for
     the Vertex Cover [k] problem using O(k 2 ) passes and O(k log n) bits of memory. In the
     EA model, this procedure takes O(k 3 ) passes.

     Proof. We execute Theorem 43 on the stream produced by applying Theorem 40 and then
     Lemma 42 on the input stream (we have to apply these transformations every time that we
     require a pass). Notice that these applications increase the number of passes by a constant
     factor. On the result of Theorem 43 we apply Lemma 44 to obtain a minimum vertex cover
     for the specific bipartite graph B. Now, C0 contains the vertices v for which both v, v ′ ∈ B
     are contained in the minimum vertex cover of B, and V0 contains the vertices v where either
     v, v ′ ∈ B is contained in the minimum vertex cover of B, but not both. Finding C0 and
     V0 from B and its minimum vertex cover requires no passes over the stream, as they are
     simply given by analysing the minimum vertex cover of B. These sets C0 and V0 are exactly
     the sets in the NT-Theorem (Proposition 41). The kernel by Chen et al. [17] is given by
     G′ = G[V0 ], which we can find with a pass (we can output the kernel as a stream), and
     parameter k ′ = k1 − |C0 |, where k1 is the parameter after application of Theorem 40. All in
     all, this process takes O(k 2 ) (AL) or O(k 3 ) (EA) passes and O(k log n) bits of memory. ◀


      7      Conclusion
     We studied the complexity of Diameter and Connectivity in the streaming model, from
     a parameterized point of view. In particular, we considered the viewpoint of an H-free
     modulator, showing that a vertex cover or a modulator to the disjoint union of ℓ cliques
     effectively forms the frontier of memory- and pass-efficient streaming algorithms. Both
     problems remain hard for almost all other H-free modulators of constant size (often even of
     size 0). We believe that this forms an interesting starting point for further investigations
     into which other graph classes or parameters might be useful when computing Diameter
     and Connectivity in the streaming model.
         On the basis of our work, we propose four concrete open questions:

          What is the streaming complexity of computing Distance to ℓ Cliques? On the
          converse of Vertex Cover [k], we are not aware of any algorithms to compute this
          parameter, even though it is helpful in computing Diameter and Connectivity.
          Are there algorithms or lower bounds for Diameter or Connectivity in the AL model
          for interval graphs?
          Assuming isolated vertices are allowed in the graph, can we solve Connectivity in the
          AL model on split graphs using O(log n) bits of memory?
          Is there a streaming algorithm for Vertex Cover [k] using O(poly(k)) passes and
          O(poly(k, log n)) bits of memory, or can it be shown that one cannot exist? This result
          would be relevant in combination with our kernel.
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                                   37


     References
 1   A. Abboud, V. V. Williams, and J. R. Wang. Approximation and fixed parameter subquadratic
     algorithms for radius and diameter in sparse graphs. In Proc. SODA 2016, pages 377–391.
     SIAM, 2016.
 2   D. Agarwal, A. McGregor, J. M. Phillips, S. Venkatasubramanian, and Z. Zhu. Spatial scan
     statistics: approximations and performance study. In Proc. SIGKDD 2006, pages 24–33. ACM,
     2006.
 3   S. Assadi, Y. Chen, and S. Khanna. Polynomial pass lower bounds for graph streaming
     algorithms. CoRR, abs/1904.04720, 2019.
 4   S. Assadi, G. Kol, R. R. Saxena, and H. Yu. Multi-pass graph streaming lower bounds for
     cycle counting, max-cut, matching size, and other problems. In Proc. FOCS 2020, pages
     354–364. IEEE, 2020.
 5   S. Assadi and V. N. Graph streaming lower bounds for parameter estimation and property
     testing via a streaming XOR lemma. In Proc. STOC 2021, pages 612–625. ACM, 2021.
 6   S. Assadi and R. Raz. Near-quadratic lower bounds for two-pass graph streaming algorithms.
     In Proc. FOCS 2020, pages 342–353. IEEE, 2020.
 7   R. Bar-Yehuda and S. Even. A local-ratio theorem for approximating the weighted vertex
     cover problem. In Proc. WG 1983, pages 17–28. Universitätsverlag Rudolf Trauner, Linz, 1983.
 8   M. Bentert and A. Nichterlein. Parameterized complexity of diameter. In Proc. CIAC 2019,
     volume 11485 of LNCS, pages 50–61. Springer, 2019.
 9   A. Bishnu, A. Ghosh, S. Kolay, G. Mishra, and S. Saurabh. Fixed-parameter tractability of
     graph deletion problems over data streams. CoRR, abs/1906.05458, 2019.
10   A. Bishnu, A. Ghosh, S. Kolay, G. Mishra, and S. Saurabh. Fixed parameter tractability of
     graph deletion problems over data streams. In Proc. COCOON 2020, volume 12273 of LNCS,
     pages 652–663. Springer, 2020.
11   A. Bishnu, A. Ghosh, G. Mishra, and S. Sen. On the streaming complexity of fundamental
     geometric problems. CoRR, abs/1803.06875, 2018.
12   J. A. Bondy and U. S. R. Murty. Graph Theory with Applications. Macmillan Education UK,
     1976.
13   K. Bringmann, T. Husfeldt, and M. Magnusson. Multivariate analysis of orthogonal range
     searching and graph distances. Algorithmica, 82(8):2292–2315, 2020.
14   J. F. Buss and J. Goldsmith. Nondeterminism within P. SIAM J. Comput., 22(3):560–572,
     1993.
15   S. Cabello. Subquadratic algorithms for the diameter and the sum of pairwise distances in
     planar graphs. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 15(2):21:1–21:38, 2019.
16   A. Chakrabarti, S. Khot, and X. Sun. Near-optimal lower bounds on the multi-party commu-
     nication complexity of set disjointness. In Proc. CCC 2003, pages 107–117. IEEE, 2003.
17   J. Chen, I. A. Kanj, and W. Jia. Vertex cover: Further observations and further improvements.
     Journal of Algorithms, 41(2):280 – 301, 2001.
18   L. Chen, G. Kol, D. Paramonov, R. R. Saxena, Z. Song, and H. Yu. Almost optimal super-
     constant-pass streaming lower bounds for reachability. In Proc. STOC 2021, pages 570–583.
     ACM, 2021.
19   R. Chitnis and G. Cormode. Towards a theory of parameterized streaming algorithms. In
     Proc. IPEC 2019, volume 148 of LIPIcs, pages 7:1–7:15. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum
     für Informatik, 2019.
20   R. Chitnis, G. Cormode, H. Esfandiari, M. T. Hajiaghayi, A. McGregor, M. Monemizadeh,
     and S. Vorotnikova. Kernelization via sampling with applications to finding matchings and
     related problems in dynamic graph streams. In Proc. SODA 2016, pages 1326–1344. SIAM,
     2016.
21   R. H. Chitnis, G. Cormode, H. Esfandiari, M. Hajiaghayi, and M. Monemizadeh. Brief
     announcement: New streaming algorithms for parameterized maximal matching & beyond. In
     Proc. SPAA 2015, pages 56–58. ACM, 2015.
38   Parameterized Complexity of Streaming Diameter and Connectivity Problems


     22   R. H. Chitnis, G. Cormode, M. T. Hajiaghayi, and M. Monemizadeh. Parameterized streaming:
          Maximal matching and vertex cover. In Proc. SODA 2015, pages 1234–1251. SIAM, 2015.
     23   D. G. Corneil, F. F. Dragan, M. Habib, and C. Paul. Diameter determination on restricted
          graph families. Discret. Appl. Math., 113(2-3):143–166, 2001.
     24   D. Coudert, G. Ducoffe, and A. Popa. Fully polynomial FPT algorithms for some classes of
          bounded clique-width graphs. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 15(3):33:1–33:57, 2019.
     25   M. Cygan, F. V. Fomin, L. Kowalik, D. Lokshtanov, D. Marx, M. Pilipczuk, M. Pilipczuk,
          and S. Saurabh. Parameterized Algorithms. Springer, Cham, 2015.
     26   H. Dell and D. van Melkebeek. Satisfiability allows no nontrivial sparsification unless the
          polynomial-time hierarchy collapses. J. ACM, 61(4):23:1–23:27, 2014.
     27   R. G. Downey and M. R. Fellows. Parameterized Complexity. Monographs in Computer
          Science. Springer, 1999.
     28   G. Ducoffe. Beyond helly graphs: The diameter problem on absolute retracts. In Proc. WG
          2021, volume 12911 of LNCS, pages 321–335. Springer, 2021.
     29   G. Ducoffe and F. F. Dragan. A story of diameter, radius, and (almost) helly property.
          Networks, 77(3):435–453, 2021.
     30   G. Ducoffe, M. Habib, and L. Viennot. Fast diameter computation within split graphs. In
          Proc. COCOA 2019, volume 11949 of LNCS, pages 155–167. Springer, 2019.
     31   G. Ducoffe, M. Habib, and L. Viennot. Diameter computation on H -minor free graphs and
          graphs of bounded (distance) vc-dimension. In Proc. SODA 2020, pages 1905–1922. SIAM,
          2020.
     32   M. Elkin. Distributed exact shortest paths in sublinear time. J. ACM, 67(3):15:1–15:36, 2020.
     33   M. Elkin and C. Trehan. (1 + ϵ)-approximate shortest paths in dynamic streams. CoRR,
          abs/2107.13309, 2021.
     34   S. Fafianie and S. Kratsch. Streaming kernelization. In Proc. MFCS 2014, volume 8635 of
          LNCS, pages 275–286. Springer, 2014.
     35   J. Feigenbaum, S. Kannan, A. McGregor, S. Suri, and J. Zhang. On graph problems in a
          semi-streaming model. Theor. Comput. Sci., 348(2-3):207–216, 2005.
     36   J. Feigenbaum, S. Kannan, A. McGregor, S. Suri, and J. Zhang. Graph distances in the
          data-stream model. SIAM J. Comput., 38(5):1709–1727, 2008.
     37   P. Gawrychowski, H. Kaplan, S. Mozes, M. Sharir, and O. Weimann. Voronoi diagrams on
          planar graphs, and computing the diameter in deterministic õ(n5/3 ) time. SIAM J. Comput.,
          50(2):509–554, 2021.
     38   A. Goel, M. Kapralov, and S. Khanna. On the communication and streaming complexity of
          maximum bipartite matching. In Y. Rabani, editor, Proc. SODA 2012, pages 468–485. SIAM,
          2012.
     39   V. Guruswami and K. Onak. Superlinear lower bounds for multipass graph processing.
          Algorithmica, 76(3):654–683, 2016.
     40   M. R. Henzinger, P. Raghavan, and S. Rajagopalan. Computing on data streams. In Proc.
          DIMACS 1998, volume 50 of DIMACS, pages 107–118. DIMACS/AMS, 1998.
     41   J. E. Hopcroft and R. M. Karp. An n5/2 algorithm for maximum matchings in bipartite
          graphs. SIAM J. Comput., 2(4):225–231, 1973.
     42   Z. Huang and P. Peng. Dynamic graph stream algorithms in o(n) space. Algorithmica,
          81(5):1965–1987, 2019.
     43   T. Husfeldt. Computing graph distances parameterized by treewidth and diameter. In Proc.
          IPEC 2016, volume 63 of LIPIcs, pages 16:1–16:11. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für
          Informatik, 2016.
     44   M. Kapralov. Better bounds for matchings in the streaming model. In S. Khanna, editor,
          Proc. SODA 2013, pages 1679–1697. SIAM, 2013.
     45   S. Khan and S. K. Mehta. Depth first search in the semi-streaming model. In R. Niedermeier
          and C. Paul, editors, Proc. STACS 2019, volume 126 of LIPIcs, pages 42:1–42:16. Schloss
          Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019.
J.J. Oostveen and E.J. van Leeuwen                                                                        39


46   A. McGregor. Graph stream algorithms: a survey. SIGMOD Rec., 43(1):9–20, 2014.
47   A. McGregor, S. Vorotnikova, and H. T. Vu. Better algorithms for counting triangles in data
     streams. In T. Milo and W. Tan, editors, Proc. PODS 2016, pages 401–411. ACM, 2016.
48   G. L. Nemhauser and L. E. T. Jr. Vertex packings: Structural properties and algorithms.
     Math. Program., 8(1):232–248, 1975.
49   J. J. Oostveen and E. J. van Leeuwen. Streaming deletion problems parameterized by vertex
     cover. In Proc. FCT 2021, volume 12867 of LNCS, pages 413–426. Springer, 2021.
50   J. H. Reif. Depth-first search is inherently sequential. Inf. Process. Lett., 20(5):229–234, 1985.
51   L. Roditty and V. V. Williams. Fast approximation algorithms for the diameter and radius of
     sparse graphs. In Proc. STOC 2013, pages 515–524. ACM, 2013.
52   X. Sun and D. P. Woodruff. Tight bounds for graph problems in insertion streams. In
     Proc. APPROX/RANDOM 2015, volume 40 of LIPIcs, pages 435–448. Schloss Dagstuhl -
     Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2015.
53   E. Verbin and W. Yu. The streaming complexity of cycle counting, sorting by reversals, and
     other problems. In D. Randall, editor, Proc. SODA 2011, pages 11–25. SIAM, 2011.
