                                         Towards a Theory of Parameterized Streaming
                                         Algorithms ∗
                                         Rajesh Chitnis1
                                         School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, UK.
                                         rajeshchitnis@gmail.com

                                         Graham Cormode
                                         University of Warwick, UK.
                                         g.cormode@warwick.ac.uk

                                               Abstract
                                         Parameterized complexity attempts to give a more fine-grained analysis of the complexity of problems:
arXiv:1911.09650v1 [cs.DS] 20 Nov 2019




                                         instead of measuring the running time as a function of only the input size, we analyze the running time
                                         with respect to additional parameters. This approach has proven to be highly successful in delineating
                                         our understanding of NP-hard problems. Given this success with the TIME resource, it seems but
                                         natural to use this approach for dealing with the SPACE resource. First attempts in this direction
                                         have considered a few individual problems, with some success: Fafianie and Kratsch [MFCS’14] and
                                         Chitnis et al. [SODA’15] introduced the notions of streaming kernels and parameterized streaming
                                         algorithms respectively. For example, the latter shows how to refine the Ω(n2 ) bit lower bound for
                                         finding a minimum Vertex Cover (VC) in the streaming setting by designing an algorithm for the
                                         parameterized k-VC problem which uses O(k2 log n) bits.
                                             In this paper, we initiate a systematic study of graph problems from the paradigm of parameterized
                                         streaming algorithms. We first define a natural hierarchy of space complexity classes of FPS, SubPS,
                                         SemiPS, SupPS and BrutePS, and then obtain tight classifications for several well-studied graph
                                         problems such as Longest Path, Feedback Vertex Set, Dominating Set, Girth, Treewidth, etc. into
                                         this hierarchy (see Figure 1 and Figure 2). On the algorithmic side, our parameterized streaming
                                         algorithms use techniques from the FPT world such as bidimensionality, iterative compression and
                                         bounded-depth search trees. On the hardness side, we obtain lower bounds for the parameterized
                                         streaming complexity of various problems via novel reductions from problems in communication
                                         complexity. We also show a general (unconditional) lower bound for space complexity of parameterized
                                         streaming algorithms for a large class of problems inspired by the recently developed frameworks for
                                         showing (conditional) kernelization lower bounds.
                                             Parameterized algorithms and streaming algorithms are approaches to cope with TIME and
                                         SPACE intractability respectively. It is our hope that this work on parameterized streaming
                                         algorithms leads to two-way flow of ideas between these two previously separated areas of theoretical
                                         computer science.

                                         2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of Computation → Design and analysis of algorithms

                                         Keywords and phrases Parameterized Algorithms, Streaming Algorithms, Kernels

                                         Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs...

                                         Acknowledgements We thank MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi, Robert Krauthgamer and Morteza
                                         Monemizadeh for helpful discussions. Algorithm 1 was suggested to us by Arnold Filtser.




                                         ∗
                                           A preliminary version of this paper will appear in IPEC 2019. Supported by ERC grant 2014-CoG
                                           647557.
                                         1
                                           Work done while at University of Warwick, UK
                                                    © Rajesh Chitnis and Graham Cormode;
                                                                                                                                             EA




                                                    licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY
                                                                                                                                              TC S




                                                           Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                                                           Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
XX:2   Towards a Theory of Parameterized Streaming Algorithms


           1    Introduction

       Designing and implementing efficient algorithms is at the heart of computer science. Tra-
       ditionally, efficiency of algorithms has been measured with respect to running time as a
       function of instance size. From this perspective, algorithms are said to be efficient if they can
       be solved in time which is bounded by some polynomial function of the input size. However,
       very many interesting problems are NP-complete, and so are grouped together as “not known
       to be efficient”. This fails to discriminate within a large heterogenous group of problems,
       and in response the theory of parameterized (time) algorithms was developed in late 90’s by
       Downey and Fellows [23]. Parameterized complexity attempts to delineate the complexity of
       problems by expressing the costs in terms of additional parameters. Formally, we say that a
       problem is fixed-parameter tractable (FPT) with respect to parameter k if the problem can
       be solved in time f (k) · nO(1) where f is a computable function and n is the input size. For
       example, the problem of checking if a graph on n vertices has a vertex cover of size at most
       k can be solved in 2k · nO(1) time. The study of various parameters helps to understand
       which parameters make the problem easier (FPT) and which ones cause it to be hard. The
       parameterized approach towards NP-complete problems has led to development of various
       algorithmic tools such as kernelization, iterative compression, color coding, and more [24, 17].
       Kernelization: A key concept in fixed parameter tractability is that of kernelization which
       is an efficient preprocessing algorithm to produce a smaller, equivalent output called the
       “kernel”. Formally, a kernelization algorithm for a parameterized problem Q is an algorithm
       which takes as an instance hx, ki and outputs in time polynomial in (|x| + k) an equivalent2
       instance hx0 , k 0 i such that max{|x0 |, k 0 } ≤ f (k) for some computable function f . The output
       instance hx0 , k 0 i is called the kernel, while the function f determines the size of the kernel.
       Kernelizability is equivalent to fixed-parameter tractability, and designing compact kernels
       is an important question. In recent years, (conditional) lower bounds on kernels have
       emerged [4, 19, 20, 25, 31].
       Streaming Algorithms: A very different paradigm for handling large problem instances
       arises in the form of streaming algorithms. The model is motivated by sources of data
       arising in communication networks and activity streams that are considered to be too big to
       store conveniently. This places a greater emphasis on the space complexity of algorithms.
       A streaming algorithm processes the input in one or a few read-only passes, with primary
       focus on the storage space needed. In this paper we consider streaming algorithms for graph
       problems over fixed vertex sets, where information about the edges arrives edge by edge [33].
       We consider variants where edges can be both inserted and deleted, or only insertions are
       allowed. We primarily consider single pass streams, but also give some multi-pass results.


       1.1      Parameterized Streaming Algorithms and Kernels
       Given that parameterized algorithms have been extremely successful for the TIME resource,
       it seems natural to also use it attack the SPACE resource. In this paper, we advance the
       model of parameterized streaming algorithms, and start to flesh out a hierarchy of complexity
       classes. We focus our attention on graph problems, by analogy with FPT, where the majority
       of results have addressed graphs. From a space perspective, there is perhaps less headroom
       than when considering the time cost: for graphs on n vertices, the entire graph can be stored


       2
           By equivalent we mean that hx, ki ∈ Q ⇔ hx0 , k0 i ∈ Q
Rajesh Chitnis and Graham Cormode                                                                   XX:3


using O(n2 ) space3 . Nevertheless, given that storing the full graph can be prohibitive, there
are natural space complexity classes to consider. We formalize these below, but informally,
the classes partition the dependence on n as: (i) (virtually) independent of n; (ii) sublinear
in n; (iii) (quasi)linear in n; (iv) superlinear but subquadratic in n; and (v) quadratic in n.
    Naively, several graph problems have strong lower bounds: for example, the problem
of finding a minimum vertex cover on graphs of n vertices has a lower bound of Ω(n2 )
bits. However, when we adopt the parameterized view, we seek streaming algorithms for
(parameterized) graph problems whose space can be expressed as a function of both the
number of vertices n and the parameter k. With this relaxation, we can separate out the
problem space and start to populate our hierarchy. We next spell out our results, which derive
from a variety of upper and lower bounds building on the streaming and FPT literature.

1.2    Our Results & Organization of the paper
For a graph problem with parameter k, there can be several possible choices for the space
complexity needed to solve it in the streaming setting. In this paper, we first define some
natural space complexity classes below:
1. O(f
    e (k)) space: Due to the connection to running time of FPT algorithms, we call the
   class of parameterized problems solvable using O(f
                                                  e (k)) bits as FPS (fixed-parameterized
   streaming)4 .
2. Sublinear space: When the dependence on n is sublinear, we call the class of parameterized
   problems solvable using O(fe (k) · n1− ) bits as SubPS (sublinear parameterized streaming)
3. Quasi-linear space: Due to the connection to the semi-streaming model [29, 37], we call the
                                    e (k) · n) bits as SemiPS (parameterized semi-streaming).
   set of problems solvable using O(f
4. Superlinear, subquadratic space: When the dependence on n is superlinear (but subquad-
                                                                        e (k) · n1+ ) bits (for
   ratic), we call the class of parameterized problems solvable using O(f
   some 1 >  > 0) as SupPS (superlinear parameterized streaming).
5. Quadratic space: We call the set of graph problems solvable using O(n2 ) bits as BrutePS
   (brute-force parameterized streaming). Note that every graph problem is in BrutePS
   since we can just store the entire adjacency matrix using O(n2 ) bits (see Remark 2).

I Remark 1. Formally, we need to consider the following 7-tuple when we attempt to find its
correct position in the aforementioned hierarchy of complexity classes:

[Problem, Parameter, Space,# of Passes, Type of Algorithm, Approx. Ratio, Type of Stream]

By type of algorithm, we mean that the algorithm could be deterministic or randomized.
For the type of stream, the standard alternatives are (adversarial) insertion, (adversarial)
insertion-deletion, random order, etc. Figure 3 gives a list of results for the k-VC problem
(as a case study) in various different settings. Unless stated otherwise, throughout this paper,
we consider the space requirement for 1-pass exact deterministic algorithms for problems
with the standard parameter (size of the solution) in insertion-only streams.
I Remark 2. There are various different models for streaming algorithms depending on how
much computation is allowed on the stored data. In this paper, we consider the most general


3
  Throughout the paper, by space we mean words/edges/vertices. Each word can be represented using
  O(log n) bits
4
  Throughout this paper, we use the Õ notation to hide logO(1) n factors
XX:4   Towards a Theory of Parameterized Streaming Algorithms


       model by allowing unbounded computation at each edge update, and also at the end of the
       stream.
           Our goal is to provide a tight classification of graph problems into the aforementioned
       complexity classes. We make progress towards this goal as follows: Section 2 shows how various
       techniques from the FPT world such as iterative compression, branching, bidimensionality,
       etc. can also be used to design parameterized streaming algorithms. First we investigate
       whether one can further improve upon the FPS algorithm of Chitnis et al. [12] for k-VC
       which uses O(k 2 · log n) bits and one pass. We design two algorithms for k-VC which use
       O(k · log n) bits5 : an 2k -pass algorithm using bounded-depth search trees (Section 2.1) and
       an (k · 22k )-pass algorithm using iterative compression (Section 2.2). Finally, Section 2.3
       shows that any minor-bidimensional problem belongs to the class SemiPS.
           Section 3 deals with lower bounds for parameterized streaming algorithms. First, in
       Section 3.1 we show that some parameterized problems are tight for the classes SemiPS
       and BrutePS. In particular, we show that k-Treewidth, k-Path and k-Feedback-Vertex-Set
       are tight for the class SemiPS, i.e., they belong to SemiPS but do not belong to the sub-
       class SubPS. Our SemiPS algorithms are based on problem-specific structural insights. Via
       reductions from the Perm problem [42], we rule out algorithms which use O(f        e (k) · n1− )
       bits (for any function f and any  ∈ (0, 1)) for these problems by proving Ω(n log n) bits
       lower bounds for constant values of k. Then we show that some parameterized problems
       such as k-Girth and k-Dominating-Set are tight for the class BrutePS, i.e, they belong to
       BrutePS but do not belong to the sub-class SupPS. Every graph problem belongs to BrutePS
       since we can store the entire adjacency matrix of the graph using O(n2 ) bits. Via reductions
       from the Index problem [34], we rule out algorithms which use O(f    e (k) · n1+ ) bits (for any
       function f and any  ∈ (0, 1)) for these problems by proving Ω(n2 ) bits lower bounds for
       constant values of k.
           Section 3.2 shows a lower bound of Ω(n) bits for any algorithm that approximates (within
                 β
       a factor 32  ) the size of min dominating set on graphs of arboricity (β + 2), i.e., this problem
                e (β) · n1− ) bits algorithm (since β is a constant), and hence does not belong to
       has no O(f
       the class SubPS when parameterized by β. In Section 3.3 we obtain unconditional lower
       bounds on the space complexity of 1-pass parameterized streaming algorithms for a large
       class of graph problems inspired by some of the recent frameworks to show conditional lower
       bounds for kernels [4, 19, 20, 25, 31]. Finally, in Section 3.4 we show that any parameterized
       streaming algorithm for the d-SAT problem (for any d ≥ 2) must (essentially) follow the
       naive algorithm of storing all the clauses.
           Figure 1 provides a pictorial representation of the complexity classes, and the known
       classification of several graph problems (from this paper and some previous work) into these
       classes. Figure 2 summarizes our results, and clarifies the stream arrival model(s) under
       which they hold. Figure 3 summarizes known results for the k-VC problem in the different
       settings outlined in Remark 1.


       1.3      Prior work on Parametrized Streaming Algorithms
       Prior work began by considering how to implement kernels in the streaming model. Formally,
       a streaming kernel [28] for a parameterized problem (I, k) is a streaming algorithm that
       receives the input I as a stream of elements, stores f (k) · logO(1) |I| bits and returns an


       5
           Which is essentially optimal since the algorithm also returns a VC of size k (if one exists)
Rajesh Chitnis and Graham Cormode                                                                            XX:5



                                                 BrutePS


                                                   SupPS


                                                  SemiPS
                                           β
                                           32 -approx for estimating
                                    DomSet in graphs of arboricity (β + 2)

                                                   SubPS


                                                    FPS

                          Minor-Bidimensional-problems
                                                    k-VC

                                     O(d)-approx. for est. max matching
                                         on graphs of arboricity d in
                                            dynamic streams [10]



                                     k-Path, k-FVS, k-Treewidth

                                O( logδ n )-approx. for DomSet in O(n
                                                                  e 1+δ ) space
                                            and O(1/δ) passes [32]




                                      k-Girth, k-Dominating Set


    Figure 1 Pictorial representation of classification of some graph problems into complexity classes:
our results are in black and previous work is referenced in blue. All results are for 1-pass deterministic
algorithms on insertion-only streams unless otherwise specified. It was already known that k-VC ∈
FPS [12, 10] using only 1-pass, but here we design an algorithm with optimal space storage at the
expense of multiple passes.


equivalent instance6 . This is especially important from the practical point of view since
several real-world situations can be modeled by the streaming setting, and streaming kernels
would help to efficiently preprocess these instances. Fafianie and Kratsch [28] showed that
the kernels for some problems like Hitting Set and Set Matching can be implemented in the
streaming setting, but other problems such as Edge Dominating Set, Feedback Vertex Set,
etc. do not admit (1-pass) streaming kernels.
    Chitnis et al. [12] studied how to circumvent the worst case bound of Ω(n2 ) bits for Vertex
Cover by designing a streaming algorithm for the parameterized k-Vertex-Cover (k-VC)7 .


6
    [28] required f (k) = kO(1) , but we choose to relax this requirement
7
    That is, determine whether there is a vertex cover of size at most k?
XX:6   Towards a Theory of Parameterized Streaming Algorithms


                                           Number
                                              of        Type of       Space                    Space
                  Problem                   Passes      Stream     Upper Bound              Lower Bound
         g(r)-minor-bidimensional                                  e −1 (k + 1))10 n)
                                                                   O((g
             problems [Sec. 2.3]                 1      Ins-Del.       words                        —
                                                2k
               k-VC [Sec. 2.2]              2     ·k    Ins-only     O(k) words               Ω(k) words
               k-VC [Sec. 2.1]                  2k      Ins-only     O(k) words               Ω(k) words
               k-FVS, k-Path                                                            No f (k) · n1− logO(1) n
            k-Treewidth [Sec. 3.1]               1      Ins-only    O(k · n) words          bits algorithm
               k-FVS, k-Path                                                            No f (k) · n1− logO(1) n
            k-Treewidth [Sec. 3.1]               1      Ins-Del.    e · n) words
                                                                    O(k                     bits algorithm
             k-Girth, k-DomSet,                                                         No f (k) · n2− logO(1) n
                  [Sec. 3.1]                     1      Ins-Del.      O(n2 ) bits           bits algorithm
        β
        32
           -approximation   for size of
         min DomSet on graphs of                                                            No f (β) · n1−
            arboricity β [Sec. 3.2]              1      Ins-only      O(nβ)
                                                                      e     bits            bits algorithm
        AND-compatible problems
             and OR-compatible                                                               e (k) · n1− )
                                                                                          No O(f
                                                                          2
             problems [Sec. 3.3]                 1      Ins-only      O(n ) bits           bits algorithm
                 d-SAT with                              Clause
            N variables [Sec. 3.4]               1       Arrival    e · N d ) bits
                                                                    O(d                     Ω((N/d)d ) bits


           Figure 2 Table summarizing our results (in the order in which they appear in the paper). All our
       algorithms are deterministic. All the lower bounds are unconditional, and hold even for randomized
       algorithms in insertion-only streams.

                           # of           Type of       Type of     Approx.                   Space
         Problem          Passes          Stream       Algorithm     Ratio                   Bound
            k-VC             1            Ins-only        Det.        1                O(k2 log n) bits [12]
            k-VC             1            Ins-only       Rand.        1                  Ω(k2 ) bits [12]
            k-VC             1            Ins-Del.       Rand.        1             O(k2 logO(1) n) bits [10]
            k-VC            2k            Ins-only        Det.        1           O(k log n) bits [Algorithm 1]
            k-VC           k · 2k         Ins-only.       Det.        1           O(k log n) bits [Algorithm 2]
        Estim. k-VC      Ω(k/ log n)      Ins-only.      Rand.        1          O(k log n) bits [1, Theorem 16]
        Estim. k-VC                                       Det.                    Ω(n) bits [27, Theorem 6.1]
                                                                                   √
          on Trees            1           Ins-only.      Rand.      (3/2 − )    Ω( n) bits [27, Theorem 6.1]


          Figure 3 Table summarizing some of the results for the k-VC problem in the different settings
       outlined in Remark 1.


       They showed that the k-VC problem can be solved in insertion-only streams using storage
       of O(k 2 ) space. They also showed an almost matching lower bound of Ω(k 2 ) bits for any
       streaming algorithm for k-VC. A sequence of papers showed how to solve the k-VC problem
       in more general streaming models: Chitnis et al. [12, 11] gave an O(k   e 2 ) space algorithm
       under a particular promise, which was subsequently removed in [10].
           Recently, there have been several papers considering the problem of estimating the size
       of a maximum matching using o(n) space in graphs of bounded arboricity. If the space is
       required to be sublinear in n, then versions of the problem that involve estimating the size of a
       maximum matching (rather than demonstrating such a matching) become the focus. Since the
Rajesh Chitnis and Graham Cormode                                                                             XX:7


work of Esfandiari et al. [27], there have been several sublinear space algorithms [35, 36, 15, 10]
which obtain O(α)-approximate estimations of the size of maximum matching in graphs
of arboricity α. The current best bounds [5, 15] for insertion-only streams is O(logO(1) n)
space and for insertion-deletion streams is O(αe · n4/5 ). All of these results can be viewed as
parameterized streaming algorithms (FPS or SubPS) for approximately estimating the size of
maximum matching in graphs parameterized by the arboricity.


    2    Parameterized Streaming Algorithms Inspired by FPT techniques

In this section we design parameterized streaming algorithms using three techniques from the
world of parameterized algorithms, viz. branching, iterative compression and bidimensionality.


2.1      Multipass FPS algorithm for k-VC using Branching
The streaming algorithm (Algorithm 2) from Section 2.2 already uses optimal storage of
O(k log n) bits but requires O(2k · (n − k)) passes. In this section, we show how to reduce
the number of passes to 2k (while still maintaining the same storage) using the technique
of bounded-depth search trees (also known as branching). The method of bounded-depth
search trees gives a folklore FPT algorithm for k-VC which runs in 2O(k) · nO(1) time. The
idea is simple: any vertex cover must contain at least one end-point of each edge. We now
build a search tree as follows: choose an arbitrary edge, say e = u − v in the graph. Start
with the graph G at the root node of the search tree. Branch into two options, viz. choosing
either u or v into the vertex cover8 . The resulting graphs at the two children of the root node
are G − u and G − v. Continue the branching process. Note that at each step, we branch
into two options and we only need to build the search tree to height k for the k-VC problem.
Hence, the binary search tree has 2O(k) leaf nodes. If the resulting graph at any leaf node
is empty (i.e., has no edges) then G has a vertex cover of size ≤ k which can be obtained
by following the path from the root node to the leaf node in the search tree. Conversely, if
the resulting graphs at none of the leaf nodes of the search tree are empty then G does not
have a vertex cover of size ≤ k: this is because at each step we branched on all the (two)
possibilities at each node of the search tree.
    Simulating branching-based FPT algorithm using multiple passes: We now
simulate the branching-based FPT algorithm described in the previous section using 2k
passes and O(k log n) bits of storage in the streaming model.

I Definition 3. Let V (G) = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vn }. Fix some ordering φ on V (G) as follows:
v1 < v2 < v3 < . . . < vn . Let Dictk be the dictionary ordering on the 2k binary strings
of {0, 1}k . Given a string X ⊆ {0, 1}k , let Dictk (Next(X)) denote the string that comes
immediately after X in the ordering Dictk . We set Dictk (Next(1k )) = ♠

   We formally describe our multipass algorithm in Algorithm 1. This algorithm crucially
uses the fact that in each pass we see the edges of the stream in the same order.

I Theorem 4. Algorithm 1 correctly solves the k-VC problem using 2k passes and O(k log n)
bits of storage.


8
    Note that if we choose u in the first branch then that does not imply that we cannot or will not choose
    v later on in the search tree
XX:8   Towards a Theory of Parameterized Streaming Algorithms


       Algorithm 1 2k -pass Streaming Algorithm for k-VC using O(k log n) bits via Branching
       Input: An undirected graph G = (V, E) and an integer k.
       Output: A vertex cover S of G of size ≤ k (if one exists), and NO otherwise
       Storage: i, j, S, X
        1: Let X = 0k , and suppose the edges of the graph are seen in the order e1 , e2 , . . . , em
        2: while X 6= ♠ do
               S = ∅, i = 1, j = 1
        3:    while i 6= k + 1 do
        4:       Let ej = u − v such that u < v under the ordering φ
        5:       if Both u ∈ / S and v ∈
                                       / S then
        6:           if X[i] = 0 then S ← S ∪ {u}
        7:           else S ← S ∪ {v}
        8:           i←i+1
        9:        j ←j+1
       10:    if j = m + 1 then Return S and abort
       11:    else X ← Dictk (Next(X))
       12: if X = ♠ then Return NO



       Proof. First we argue the correctness of Algorithm 1. Suppose that there is a string
       X ∈ {0, 1}k such that j = m + 1 and we return the set S. Note that initially we have S = ∅,
       and the counter i increases each time we add a vertex to S. Hence, size of S never exceeds k.
       Moreover, if an edge was not covered already (i.e., neither endpoint was in S) then we add at
       least one of those end-points in S (depending on whether X[i] is 0 or 1) and increase i by one.
       Hence, if j = m + 1 then this means that we have seen (and covered) all the edges and the
       current set S is indeed a vertex cover of size ≤ k. Now suppose that the algorithm returns
       NO. We claim that indeed G cannot have a vertex cover of size k. Suppose to the contrary
       that G has a vertex cover S ∗ of size ≤ k, but Algorithm 1 returned NO. We construct a
       string X ∗ ∈ {0, 1}k for which Algorithm 1 would return the set S ∗ : we start with i=1 and
       the edge e1 . Since S ∗ is a vertex cover of G it must cover the edge e1 . Set X ∗ [1] to be 0 or 1
       depending on which of the two endpoints of e1 is in S ∗ (if both endpoints are in S ∗ , then it
       does not matter what we set X ∗ [1] to be). Continuing this way suppose we have filled the
       entries till X ∗ [i] and the current edge under consideration is ej . If ej is not covered then
       i 6= k since S ∗ is a vertex cover of G of size ≤ k. In this case, we set X ∗ [i + 1] to be 0 or 1
       depending on which of the two endpoints of e1 is in S ∗ .
           We now analyze the storage and number of passes required. The number of passes is at
       most 2k since we have one pass for each string from {0, 1}k . During each pass, we store four
       quantities:
        • The string X ∈ {0, 1}k under consideration in this pass. This needs k bits.
        • The index i of current bit of the k-bit binary string X under consideration in this pass.
           This needs log k bits.
        • The index j of the current edge under consideration in this pass. This needs log n bits.
        • The set S. Since size of S never exceeds k throughout the algorithm, this can be done
           using k log n bits.
                                                                                                        J

           Note that the total storage of Algorithm 1 is O(k log n) bits which is essentially optimal
       since the algorithm also outputs a vertex cover of size at most k (if one exists). The next
Rajesh Chitnis and Graham Cormode                                                                    XX:9


natural question is whether one need exponential (in k) number of passes when we want
to solve the k-VC problem using only O(k log n) bits. A lower bound of (k/ log n) passes
follows for such algorithms from the following result of Abboud et al.

I Theorem 5. (rewording of [1, Thm 16]) Any algorithm for the k-VC problem which uses
S bits of space and R passes must satisfy RS ≥ n2

2.2      Multipass FPS algorithm for k-VC using Iterative Compression
The technique of iterative compression was introduced by Reed et al. [39] to design the first
FPT algorithm for the k-OCT problem9 . Since then, iterative compression has been an
important tool in the design of faster parameterized algorithms [9, 13, 8] and kernels [18]. In
this section, using the technique of iterative compression, we design an algorithm (Algorithm 2)
for k-VC which uses O(k log n) bits but requires O(k · 22k ) passes. Although this algorithm
is strictly worse (same storage, but higher number of passes) compared to Algorithm 1, we
include it here to illustrate that the technique of iterative compression can be used in the
streaming setting.

2.2.1       FPT algorithm for k-VC using iterative compression
We first define a variant problem where we are given some additional information in the
input in the form of a vertex cover of size of size k + 1 (just more than the budget).

      Compression-VC
      Input: A graph G, a positive integer k and a vertex cover T of size k + 1
      Parameter: k
      Question: Does there exist a set X ⊆ V (G) with |X| ≤ k such that G \ X has no
      edges?

I Lemma 6 (power of iterative compression). k-VC can be solved by k calls to an algorithm
for the Compression-VC problem.

Proof. Let e1 , e2 , . . . , et be the edges of a maximal matching M in G, and let VM be the set
of vertices which are matched in M . If t > k then there is no vertex cover of size k since
any vertex cover needs to pick at least one vertex from every edge of the maximal matching.
Hence, we have t ≤ k. By maximality of M , it follows that the set VM forms a vertex cover
of size 2t ≤ 2k. For each 2k ≥ r ≥ k + 1 we now run the Compression-VC problem to see
whether there exists a vertex cover of size r − 1. If the answer is YES, then we continue with
the compression. On the other hand, if the the Compression-VC problem answers NO for
some 2k ≥ r ≥ k + 1 then clearly there is no vertex cover of G which has size ≤ k.            J

    Now we solve the Compression-VC problem via the following problem whose only
difference is that the vertex cover in the output must be disjoint from the one in the input:

      Disjoint-VC
      Input: A graph G, a positive integer k and a vertex cover T of size k + 1
      Parameter: k
      Question: Does there exist a set X ⊆ V (G) with |X| ≤ k such that X ∩ T = ∅ and
      G \ X has no edges?

9
    Is there a set of size at most k whose deletion makes the graph odd cycle free, i.e. bipartite
XX:10   Towards a Theory of Parameterized Streaming Algorithms


        I Lemma 7 (adding disjointness). Compression-VC can be solved by O(2|T | ) calls to an
        algorithm for the Disjoint-VC problem.

        Proof. Given an instance I = (G, T, k) of Compression-VC we guess the intersection Y
        of the given vertex T of size k + 1 and the desired vertex cover X of size k in the output.
        We have at most 2|T | − 1 choices for Y since we can have all possible subsets of T except
        T itself. Then for each guess for Y , we solve the Disjoint-VC problem for the instance
        IY = (G \ Y, T \ Y, k − |Y |). It is easy to see that if X is a solution for instance I of
        Compression-VC, then X \ Y is a solution of instance IY of Disjoint-VC for Y = T ∩ X.
        Conversely, if Z is a solution to some instance IY = (G \ Y, T \ Y, k − |Y |) of Disjoint-VC,
        then Z ∪ Y is a solution for the instance I = (G, T, k) of Compression-VC.                 J

            Using a maximal matching, we either start with a vertex cover of size ≤ 2k or we can
        answer that G has no vertex cover of size ≤ k. Hence, any algorithm for Disjoint-VC
        gives an algorithm for the k-VC problem, with an additional blowup of O(22k · k). Since
        our objective is to show that the k−VC problem is FPT, then it is enough to give an FPT
        algorithm for the Disjoint-VC problem (which has additional structure that we can exploit!).
        In fact we show that the Disjoint-VC problem can be solved in polynomial time.

        I Lemma 8. The Disjoint-VC problem can be solved in polynomial time.

        Proof. Let (G, T, k) be an instance of Disjoint-VC. Note that G \ T has no edges since
        T is a vertex cover. Meanwhile, if G[T ] has even a single edge, then answer is NO since
        we cannot pick any vertices from T in the vertex cover. So the only edges are between
        T and G \ T . Since we cannot pick any vertex from T in vertex cover, we are forced to
        pick all vertices in G \ T which have neighbors in T . Formally, we have to pick the set
        X = {x ∈  / T : ∃y ∈ T such that x − y ∈ E(G)}. Note that picking X is both necessary and
        sufficient. So it simply remains to compare |X| with k and answer accordingly.          J

           Consequently, we obtain a O(22k · k · nO(1) ) time algorithm for k-VC by composing these
        two reductions.

        2.2.2     Simulating the FPT algorithm in streaming using multiple passes
        In this section, we show how to simulate the FPT algorithm of the previous section in the
        multi-pass streaming model. First, let us fix some order on all subsets of [n].
                                                                                               Pk
        I Definition 9. Let U = {u1 , u2 , . . . , un } and k ≤ n. Let Uk denote the set of all i=0 |Ui |
                                                                                                         

        subsets of U which have at most k elements, and DictUk be the dictionary ordering on Uk .
        Given a subset X ∈ Uk , let DictUk (Next(X)) denote the subset that comes immediately after
        X in the ordering DictU . We denote the last subset in the dictionary order of Uk by Last(Uk )
        and use the notation that DictUk (Last(Uk )) = ♠.

            We give our multipass algorithm as Algorithm 2, whose correctness follows from Sec-
        tion 2.2.1. We now analyze the storage and number of passes required.
            We first use one pass to store a maximal matching M (upto k edges). The remaining
        number of passes used by the algorithm is at most 22k · k = O(22k · k) since we have (k)
        iterations over the index i, we have 22k choices for the set Y ∈ Sk (since |S| ≤ 2k) and we
        need one pass for each execution of Step 7 and Step 8. Throughout the algorithm, we store
        three quantities:
         • We store the vertices VM saturated by a maximal matching M (but only until the size of
            M exceeds k in which case we output NO). This needs at most 2k log n bits
Rajesh Chitnis and Graham Cormode                                                                   XX:11


Algorithm 2 Multipass Streaming Algorithm for k-VC using Iterative Compression
Input: An undirected graph G = (V, E), integer k.
Output: A vertex cover S of G of size at most k (if one exists), and NO otherwise
Storage: i, S, Y , VM
 1: Find a maximal matching M (upto size k) in 1 pass which saturates the vertices VM
 2: If |M | exceeds k, then return NO and abort
 3: Let S = VM
 4: for i = |VM | to k + 1 do
 5:    Y =∅
 6:    while Y ∈ Sk , Y 6= ♠ do
 7:       if |{x ∈ V \ S : ∃y ∈ S \ Y s.t. {x, y} ∈ E(G)}| ≤ k − |Y | then
 8:           S ← Y ∪ {x ∈ V \ S : ∃y ∈ S \ Y s.t. x − y ∈ E(G)}         . Requires a pass
    through the data
 9:           Break                         . Found a solution, and reduce value of i by 1
10:       else
11:           Y ← DictSk (Next(Y ))                                  . Try the next subset
12:     if Y = ♠ then
13:         Return NO and abort
14: if i = k then
15:     Return S


• The index i of current iteration. This needs log n bits.
• The set S. Since size of S never exceeds 2k throughout the algorithm, this can be done
  using 2k log n bits.
• The current subset Y ⊆ Sk under consideration for being the intersection of S and new
  potential VC of size ≤ k. Since |S| ≤ 2k and we store S explicitly, it follows that we can
  store Y and find Next(Y ) using O(k log n) bits.
    Hence, the total storage of the algorithm is O(k log n) bits which is essentially optimal
since the algorithm also outputs a vertex cover of size at most k (if one exists).

2.3    Minor-Bidimensional problems belong to SemiPS
The theory of bidimensionality [21, 22] provides a general technique for designing (subexpo-
nential) FPT for NP-hard graph problems on various graph classes. First, we introduce some
graph theoretic concepts.
I Definition 10 (treewidth). Let G be a given undirected graph. Let T be a tree and
B : V (T ) → 2V (G) . The pair (T, B) is a tree decomposition of an undirected graph G if
every vertex x ∈ V (T ) of the tree T has an assigned set of vertices Bx ⊆ V (G) (called a bag)
such that the following properties are satisfied:
           S
 • (P1): x∈V (T ) Bx = V (G).
 • (P2): For each {u, v} ∈ E(G), there exists an x ∈ V (T ) such that u, v ∈ Bx .
 • (P3): For each v ∈ V (G), the set of vertices of T whose bags contain v induce a connected
   subtree of T .
The width of a tree decomposition (T, B) is maxx∈V (T ) |Bx | − 1. The treewidth of a graph G,
usually denoted by tw(G), is the minimum width over all tree decompositions of G.
    Intuitively, the treewidth of a graph captures how tree-like it is. Trees (and more generally
forests) have treewidth 1.
XX:12   Towards a Theory of Parameterized Streaming Algorithms


        I Definition 11 (minor). Let H, G be two undirected graphs. We say that H is a minor
        of G if H can be obtained from G by a sequence of edge deletions, vertex deletions or edge
        contractions.
          One of the foundational results of graph theory is the Excluded Grid Minor Theorem of
        Robertson and Seymour [40] which states that large treewidth forces large grid minors:
        I Theorem 12. [40] There is a function f : N → N such that for r ≥ 1 any graph of
        treewidth ≥ f (r) contains the r × r grid as a minor.
            Robertson and Seymour [40] did not provide an explicit bound on f , but proved it was
        bounded by a tower of exponentials. The first explicit bounds on f were given by Robertson,
                                                                    5
        Seymour and Thomas [41] who showed that f (r) = 2O(r ) suffices and there are graphs
        which force f (r) = Ω(r2 · log r). The question whether f (r) can be shown to be bounded
        by a polynomial in r was open for a long time until Chekuri and Chuzhoy [7] showed that
        f (r) = O(r98 · logO(1) r) suffices. The current best bound is f (r) = O(r9 · logO(1) r) due to
        Chuzhoy and Tan [14]. Henceforth, for ease of presentation, we will use the weaker bound
        f (r) = O(r10 ).
            The theory of bidimensionality [21, 22] exploits the idea that many problems can be
        solved efficiently via dynamic programming on graphs of bounded treewidth, and have large
        values on grid-like graphs.
        I Definition 13 (minor-bidimensional). A graph problem Π is said to be g(r)-minor-
        bidimensional if
         • The value of Π on the r × r grid is ≥ g(r)
         • Π is closed under taking minors, i.e., the value of Π does not increase under the operations
            of vertex deletions, edge deletions, edge contractions.
            Hence, we obtain a “win-win” approach for designing FPT algorithms for bidimensional
        problems as follows:
        • Either the graph has small treewidth and we can then use dynamic programming al-
            gorithms for bounded treewidth graphs; or
        • The treewidth is large which implies that the graph contains a large grid as a minor. This
            implies that the solution size is large, since the parameter is minor-bidimensional.
        Several natural graph parameters are known to be minor-bidimensional. For example,
        treewidth is Ω(r)-minor-dimensional and Feedback Vertex Set, Vertex Cover, Minimum
        Maximal Matching, Long Path, etc are Ω(r2 )-minor-bidimensional. To design parameterized
        streaming algorithms, we will replace the dynamic programming step for bounded treewidth
        graphs by simply storing all the edges of such graphs.
            The following (folklore) lemma shows that bounded treewidth graphs cannot have too
        many edges.
        I Lemma 14. Let G = (V, E) be a graph on n vertices. Then |E(G)| ≤ tw(G) · |V (G)|
        Proof. Let tw(G) = k. We first show that there is a vertex v ∈ G whose degree in G is at
        most k. Among all tree-decompositions of G of width k, let (T, B) be one which minimizes
        |T |. Since T is a tree, it has a leaf say t. Let t0 be the unique neighbor of t in T . Minimality
        of |T | implies that Bt * Bt0 , since otherwise deleting t (and the bag Bt ) would still give a
        tree-decomposition of G. Hence, there is a vertex v ∈ Bt and v ∈      / Bt0 . This implies that all
        neighbors of v in G must be in the bag Bt , i.e., v has degree at most |Bt | − 1 = k. Now,
        delete the vertex v. It follows from the definition of treewidth that tw(G − v) ≤ tw(G) = k,
        and hence we can conclude that G − v also has a vertex of degree at most k. Continuing this
        way, we obtain |E(G)| ≤ tw(G) · |V (G)|.                                                         J
Rajesh Chitnis and Graham Cormode                                                                       XX:13


      Note that cliques are a tight example (up to factor 2) for the bound in Lemma 14.
I Lemma 15. Let Π be a g(r)-minor-dimensional problem. Any graph G having more than
O((g −1 (k + 1))10 · |V (G)|) edges is a NO (resp. YES) instance of k-Π if Π is a minimization
(resp. maximization) problem.
Proof. Suppose G has more than τ (g −1 (k + 1))10 · n edges. By Lemma 14, it follows that
tw(G) ≥ τ (g −1 (k + 1))10 . This implies G has the g −1 (k + 1) × g −1 (k + 1) grid as a minor [14].
Since Π is minor-dimensional, this implies that the value of Π is at least g(g −1 (k + 1)) = k + 1,
i.e., G is a NO (resp. YES) instance of k-Π if Π is a minimization (resp. maximization)
problem.                                                                                          J

    Lemma 15 implies streaming algorithms for Π in both insertion-only and insertion-deletion
streams. First, we define a data structure that we need.
I Definition 16 (k-sparse recovery algorithm). A k-sparse recovery algorithm is a data
structure which accepts insertions and deletions of elements from [n] so that, if the current
number of elements stored in it is at most k, then these can be recovered in full.
    Barkay et al. [3] showed that a k-sparse recovery algorithm can be constructed determin-
istically using O(k)
                e     space.
I Theorem 17. Let M ≥ 1. Then we can check if a graph stream contains at most M edges
(and also store all these edges) using
 • O(M ) space in insertion-only streams
 • O(M
    e    ) space in insertion-deletion streams
Proof. The algorithm in insertion-only streams simply stores all the edges. It also maintains
a counter (using O(log n) bits) to count how many edges have been seen so far. If the counter
exceeds M then the graph has more than M edges. Otherwise, we have stored the entire
graph which uses O(M ) space since the number of edges is ≤ M .
    In insertion-deletion streams we also keep a counter (to count how many edges are
currently present) and also maintain an M -sparse recovery algorithm X . At the end of the
stream, if the counter exceeds M then the graph stream has more than M edges. Otherwise
we recover the whole graph by extracting the ≤ M edges from X . The counter can be
implemented in O(log n) bits, and X can be implemented in O(M e    ) space [3].            J

   Now we are ready to show the main theorem of this section: minor-bidimensional problems
belong to the class SemiPS.
I Theorem 18. (minor-bidimensional problems are in SemiPS) Let Π be a g(r)-minor-
dimensional problem. Then the k-Π problem on graphs with n vertices can be solved using
• O((g −1 (k + 1))10 · n) space in insertion-only streams
   e −1 (k + 1))10 · n) space in insertion-deletion streams
• O((g
Proof. We invoke Theorem 17 with M = O((g −1 (k + 1))10 · n). By Lemma 15, we know
that if G has more than O(g −1 (k + 1))10 · n edges then G is a NO (resp. YES) instance of
k-Π if Π is a minimization (resp. maximization) problem. Hence, we use the algorithms from
Theorem 17 to check if G has at most M edges: if it has more edges then we say NO (resp.
YES) if Π is a minimization (resp. maximization) problem, and otherwise we store the entire
graph.                                                                                   J

      Theorem 18 implies the following results for specific graph problems10 :

10
     We omit the simple proofs of why these problems satisfy the conditions of Definition 13
XX:14   Towards a Theory of Parameterized Streaming Algorithms


        • Since Treewidth is Ω(r)-minor-bidimensional, it follows that k-Treewidth has an O(k 10 · n)
          space algorithm in insertion-only streams and O(k  e 10 · n) space algorithm in insertion-
          deletion streams.
        • Since problems such as Long Path, Vertex Cover, Feedback Vertex Set, Minimum Maximal
          Matching, etc. are Ω(r2 )-minor-bidimensional, it follows that their parameterized versions
          have O(k 5 · n) space algorithm in insertion-only streams and O(k
                                                                         e 5 · n) space algorithm in
          insertion-deletion streams.

            In Section 3.1, we design algorithms for some of the aforementioned problems with smaller
        storage. In particular, we design problem-specific structural lemmas (for example, Lemma 21
        and Lemma 26) to reduce the dependency of k on the storage from k O(1) to k.
        I Remark 19. It is tempting to conjecture a lower bound complementing Theorem 18: for
        example, can we show that the bounds for minor-bidimensional problems are tight for SemiPS,
        i.e., they do not belong to SubPS or even FPS? Unfortunately, we can rule out such a converse
        to Theorem 18 via the two examples of Vertex Cover (VC) and Feedback Vertex Set (FVS)
        which are both Ω(r2 )-minor-bidimensional. Chitnis et al. [12] showed that k-VC can be
        solved in O(k 2 ) space and hence belongs to the class FPS. However, we show (Theorem 25)
        that k-FVS cannot belong to SubPS since it has a Ω(n log n) bits lower bound for k = 0.

         3      Lower Bounds for Parameterized Streaming Algorithms

        3.1     Tight Problems for the classes SemiPS and BrutePS
        In this section we show that certain problems are tight for the classes SemiPS and BrutePS.
        All of the results hold for 1-pass in the insertion-only model. Our algorithms are deterministic,
        while the lower bounds also hold for randomized algorithms.

        3.1.1      Tight Problems for the class SemiPS
        We now show that some parameterized problems are tight for the class SemiPS, i.e.,
        • They belong to SemiPS, i.e., can be solved using O(g(k)
                                                               e      · n) bits for some function g.
        • They do not belong to SubPS, i.e., there is no algorithm which uses O(f    e (k) · n1− ) bits
           for any function f and any constant 1 >  > 0. We do this by showing Ω(n · log n) bits
           lower bounds for these problems for constant values of k.
        For each of the problems considered in this section, a lower bound of Ω(n) bits (for constant
        values of k) was shown by Chitnis et al. [10]. To obtain the improved lower bound of
        Ω(n · log n) bits for constant k, we will reduce from the Perm problem defined by Sun and
        Woodruff [42].

              Perm
              Input: Alice has a permutation δ : [N ] → [N ] which is represented as a bit string
              Bδ of length N log N by concatenating the images of 1, 2, . . . , N under δ. Bob has
              an index I ∈ [N log N ].
              Goal: Bob wants to find the I-th bit of Bδ

        Sun and Woodruff [42] showed that the one-way (randomized) communication complexity of
        Perm is Ω(N · log N ). Using the Perm problem, we show Ω(n · log n) bit lower bounds for
        constant values of k for various problem such as k-Path, k-Treewidth, k-Feedback-Vertex-Set,
        etc. We also show a matching upper bound for these problems: for each k, these problems
        can be solved using O(kn · log n) words in insertion-only streams and O(kn
                                                                               e    · log n) words in
Rajesh Chitnis and Graham Cormode                                                                     XX:15


insertion-deletion streams. To the best of our knowledge, the only problems known previously
to be tight for SemiPS were k-vertex-connectivity and k-edge-connectivity [16, 42, 26].

    k-Path
    Input: An undirected graph G on n nodes
    Parameter: k
    Question: Does G have a path of length at least k? (or alternatively, a path on at
    least k + 1 vertices)

I Theorem 20. The k-Path problem has a lower bound of Ω(n · log n) bits even for k = 5.

Proof. Let n = 2N + 2. We start with an instance of Perm of size N . Alice has a
permutation δ which she uses to build a perfect matching from [N ] to [N ] as follows: let
W = {w1 , w2 , . . . , wN } and X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN } denote two sets of size N each. Alice’s
edge set consists of a perfect matching built as follows: for each i ∈ [N ] there is an edge
between wi and xδ(i) . Suppose Bob has the index I ∈ [N ]. This corresponds to the `-th bit
of δ(j) for some j ∈ [N ] and ` ∈ [log N ]. Bob adds two new vertices v, y and adds edges
using the index I as follows:
• Bob adds an edge between v and wj
• Let S` ⊆ X where S` = {xr : `-th bit of r is 0}. Bob adds edges from y to each vertex
    of S` .
Let the graph constructed this way be G0 . It is easy to see that G0 has a path of length 5 if
and only xj ∈ S` , i.e., the `-th bit of δ(j) is zero. Hence, the lower bound of Ω(N log N ) of
Perm translates to an Ω(n log n) lower bound for 5-Path.                                         J

I Lemma 21. Any graph on n vertices with at least nk edges has a path on k + 1 vertices

Proof. Preprocess the graph to enforce that the minimum degree ≥ k by iteratively deleting
vertices of degree < k. Then we have a graph G0 which has n0 vertices and ≥ n0 k edges whose
min degree is ≥ k. Now consider an arbitrary path P in this graph G0 , say v1 −v2 −v3 −. . .−vr .
At each intermediate vertex vj , at most j − 1 neighbors have been visited, and so at least
k − j + 1 possibilities are open. Hence, there is always a possible next step up to node k + 1,
i.e. there is a path of length k.                                                            J

I Theorem 22. The k-Path problem can be solved using
• O(k · n) space in insertion-only streams
• O(k
   e · n) space in insertion-deletion streams

Proof. We invoke Theorem 17 with M = nk. By Lemma 21, we know that if G has more
than M edges then it has a k-Path. Hence, we use the algorithms from Theorem 17 to check
if G has at most M edges: if it has more edges then we say YES, and otherwise we store the
entire graph.                                                                           J

    k-Treewidth
    Input: An undirected graph G
    Parameter: k
    Question: Is the treewidth of G at most k?

I Theorem 23. [42, Theorem 7] The k-Treewidth problem has a lower bound of Ω(n · log n)
bits even for k = 1.
XX:16   Towards a Theory of Parameterized Streaming Algorithms


        Proof. Let n = 2N + 1. We start with an instance of Perm of size N . Alice has a
        permutation δ which she uses to build a perfect matching from [N ] to [N ] as follows: let
        W = {w1 , w2 , . . . , wN } and X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN } denote two sets of size N each. Alice’s
        edge set consists of a perfect matching built as follows: for each i ∈ [N ] there is an edge
        between wi and xδ(i) . Suppose Bob has the index I ∈ [N ]. This corresponds to the `-th bit
        of δ(j) for some j ∈ [N ] and ` ∈ [log N ]. Bob adds a new vertex v and adds edges using the
        index I as follows:
         • Bob adds an edge between v and wj
         • Let S` ⊆ X where S` = {xr : `-th bit of r is 0}. Bob adds edges from v to each vertex
            of S` .
        Let the graph constructed this way be G0 . It is easy to see that G0 has no cycles if and only
        xj ∈/ S` , i.e., the `-th bit of δ(j) is 1. Recall that a graph has treewidth 1 if and only if it has
        no cycles. Hence, the lower bound of Ω(N log N ) of Perm translates to a O(n log n) lower
        bound for k-Treewidth with k = 1.                                                                  J

        I Theorem 24. The k-Treewidth problem can be solved using
        • O(k · n) space in insertion-only streams
        • O(k
           e · n) space in insertion-deletion streams

        Proof. We invoke Theorem 17 with M = nk. By Lemma 14, we know that if G has more
        than M edges then tw(G) > k. Hence, we use the algorithms from Theorem 17 to check if
        G has at most M edges: if it has more edges then we say NO, and otherwise we store the
        entire graph.                                                                       J

            k-FVS
            Input: An undirected graph G = (V, E)
            Parameter: k
            Question: Does there exist a set X ⊆ V such that |X| ≤ k and G \ X has no cycles?

        I Theorem 25. [42, Theorem 7] The k-FVS problem has a lower bound of Ω(n · log n) bits
        even for k = 0.

        Proof. We use exactly the same reduction as in Theorem 23. Recall that graph has a FVS
        of size 0 if and only if it has no cycles. Also a graph has treewidth 1 if and only if it has
        no cycles. The proof of Theorem 23 argues that G0 has no cycles if and only xj ∈    / S` , i.e.,
        the `-th bit of δ(j) is 1. Since G0 has n = 2n + 1 vertices, the lower bound of Ω(N log N ) of
        Perm translates to a O(n log n) lower bound for k-FVS with k = 0.                            J

        I Lemma 26. If G has a feedback vertex set of size k then |E(G)| ≤ n(k + 1)

        Proof. Let X be a feedback vertex of G of size k. Then G \ X is a forest and has at most
        n − k − 1 edges. Each vertex of X can have degree ≤ n − 1 in G. Hence, we have that
        |E(G)| ≤ (n − k − 1) + k(n − 1) ≤ n + kn = n(k + 1)                                   J

        I Theorem 27. The k-FVS problem can be solved using
        • O(k · n) space in insertion-only streams
        • O(k
           e · n) space in insertion-deletion streams

        Proof. We invoke Theorem 17 with M = n(k + 1). By Lemma 26, we know that if G has
        more than M edges then G cannot have a feedback vertex set of size k. Hence, we use the
        algorithms from Theorem 17 to check if G has at most M edges: if it has more edges then
        we say NO, and otherwise we store the entire graph.                                   J
Rajesh Chitnis and Graham Cormode                                                                           XX:17


3.1.2     Tight Problems for the class BrutePS
We now show that some parameterized problems are tight for the class BrutePS, i.e.,
• They belong to BrutePS, i.e., can be solved using O(n2 ) bits. Indeed any graph problem
  can be solved by storing the entire adjacency matrix which requires O(n2 ) bits.
                                                                        e (k) · n1+ ) bits
• They do not belong to SubPS, i.e., there is no algorithm which uses O(f
                                                                   2
  for any function f and any  ∈ (0, 1). We do this by showing Ω(n ) bits lower bounds for
  these problems for constant values of k via reductions from the Index problem.

    Index
    Input: Alice has a string B = b1 b2 . . . bN ∈ {0, 1}N . Bob has an index I ∈ [N ]
    Goal: Bob wants to find the value bI

    There is a Ω(N ) lower bound on the (randomized) one-way communication complexity
of Index [34]. Via reduction from the Index problem, we are able to show Ω(n2 ) bits for
constant values of k for several problems such as k-Dominating-Set and k-Girth.

    k-Dominating Set
    Input: An undirected graph G = (V, E)
    Parameter: k
    Question: Is there a set S ⊆ V (G) of size ≤ k such that each v ∈ V \ S has at least
    one neighbor in S?

I Theorem 28. The k-Dominating Set problem has a lower bound of Ω(n2 ) bits for 1-pass
algorithms, even when k = 3.
                    √
Proof. Let r = N . We start with an instance of Index where Alice has a bit string
B ∈ {0, 1}N . Fix a canonical bijection φ : [N ] → [r] × [r]. We now construct a graph with
vertex set Y = y1 , y2 , . . . , yr and W = w1 , w2 , . . . , wr . For each I ∈ [N ] we do the following:
• If B[I] = 1 then add the edge yi0 − wi00 where φI = (i0 , i00 )
• If B[I] = 0 then do not add any edge
Suppose Bob has the index I ∗ ∈ [N ]. Let φ(I ∗ ) = (α, β) where α, β ∈ [r]. Bob adds four
new vertices x1 , x2 , z1 and z2 . He also adds the following edges:
• The edge x1 − x2
• The edge z1 − z2
• An edge from x1 to each vertex of Y \ yα
• An edge from z1 to each vertex of W \ wβ
Let the final constructed graph be G. A simple observation is that if a vertex has degree
exactly 1, then its unique neighbor can be assumed to be part of a minimum dominating set.
We now show that G has a dominating set of size 3 if and only B[I ∗ ] = 1.
    First suppose that B[I ∗ ] = 1, i.e., yα − wβ forms an edge in G. Then we claim that
{x1 , z1 , yα } form a dominating set of size 3. This is because x1 dominates x2 ∪ (Y \ yα ), z1
dominates z2 ∪ (W \ wβ ) and finally yα dominates wβ .
    Now suppose that G has a dominating set S of size 3 but yα − wβ ∈               / E(G). Since x2 , z2
have degree 1 we can assume that {x1 , z1 } ⊆ S. Let S \ {x1 , z1 } = u. We now consider
different possibilities for u and obtain a contradiction in each case:
• u = x2 or u = z2 : In this case the vertex yα is not dominated by S
• u ∈ (Y \ yα ): In this case the vertex yα is not dominated by S
• u ∈ (W \ wβ ): In this case the vertex wβ is not dominated by S
• u = yα : In this case the vertex wβ is not dominated by S since yα − wβ ∈              / E(G)
XX:18   Towards a Theory of Parameterized Streaming Algorithms


         • u = wβ : In this case the vertex yα is not dominated by S since√yα − wβ ∈/ E(G)
        Hence, the 3-Dominating Set problem on graphs with 2r + 4 = O( N ) vertices can be used
        to solve instances of the Index problem of size N . Since Index has a lower bound of Ω(N ),
        it follows that the 3-Dominating Set problem on graphs of n vertices has a lower bound of
        Ω(n2 ) bits.                                                                            J

               k-Girth
               Input: An undirected graph G
               Parameter: k
               Question: Is the length of smallest cycle of G equal to k?

        I Theorem 29. The k-Girth problem has a lower bound of Ω(n2 ) bits for 1-pass algorithms,
        even when k = 3.
                          √
        Proof. Let r = N . We start with an instance of Index where Alice has a bit string
        B ∈ {0, 1}N . Fix a canonical bijection φ : [N ] → [r] × [r]. We now construct a graph with
        vertex set Y = y1 , y2 , . . . , yr and W = w1 , w2 , . . . , wr . For each I ∈ [N ] we do the following:
         • If B[I] = 1 then add the edge yi0 − wi00 where φI = (i0 , i00 )
         • If B[I] = 0 then do not add any edge
        Suppose Bob has the index I ∗ ∈ [N ]. Let φ(I ∗ ) = (α, β) where α, β ∈ [r]. Bob adds a new
        vertex z and adds the edges z − yα and z − wβ . Let the final constructed graph be G. It
        is easy to see that G \ z is bipartite, and hence has girth ≥ 4 (we say the girth is ∞ if the
        graph has no cycle). The only edges incident on z are to yα and wβ . Hence, G has a cycle of
        length 3 if and only if the edge yα −√wβ is present in G, i.e., B[I ∗ ] = 1. Hence, the 3-Girth
        problem on graphs with 2r + 1 = O( N ) vertices can be used to solve instances of the Index
        problem of size N . Since Index has a lower bound of Ω(N ), it follows that the 3-Girth
        problem on graphs of n vertices has a lower bound of Ω(n2 ) bits.                                      J

            Super-linear lower bounds for multi-pass algorithms for k-Girth were shown in Feigenbaum
        et al. [30].
        I Remark 30. We usually only design FPT algorithms for NP-hard problems. However,
        parameterized streaming algorithms make sense for all graph problems since we are only
        comparing ourselves against the naive choice of storing all the O(n2 ) edges. Hence, here we
        consider the k-Girth problem as an example of a polynomial time solvable problem.

        3.2       Lower bound for approximating size of minimum Dominating Set
                  on graphs of bounded arboricity
                                                                                               β
        I Theorem 31. Let β ≥ 1 be any constant. Then any streaming algorithm which 32           -
        approximates the size of a min dominating set on graphs of arboricity β + 2 requires Ω(n)
        space.
            Note that Theorem 31 shows that the naive algorithm which stores all the O(nβ) edges
        of an β-arboriticy graph is essentially optimal. Our lower bound holds even for randomized
        algorithms (required to have success probability ≥ 3/4) and also under the vertex arrival
        model, i.e., we see at once all edges incident on a vertex. We (very) closely follow the
        outline from [2, Theorem 4] who used this approach for showing that any α-approximation
                                                                                          n2
        for estimating size of a minimum dominating set in general graphs11 requires Ω̃( α 2 ) space.




        11
             They actually talk about Set Cover
Rajesh Chitnis and Graham Cormode                                                                                  XX:19


Because we are restricted to bounded arboriticy graphs, we cannot just use their reduction
as a black-box but need to adapt it carefully for our purposes.
    Let V (G) = [n + 1], and Fβ be the collection of all subsets of [n] with cardinality β. Let
                              β
DomSetest be the problem of 32  -approximately estimating the size of a minimum dominating
set on graphs of arboricity β + 2. Consider the following distribution Dest for DomSetest .

 Distribution Dest : A hard input distribution for DomSetest .
  • Alice. The input of Alice is a collection of n sets S 0 = {S10 , S20 , . . . , Sn0 } where for
    each i ∈ [n] we have that Si0 = {i} ∪ Si with Si being a set chosen independently and
    uniformly at random from Fβ .
  • Bob. Pick θ ∈ {0, 1} and i∗ ∈ [n] independently and uniformly at random; the input
    of Bob is a single set T defined as follows.
    − If θ = 0, then T = [n] \ T is a set of size β/8 chosen uniformly at random from Si∗ .
    − If θ = 1, then T = [n] \ T is a set of size β/8 chosen uniformly at random from
       [n] \ Si∗ .


    Recall that OPT(S 0 , T ) denotes the size of the minimum dominating set of the graph G
whose edge set is given by N [i] = {i}∪Si for each i ∈ [n] and N [n+1] = {n+1}∪T . It is easy
to see that G has arboricity ≤ (β + 2) since it has (n + 1) vertices and ≤ (β + 1)n + (1 + n − β8 )
edges. We first establish the following lemma regarding the parameter θ and OPT(S 0 , T ) in
the distribution Dest .
                         β
I Lemma 32. Let α = 32      . Then, for (S 0 , T ) ∼ Dest we have
             0
1. Pr (OPT(S , T ) = 2 | θ = 0) = 1.
2. Pr (OPT(S 0 , T ) > 2α | θ = 1) = 1 − o(1).

Proof. The first claim is immediate since by construction, when θ = 0 we have that
T ∪ Si0∗ = [n + 1] and hence {n + 1, i∗ } forms a dominating set of size 2.
    We now prove the second claim, i.e., when θ = 1. The vertex (n + 1) dominates all
vertices in the set T ∪ {n + 1}. It remains to dominate vertices of T = [n] \ T . Since i ∈ Si0
for each i ∈ [n] it follows that the set {j : j ∈ T } ∪ {n + 1} forms a dominating set of size
1 + β8 for G. Fix a collection Sb0 of 2α sets in S 0 \ {Si0∗ }, and let Sb0 = {Sµ0 1 , Sµ0 2 , . . . , Sµ0 2α }.
                                                                       β      β
Let T0 = T \ {µ1 , µ2 , . . . , µ2α }, and note that |T0 | = |T | − 2( 32 ) = 16 . Hence, we have that
                                                                  0
S = {Sµ1 , Sµ2 , . . . , Sµ2α } has to cover T0 , where Sµj = Sµj for each 1 ≤ j ≤ 2α and the sets
 b
{Sµ1 , Sµ2 , . . . , Sµ2α } are chosen independent of T0 (according to the distribution Dest ). We
first analyze the probability that Sb covers T0 and then take union bound over all choices of
2α sets from S 0 \ {Si0∗ }.
    Fix any choice of T0 ; for each element k ∈ T0 , and for each set Sj ∈ S,      b define an indicator
random variable Xk ∈ {0, 1}, where Xk = 1 iff k ∈ Sj . Let X := j k Xkj and notice
                           j                   j                                P P

that:


              XX                             β     β   αβ 2
    E[X] =              E[Xkj ] = (2α) · (      )·( )=
               j
                                             16    n   8n
                    k

We have,
                                                  
                           β              n
    Pr Sb covers T0 ≤ Pr X ≥      = Pr X ≥     · E[X]
                             16            2αβ
XX:20   Towards a Theory of Parameterized Streaming Algorithms


        It is easy to verify that the Xkj variables are negatively correlated. Hence, applying the
        extended Chernoff bound12 due to Panconesi and Srinivasan [38] we get
                                          2         
                       n                     − E[X]                      n
            Pr X ≥          · E[X] ≤ 3 exp                where 1 +  =
                      2αβ                         3                      2αβ
              Finally, by union bound,
                                                          n              2      
                                                                           − E[X]
           Pr(OPT(S 0 , T ) ≤ 2α) ≤ Pr ∃ Sb covers T0 ≤            · 3 exp
                                                               2α               3
                                                              2         
                                                              − E[X]
                                  ≤ exp (2α · log n) · 3 exp
                                                                  3
                                                           2      
                     β
           Since α = 32 , one can easily check that exp − 3E[X] ≤ exp (−3α · log n) and hence we
        have
                                                         n              2       
                     0
                                                                           − E[X]
           Pr(OPT(S , T ) ≤ 2α) ≤ Pr ∃ S covers T ≤
                                           b                      · 3 exp
                                                              2α               3
                                                              2         
                                                              − E[X]
                                  ≤ exp (2α · log n) · 3 exp
                                                                  3
                                       ≤ exp (2α · log n) · 3 exp (−3α · log n)
                                       = o(1)

                                                                                                               J

             Observe that distribution Dest is not a product distribution due to the correlation between
        the input given to Alice and Bob. However, we can express the distribution as a convex
        combination of a relatively small set of product distributions. To do so, we need the following
        definition. For integers k, t and n, a collection P of t subsets of [n] is called a random
        (k, t)-partition if the t sets in P are constructed as follows: Pick k elements from [n], denoted
        by S, uniformly at random, and partition S randomly into t sets of equal size. We refer to
        each set in P as a block.

         An alternative definition of the distribution Dest .
            Parameters:             k = 2β                p = β8         t = 16
         1. For any i ∈ [n], let Pi be a random (k, t)-partition in [n] (chosen independently).
         2. The input to Alice is S 0 = (S10 , . . . , Sn0 ), where for each i we have Si0 = {i} ∪ Si and Si
            is created by picking t/2 blocks from Pi uniformly at random.
         3. The input to Bob is a set T where T is created by first picking an i∗ ∈ [n] uniformly at
            random, and then picking a block from Pi∗ uniformly at random.

            To see that the two formulations of the distribution Dest are indeed equivalent, notice
        that (i) the input given to Alice in the new formulation is a collection of sets of size β
        chosen independently and uniformly at random (by the independence of Pi ’s), and (ii) the
        complement of the set given to Bob is a set of size β8 which, for i∗ ∈R [n], with probability
        half, is chosen uniformly at random from Si∗ , and with probability half, is chosen from
        [n] \ Si∗ (by the randomness in the choice of each block in Pi∗ ).


        12
             Let X1 , X2 , . . . , Xr be a sequence of negatively correlated Boolean random variables, and let X =
             Pr                                                          2

               i=1
                   Xi . Then Pr(|X − E[X]| ≥  · E[X]) ≤ 3 · exp( − 3E[X] )
Rajesh Chitnis and Graham Cormode                                                                                XX:21


3.2.1      The Lower Bound for the Distribution Dest
Notation: First we set up some notation to be used throughout this section: we use bold
face letters to represent random variables. For any random variable X, supp(X) denotes its
support set. We define |X| := log |supp(X)|. For any k-dimensional tuple X = (X1 , . . . , Xk )
and any i ∈ [k], we define X <i := (X1 , . . . , Xi−1 ), and X −i := (X1 , . . . , Xi−1 , Xi+1 , . . . , Xk ).
The notation “X ∈R U ” indicates that X is chosen uniformly at random from a set U . We
denote the Shannon Entropy of a random variable A by H(A) and the mutual information
of two random variables A and B by I(A; B) = H(A) − H(A | B) = H(B) − H(B | A). If
the distribution D of the random variables is not clear from the context, we use HD (A) (resp.
ID (A; B)). We use H2 to denote the binary entropy function where for any real number
0 < δ < 1, H2 (δ) = δ log 1δ + (1 − δ) log 1−δ1
                                                 .
    We are now ready to show our desired lower bound: fix any δ-error protocol ΠDS (set
δ = 1/4) for DomSetest on the distribution Dest . Recall that ΠDS denotes the random variable
for the concatenation of the message of Alice with the public randomness used in the protocol
ΠDS . We further use P := (P1 , . . . , Pt ) to denote the random partitions (P1 , . . . , Pt ), I for
the choice of the special index i∗ , and θ for the parameter θ ∈ {0, 1}, whereby θ = 0 if and
only if T ⊆ Si∗ .
    We make the following simple observations about the distribution Dest . The proofs are
straightforward.
I Remark 33. In the distribution Dest ,
1. The random variables S, P, and ΠDS (S) are all independent of the random variable I.
2. For any i ∈ [m], conditioned on Pi = P , and I = i, the random variables Si and T are
   independent of each other. Moreover, supp(Si ) and supp(T) contain, respectively, tt
                                                                                                          2
   and t elements and both Si and T are uniform over their support.
3. For any i ∈ [m], the random variable Si is independent of both S −i and P −i .

    We will show our claimed lower bound on the space complexity of any streaming algorithm
for DomSetest through the well-known connection to one-way communication complexity [34].

I Definition 34. The communication cost of a protocol Π for a problem P on an input
distribution D, denoted by kΠk, is the worst-case size of the message sent from Alice to Bob
in the protocol Π, when the inputs are chosen from the distribution D.
The communication complexity CCδD (P ) of a problem P with respect to a distribution D is
the minimum communication cost of a δ-error protocol Π over D.

   However, since the information complexity is a lower bound on the communication
complexity [6], we will instead bound the information complexity of ΠDS (set δ = 1/4) for
DomSetest on the distribution Dest .

I Definition 35. Consider an input distribution D and a protocol Π (for some problem P ).
Let X be the random variable for the input of Alice drawn from D, and let Π := Π(X) be
the random variable denoting the message sent from Alice to Bob concatenated with the
public randomness R used by Π. The information cost ICostD (Π) of a one-way protocol Π
with respect to D is ID (Π; X).
The information complexity ICδD (P ) of P with respect to a distribution D is the minimum
ICostD (Π) taken over all one-way δ-error protocols Π for P over D.

   Our goal now is to lower bound ICostDest (ΠDS ), which then also gives a desired lower
bound on kΠDS k. We start by simplifying the expression for ICostDest (ΠDS ).
XX:22   Towards a Theory of Parameterized Streaming Algorithms

                                                 Pn
        I Lemma 36. ICostDest (ΠDS ) ≥             i=1 I(ΠDS ; Si | Pi )

        Proof. We have,

           ICostDest (ΠDS ) = I(ΠDS ; S) ≥ I(ΠDS ; S | P)

        where the inequality holds since (i) H(ΠDS ) ≥ H(ΠDS | P) and (ii) H(ΠDS | S) = H(ΠDS |
        S, P) as ΠDS is independent of P conditioned on S. We now bound the conditional mutual
        information term in the above equation.
                                 m
                                 X
           I(ΠDS ; S | P) =            I(Si ; ΠDS | P, S <i )          (the chain rule for the mutual information)
                                 i=1
                                 Xm
                            =          H(Si | P, S <i ) − H(Si | ΠDS , P, S <i )
                                 i=1
                                 m
                                 X
                            ≥          H(Si | Pi ) − H(Si | ΠDS , Pi )
                                 i=1
                                 Xm
                            =          I(Si ; ΠDS | Pi )
                                 i=1

        The inequality holds since:
          (i) H(Si | Pi ) = H(Si | Pi , P −i , S <i ) = H(Si | P, S <i ) because conditioned on Pi , Si is
              independent of P −i and S <i (Remark 33-(3)), hence the equality since conditioning
              reduces the entropy.
         (ii) H(Si | ΠDS , Pi ) ≥ H(Si | ΠDS , Pi , P −i , S <i ) = H(Si | ΠDS , P, S <i ) since condition-
              ing reduces the entropy.
                                                                                                         J
                                                                                   P
           Equipped with Lemma 36, we only need to bound                            i∈[n] I(ΠDS ; Si | Pi ). Note that,

           n
           X                            n
                                        X                      n
                                                               X
                 I(ΠDS ; Si | Pi ) =          H(Si | Pi ) −          H(Si | ΠDS , Pi )                                (1)
           i=1                          i=1                    i=1

                                                                           t
                                                                               
        Furthermore, for each i ∈ [n], |supp(Si | Pi )| =                  t       and Si is uniform over its support
                                                                           2
        (Remark 33-(2)); hence we have
           n                     n                    n                                n            
           X                     X                    X                                X            t
                 H(Si | Pi ) =         |Si | Pi | =         log |supp(Si | Pi )| =           log    t    = 13.64n     (2)
           i=1                   i=1                  i=1                              i=1          2

                                                          Pn
        since t = 16. Consequently, we only need to bound i=1 H(Si | ΠDS , Pi ). In order to do so,
        we show that ΠDS can be used to estimate the value of the parameter θ, and hence we only
        need to establish a lower bound for the problem of estimating θ.

        I Lemma 37. Any δ-error protocol ΠDS over the distribution Dest can be used to determine
        the value of θ with error probability δ + o(1).

        Proof. Alice sends the message ΠDS (S) as before. Using this message, Bob can compute an
        α-estimation of the dominating set problem using ΠDS (S) and his input. If the estimation
        is less than 2α, we output θ = 0 and otherwise we output θ = 1. The bound on the error
        probability follows from Lemma 32.                                                      J
Rajesh Chitnis and Graham Cormode                                                                          XX:23


I Remark 38. We assume that in DomSetest over the distribution Dest , Bob is additionally
provided with the special index i∗ .
Note that this assumption can only make our lower bound stronger since Bob can always
ignore this information and solve the original DomSetest .
   Let γ be the function that estimates θ used in Lemma 37; the input to γ is the message
given from Alice, the public coins used by the players, the set T , and (by Remark 38) the
special index i∗ . We have,

      Pr(γ(ΠDS , T, I) 6= θ) ≤ δ + o(1)

      Hence, by Fano’s inequality13

      H2 (δ + o(1)) ≥ H(θ | ΠDS , T, I)
                        h                    i
                    = E H(θ | ΠDS , T, I = i)
                         i∼I
                               m
                         1X
                     =         H(θ | ΠDS , T, I = i)                                                 (3)
                         n i=1

   We now show that each term above is lower bounded by H(Si | ΠDS , Pi )/t and hence we
obtain the desired upper bound on H(Si | ΠDS , Pi ) in Equation (1).

I Lemma 39. For any i ∈ [n], H(θ | ΠDS , T, I = i) ≥ H(Si | ΠDS , Pi )/t.

Proof. We have,

      H(θ | ΠDS , T, I = i) ≥ H(θ | ΠDS , T, Pi , I = i)
                                                      (conditioning on random variables reduces entropy)
                                                    h                             i
                                   =       E         H(θ | ΠDS , T, Pi = P, I = i)
                                       P ∼Pi |I=i


For brevity, let E denote the event (Pi = P, I = i). We can write the above equation as,
                                              h                       i
   H(θ | ΠDS , T, Pi , I = i) =   E      E     H(θ | ΠDS , T = T , E)
                                           P ∼Pi |I=i T ∼T|E


Note that by Remark 33-(2), conditioned on the event E, T is chosen to be one of the blocks
of P = (B1 , . . . , Bt ) uniformly at random. Hence,
                                                         t
                                                        hX H(θ | Π   DS , T = Bj , E)
                                                                                        i
      H(θ | ΠDS , T, Pi , I = i) =             E
                                           P ∼Pi |I=i
                                                         j=1
                                                                        t

    Define a random variable X := (X1 , . . . , Xt ), where each Xj ∈ {0, 1} and Xj = 1 if and
only if Si contains the block Bj . Note that conditioned on E, X uniquely determines the set
Si . Moreover, notice that conditioned on T = Bj and E, θ = 0 if and only if Xj = 1. Hence,
                                                         t
                                                        hX H(X | Π
                                                                 j    DS , T = Bj , E)
                                                                                            i
      H(θ | ΠDS , T, Pi , I = i) =             E
                                           P ∼Pi |I=i
                                                         j=1
                                                                            t


13
     For any binary random variable B and any (possibly randomized) function f that predicts B based on
     A, if Pr(f(A)6= B) = δ, then H(B | A) ≤ H2 (δ).
XX:24   Towards a Theory of Parameterized Streaming Algorithms


        Now notice that Xj is independent of the event T = Bj since Si is chosen independent
        of T conditioned on E (Remark 33-(2)). Similarly, since ΠDS is only a function of S and
        S is independent of T conditioned on E, ΠDS is also independent of the event T = Bj .
        Consequently, we can “drop” the conditioning on T = Bj ,
                                                          t
                                                         hX H(X | Π
                                                                 j       DS , E)
                                                                                   i
           H(θ | ΠDS , T, Pi , I = i) =         E
                                            P ∼Pi |I=i
                                                          j=1
                                                                     t
                                                         h H(X | Π
                                                                 DS , E)
                                                                           i
                                        ≥       E                      (sub-additivity of the entropy)
                                            P ∼Pi |I=i       t
                                                     h H(S | Π , E) i
                                                          i    DS
                                        =    E
                                          P ∼Pi |I=i         t
                                              (Si and X uniquely define each other conditioned on E)
                                                     h H(S | Π , P = P, I = i) i
                                                          i    DS   i
                                        =    E
                                          P ∼Pi |I=i              t
                                                                      (E is defined as (Pi = P, I = i))
                                             H(Si | ΠDS , Pi , I = i)
                                        =
                                                      t
        Finally, by Remark 33-(1), Si , ΠDS , and Pi are all independent of the event I = i, and hence
        we have that H(Si | ΠDS , Pi , I = i) = H(Si | ΠDS , Pi ), which concludes the proof.       J

           By plugging in the bound from Lemma 39 in Equation (3) we have,
           n
           X
                 H(Si | ΠDS , Pi ) ≤ H2 (δ + o(1)) · (nt) = 0.812 × (16n) = 12.992n
           i=1

        since δ = 1/4 and t = 16. Finally, by plugging in this bound together with the bound from
        Equation (2) in Equation (1), we get,
           n
           X
                 I(ΠDS ; Si | Pi ) ≥ 0.64n
           i=1

           By Lemma 36,

                                                    
             1/4
           ICDest (DomSetest ) = min ICostDest (ΠDS ) = Ω(n)
                                  ΠDS

        To conclude, since the information complexity is a lower bound on the communication
        complexity [6], we obtain a lower bound of Ω(n) for DomSetest over the distribution Dest .
        This completes the proof of Theorem 31.

        3.3      Streaming Lower Bounds Inspired by Kernelization Lower Bounds
        Streaming algorithms and kernelization are two (somewhat related) compression models. In
        kernelization, we have access to the whole input but our computation power is limited to
        polynomial time whereas in streaming algorithms we don’t have access to the whole graph
        (have to pay for whatever we store) but have unbounded computation power on whatever
        part of the input we have stored.
           A folklore result states that a (decidable) problem is FPT if and only if it has a kernel.
        Once the fixed-parameter tractability for a problem is established, the next natural goals
Rajesh Chitnis and Graham Cormode                                                                     XX:25


are to reduce the running time of the FPT algorithm and reduce the size of the kernel. In
the last decade, several frameworks have been developed to show (conditional) lower bounds
on the size of kernels [4, 19, 20, 25, 31]. Inspired by these frameworks, we define a class of
problems, which we call as AND-compatible and OR-compatible, and show (unconditionally)
that none of these problems belong to the class SubPS.

I Definition 40. We say that a graph problem Π is AND-compatible if there exists a constant
k such that
• for every n ∈ N there exists a graph GYES of size n such Π(GYES , k) is a YES instance
• for every n ∈ N there exists a graph
                                      GNO of size n such Π(GNO , k) is a NO instance
• for every t ∈ N we have that Π ]ti=1 Gi , k = ∧ti=1 Π(Gi , k) where G = ]ti=1 Gi denotes
  the union of the vertex-disjoint graphs G1 , G2 , . . . , Gt

   Examples of AND-compatible graph problems are k-Treewidth, k-Girth, k-Pathwidth,
k-Coloring, etc.

I Definition 41. We say that a graph problem Π is OR-compatible if there exists a constant
k such that
• for every n ∈ N there exists a graph GYES of size n such Π(GYES , k) is a YES instance
• for every n ∈ N there exists a graph GNO of size n such Π(GNO , k) is a NO instance
• for every t ∈ N we have that Π(]ti=1 Gi , k) = ∨ti=1 Π(Gi , k) where G = ]ti=1 Gi denotes
   the union of the vertex-disjoint graphs G1 , G2 , . . . , Gt

   A general example of an OR-compatible graph problem is the subgraph isomorphism
problem parameterized by size of smaller graph: given a graph G of size n and a smaller
graph H of size k, does G have a subgraph isomorphic to H? Special cases of this problem
are k-Path, k-Clique, k-Cycle, etc.

I Theorem 42. If Π is an AND-compatible or an OR-compatible graph problem then
Π∈/ SubPS

Proof. Let Π be an AND-compatible graph problem, and G = ]ti=1 Gi for some t ∈ N. We
claim that any streaming algorithm ALG for Π must use t bits. Intuitively, we need at least
one bit to check that each of the instances (Gi , k) is a YES instance of Π (for all 1 ≤ i ≤ t).
Consider a set of t graphs G = {G1 , G2 , . . . , Gt }: note that we don’t fix any of these graphs
yet. For every subset X ⊆ [t] we define the instance (GX , k) of Π where GX = ]j∈J Gj .
Suppose that ALG uses less than t bits. Then by pigeonhole principle, there are two subsets
I, I 0 of [t] such that ALG has the same answer on (GI , k) and (GI 0 , k). Since I 6= I 0 (without
loss of generality) there exists i∗ such that i∗ ∈ I \ I 0 . This is where we now fix each of
the graphs in G to arrive at a contradiction: consider the input where Gi = GYES for all
(I ∪ I 0 ) \ i∗ and Gi∗ = GNO . Then, it follows that (GI , k) is a NO instance but (GI 0 , k) is a
YES instance.
     Suppose that Π ∈ SubPS, i.e., there is an algorithm for Π which uses f (k)·N 1− ·logO(1) N
bits (for some 1 >  > 0) on a graph G of size N to decide whether (G, k) is a YES or NO
instance. Let G = ]ti=1 Gi where |Gi | = n for each i ∈ [t]. Then |G| = N = nt. By the
previous paragraph, we have that

                f (k) · (nt)1− · logO(1) (nt) ≥ t ⇒ f (k) · n1− · logO(1) (nt) ≥ t
                    2−                                     2−
    Choosing t = n  we have that f (k) · logO(1) n1+(  ) ≥ n, which is a contradiction for
large enough n (since k and  are constants).
XX:26   Towards a Theory of Parameterized Streaming Algorithms


            We now prove the lower bound for AND-compatible problems. Recall that De Morgan’s
        law states that ¬(∨i Pi ) = ∧i (¬Pi ). Hence, if Π is an OR-compatible graph problem then the
        complement14 problem Π is an AND-compatible graph problem, and hence the lower bound
        follows from the previous paragraph.                                                       J

        I Remark 43. Note that throughout this paper we have considered the model where we allow
        unbounded computation at each edge update, and also at the end of the stream. However, if
        we consider a restricted model of allowing only polynomial (in input size n) computation at
        each edge update and also at end of the stream, then it is easy to see that existing (conditional)
        lower bounds from the parameterized algorithms and kernelization setting translate easily
        to this restricted model. For example, the following two lower bounds for parameterized
        streaming algorithms follow immediately in the restricted (polytime computation) model:
         • Let X be a graph problem that is W [i]-hard parameterized by k (for some i ≥ 1). Then
           (in the polytime computation model) X ∈    / FPS unless FPT = W [i].
         • Let X be a graph problem that is known to not have a polynomial kernel unless NP ⊆
            coNP/poly. Then (in the polytime computation model) X does not have a parameterized
            streaming algorithm which uses k O(1) · logO(1) n bits, unless NP ⊆ coNP/poly.

        3.4       Ω((N/d)d ) bits lower bound for d-SAT
        Finally, in this section, we show that for any d ≥ 2, any streaming algorithm for d-SAT
        (in the clause arrival model) must essentially store all the clauses (and hence fits into the
        “brute-force” streaming setting). This is the only non-graph-theoretic result in this paper,
        and may be viewed as a “streaming analogue” of the Exponential Time Hypothesis. We fix
        the notation as follows: there are N variables and M clauses. The variable set is fixed, and
        the clauses arrive one-by-one.

        I Theorem 44. Any streaming algorithm for d-SAT requires storage of Ω((N/d)d ) bits,
        where N is the number of variables

        Proof. For simplicity, we show the result for 2-SAT; the generalization to d-SAT for other
        d > 2 is simple. Let n = (N/2)2 . We reduce from the Index problem. Let Alice have a
        string B = b1 b2 . . . bn ∈ {0, 1}n . We now map B to an instance φB of 2-SAT defined over
        N variables. The N variables are partitioned into d = 2 sets X, Y of N/2 variables each.
        Fix a canonical mapping ψ : [(N/2)2 ] → [N/2]2 . For each index L ∈ [(N/2)2 ], we add the
        following clauses depending on the value of bL :
         • If bL = 0, then add the clause (xi ∨ yj ) where ψ(L) = (i, j).
         • If bL = 1, then add the clause (xi ∨ yj ) where ψ(L) = (i, j).
        Observe that the sub-instance constructed so far is trivially satisfiable, by setting all y ∈ Y
        to true. Suppose Bob has the index L∗ ∈ [n]. To solve the instance of Index, we need to
        retrieve the value of the bit bL∗ . Let ψ(L∗ ) = (i∗ , j ∗ ). We add two new clauses as follows:
         • Add the clause (y j ∗ ) 15
         • Add the clause (xi∗ ∨ yj ∗ )
        This completes the construction of the 2-SAT instance φB . Now we claim that φB is satisfiable
        if and only if bL∗ = 0. Consider a clause of the form (x ∨ y) of φB :
         • If y 6= yj ∗ , we can set y to be true and satisfy this clause.


        14
             By complement, we mean that Π(G, k) is YES if and only if Π(G, k) is NO
        15
             If we insist that all clauses should have cardinality exactly 2, then we can simply create a new “dummy”
             variable z, and add the clauses (yj ∗ ∨ z), (yj ∗ ∨ z) to achieve the same effect.
Rajesh Chitnis and Graham Cormode                                                                            XX:27


 • If y = yj ∗ but x 6= xi∗ , then we can satisfy this clause by setting x = 1 (or 0, if x appears
    in complemented form). This is the only time we need to set x, and each such x appears
    in at most one such clause, so there is no clash16 .
This only leaves the clause on the variables xi∗ and yj ∗ . We must set yj ∗ = 0 to satisfy
the clause y j ∗ . If bL∗ = 1 then we have both the clauses (xi∗ ∨ yj ∗ ) and (xi∗ ∨ yj ∗ ), and
hence the instance φB is not satisfiable. However, if bL∗ = 0 then we only have the clause
(xi∗ ∨ yj ∗ ), and hence the instance φB is satisfiable by setting xi∗ = 1. Hence, the lower
bound of Ω(n) = Ω((N/2)2 ) translates from Index to 2-SAT.                                      J

   Note
       that the naive   algorithm for d-SAT which stores all the clauses in memory requires
 e N ) = O(d
O(         e · N d ) bits, and therefore Theorem 44 shows that d-SAT is hard from a space
    d
perspective (essentially have to store all the clauses) for all d ≥ 2, whereas there is a transition
from P to NP-complete for the time cost when going from 2-SAT to 3-SAT.


 4        Conclusions and Open Problems
In this paper, we initiate a systematic study of graph problems from the paradigm of
parameterized streaming algorithms. We define space complexity classes of FPS, SubPS,
SemiPS, SupPS and BrutePS, and then obtain tight classifications for several well-studied
graph problems such as Longest Path, Feedback Vertex Set, Girth, Treewidth, etc. into these
classes. Our parameterized streaming algorithms use techniques of bidimensionality, iterative
compression and branching from the FPT world. In addition to showing lower bounds for
some parameterized streaming problems via communication complexity, we also show how
(conditional) lower bounds for kernels and W-hard problems translate to lower bounds for
parameterized streaming algorithms.
    Our work leaves open several concrete questions. We list some of them below:
 • The streaming algorithm (Algorithm 1) for k-VC (on insertion-only streams) from
    Section 2.1 has an optimal storage of O(k log n) bits but requires 2k passes. Can we
    reduce the number of passes to poly(k), or instead show that we need passes which are
    superpolynomial in k if we restrict space usage to O(k log n) bits? The only known lower
    bound for such algorithms is (k/ log n) passes (see Theorem 5).
 • As in the FPT setting, a natural problem to attack using iterative compression in the
    streaming setting would be the k-OCT problem. It is known that 0-OCT, i..e, checking if
    a given graph is bipartite, in the 1-pass model has an upper bound of O(n log n) bits [29]
    and a lower bound of Ω(n log n) bits [42]. For k ≥ 1, can we design a g(k)-pass algorithm
    for k-OCT which uses O(fe (k) · n) bits for some functions f and g, maybe using iterative
    compression? To the best of our knowledge, such an algorithm is not known even for
    1-OCT.


         References
 1       Amir Abboud, Keren Censor-Hillel, Seri Khoury, and Ami Paz. Smaller Cuts, Higher Lower
         Bounds. CoRR, abs/1901.01630, 2019. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1901.01630, arXiv:
         1901.01630.
 2       Sepehr Assadi, Sanjeev Khanna, and Yang Li. Tight bounds for single-pass streaming
         complexity of the set cover problem. In STOC, pages 698–711, 2016.


16
     Note that we do not have to know in what form x appears in the input, as our question is just whether
     the instance is satisfiable, not to provide a satisfying assignment.
XX:28   Towards a Theory of Parameterized Streaming Algorithms


         3   Neta Barkay, Ely Porat, and Bar Shalem. Efficient Sampling of Non-strict Turnstile Data
             Streams. In FCT, pages 48–59, 2013.
         4   Hans L. Bodlaender, Rodney G. Downey, Michael R. Fellows, and Danny Hermelin. On
             Problems Without Polynomial Kernels. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 75(8):423–434, 2009.
         5   Marc Bury, Elena Grigorescu, Andrew McGregor, Morteza Monemizadeh, Chris Schwiegel-
             shohn, Sofya Vorotnikova, and Samson Zhou. Structural Results on Matching Estimation with
             Applications to Streaming. Algorithmica, 81(1):367–392, 2019.
         6   Amit Chakrabarti, Yaoyun Shi, Anthony Wirth, and Andrew Chi-Chih Yao. Informational
             Complexity and the Direct Sum Problem for Simultaneous Message Complexity. In FOCS,
             pages 270–278, 2001.
         7   Chandra Chekuri and Julia Chuzhoy. Polynomial Bounds for the Grid-Minor Theorem. J.
             ACM, 63(5):40:1–40:65, 2016.
         8   Jianer Chen, Fedor V. Fomin, Yang Liu, Songjian Lu, and Yngve Villanger. Improved
             algorithms for feedback vertex set problems. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 74(7):1188–1198, 2008.
         9   Jianer Chen, Yang Liu, Songjian Lu, Barry O’Sullivan, and Igor Razgon. A fixed-parameter
             algorithm for the directed feedback vertex set problem. J. ACM, 55(5):21:1–21:19, 2008.
        10   Rajesh Chitnis, Graham Cormode, Hossein Esfandiari, MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi, Andrew
             McGregor, Morteza Monemizadeh, and Sofya Vorotnikova. Kernelization via sampling with
             applications to finding matchings and related problems in dynamic graph streams. In SODA,
             pages 1326–1344, 2016.
        11   Rajesh Hemant Chitnis, Graham Cormode, Hossein Esfandiari, MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi,
             and Morteza Monemizadeh. Brief announcement: New streaming algorithms for parameterized
             maximal matching & beyond. In SPAA, pages 56–58, 2015.
        12   Rajesh Hemant Chitnis, Graham Cormode, Mohammad Taghi Hajiaghayi, and Morteza
             Monemizadeh. Parameterized streaming: Maximal matching and vertex cover. In SODA,
             pages 1234–1251, 2015.
        13   Rajesh Hemant Chitnis, Marek Cygan, Mohammad Taghi Hajiaghayi, and Dániel Marx.
             Directed Subset Feedback Vertex Set Is Fixed-Parameter Tractable. ACM Trans. Algorithms,
             11(4):28:1–28:28, 2015.
        14   Julia Chuzhoy and Zihan Tan. Towards Tight(er) Bounds for the Excluded Grid Theorem. In
             SODA, pages 1445–1464, 2019.
        15   Graham Cormode, Hossein Jowhari, Morteza Monemizadeh, and S. Muthukrishnan. The
             Sparse Awakens: Streaming Algorithms for Matching Size Estimation in Sparse Graphs. In
             ESA, pages 29:1–29:15, 2017.
        16   Michael S. Crouch, Andrew McGregor, and Daniel Stubbs. Dynamic Graphs in the Sliding-
             Window Model. In ESA, pages 337–348, 2013.
        17   Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Lukasz Kowalik, Daniel Lokshtanov, Dániel Marx, Marcin
             Pilipczuk, Michal Pilipczuk, and Saket Saurabh. Parameterized Algorithms. Springer, 2015.
        18   Frank K. H. A. Dehne, Michael R. Fellows, Frances A. Rosamond, and Peter Shaw. Greedy
             Localization, Iterative Compression, Modeled Crown Reductions: New FPT Techniques, an
             Improved Algorithm for Set Splitting, and a Novel 2k Kernelization for Vertex Cover. In
             IWPEC, pages 271–280, 2004.
        19   Holger Dell. AND-Compression of NP-Complete Problems: Streamlined Proof and Minor
             Observations. Algorithmica, 75(2):403–423, 2016.
        20   Holger Dell and Dieter van Melkebeek. Satisfiability Allows no Nontrivial Sparsification Unless
             the Polynomial-Time Hierarchy Collapses. In STOC, pages 251–260, 2010.
        21   Erik D. Demaine, Fedor V. Fomin, Mohammad Taghi Hajiaghayi, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos.
             Subexponential parameterized algorithms on bounded-genus graphs and H -minor-free graphs.
             J. ACM, 52(6):866–893, 2005.
        22   Erik D. Demaine and MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi. The bidimensionality theory and its
             algorithmic applications. Comput. J., 51(3):292–302, 2008.
Rajesh Chitnis and Graham Cormode                                                                 XX:29


23   Rodney G. Downey and Michael R. Fellows. Parameterized Complexity. Monographs in
     Computer Science. Springer, 1999.
24   Rodney G. Downey and Michael R. Fellows. Fundamentals of Parameterized Complexity.
     Texts in Computer Science. Springer, 2013.
25   Andrew Drucker. New Limits to Classical and Quantum Instance Compression. In FOCS,
     pages 609–618, 2012.
26   David Eppstein, Zvi Galil, Giuseppe F. Italiano, and Amnon Nissenzweig. Sparsification - a
     technique for speeding up dynamic graph algorithms. J. ACM, 44(5):669–696, 1997.
27   Hossein Esfandiari, Mohammad Taghi Hajiaghayi, Vahid Liaghat, Morteza Monemizadeh, and
     Krzysztof Onak. Streaming Algorithms for Estimating the Matching Size in Planar Graphs
     and Beyond. In SODA, pages 1217–1233, 2015.
28   Stefan Fafianie and Stefan Kratsch. Streaming kernelization. In MFCS, pages 275–286, 2014.
29   Joan Feigenbaum, Sampath Kannan, Andrew McGregor, Siddharth Suri, and Jian Zhang. On
     graph problems in a semi-streaming model. Theor. Comput. Sci., 348(2-3):207–216, 2005.
30   Joan Feigenbaum, Sampath Kannan, Andrew McGregor, Siddharth Suri, and Jian Zhang.
     Graph Distances in the Data-Stream Model. SIAM J. Comput., 38(5):1709–1727, 2008.
31   Lance Fortnow and Rahul Santhanam. Infeasibility of Instance Compression and Succinct
     PCPs for NP. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 77(1):91–106, 2011.
32   Sariel Har-Peled, Piotr Indyk, Sepideh Mahabadi, and Ali Vakilian. Towards Tight Bounds
     for the Streaming Set Cover Problem. In PODS, pages 371–383, 2016.
33   Monika Rauch Henzinger, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Sridhar Rajagopalan. Computing on
     data streams. External memory algorithms, 50:107–118, 1998.
34   Eyal Kushilevitz and Noam Nisan. Communication Complexity. Cambridge University Press,
     1997.
35   Andrew McGregor and Sofya Vorotnikova. Planar Matching in Streams Revisited. In AP-
     PROX/RANDOM, pages 17:1–17:12, 2016.
36   Andrew McGregor and Sofya Vorotnikova. A Simple, Space-Efficient, Streaming Algorithm
     for Matchings in Low Arboricity Graphs. In SOSA, pages 14:1–14:4, 2018.
37   S. Muthukrishnan. Data Streams: Algorithms and Applications. Foundations and Trends in
     Theoretical Computer Science, 1(2), 2005.
38   Alessandro Panconesi and Aravind Srinivasan. Randomized Distributed Edge Coloring via an
     Extension of the Chernoff-Hoeffding Bounds. SIAM J. Comput., 26(2):350–368, 1997.
39   Bruce A. Reed, Kaleigh Smith, and Adrian Vetta. Finding odd cycle transversals. Oper. Res.
     Lett., 32(4):299–301, 2004.
40   Neil Robertson and Paul D. Seymour. Graph minors. V. Excluding a planar graph. J. Comb.
     Theory, Ser. B, 41(1):92–114, 1986.
41   Neil Robertson, Paul D. Seymour, and Robin Thomas. Quickly Excluding a Planar Graph. J.
     Comb. Theory, Ser. B, 62(2):323–348, 1994.
42   Xiaoming Sun and David P. Woodruff. Tight Bounds for Graph Problems in Insertion Streams.
     In APPROX-RANDOM, pages 435–448, 2015.
