             Impossibility of VDFs in the ROM:
                   The Complete Picture

Hamza Abusalah1 , Karen Azari2 , Chethan Kamath3 , Erkan Tairi4⋆ , and
                      Maximilian von Consbruch5
                               1
                                 IMDEA Software Institute
                               hamza.abusalah@imdea.org
        2
            University of Vienna, Faculty of Computer Science, Vienna, Austria
                               karen.azari@univie.ac.at
                                       3
                                          IIT Bombay
                                   ckamath@cse.iitb.ac.in
                          4
                              University of California, Berkeley
                               erkan.tairi@berkeley.edu
5
    University of Vienna, UniVie Doctoral School Computer Science DoCS, Faculty of
                          Computer Science, Vienna, Austria
                              mvconsbruch@mailbox.org



        Abstract. We study whether Verifiable Delay Functions (VDFs) can
        be constructed in the (plain) Random Oracle Model (ROM) without any
        computational assumptions. A first partial answer to this question is due
        to Mahmoody, Smith, and Wu [ICALP 2020] where they rule out perfectly
        unique VDFs in the ROM. Building on this result, Guan, Riazanov, and
        Yuan [CRYPTO 2025] prove that VDFs with computational uniqueness
        and public-coin setup are impossible in the ROM. These works leave
        open the possibility of constructing computationally unique VDFs with
        private-coin setup in the ROM. We resolve this problem and additionally
        rule out computationally-unique VDFs with computationally expensive
        private-coin setup in the ROM.


1     Introduction
A Verifiable Delay Function (VDF) [BBBF18] is a function that takes a long
sequential time to compute, but whose output can be verified quickly. This prop-
erty allows translating out (sequential) computational steps into wall-clock time
in the physical world. As a result, VDFs have been shown useful in a variety
of applications such as randomness beacons [LW15, BBBF18, EFKP20a, Sta20],
computational time-stamping [LSS20], resource-efficient blockchains [CP19], and
proofs of replication [ABBK16].
    VDF constructions abound [BBBF18, Pie19, Wes19, DMPS19, DGMV20,
EFKP20b, EFKP20a, LV20, BHR+ 21, JMRR21, HHK+ 22, BCH+ 22, CSRT22,
⋆
    Work done while the author was at ENS Paris.
HHKK23, LM23, CLM23, OKC+ 25]. Since these constructions either rely on
advanced cryptographic primitives like randomized encodings, SNARGs, and
FHE or require structured algebraic settings like groups of unknown order, they
end up relying on structured hardness assumptions. Therefore, a fundamental
question this impressive body of work leaves open is whether VDFs can be black-
box constructed from one-way functions or even collision-resistant hashing.
    A series of results [DGMV20, MSW20, GRY25] partially answer this question
in the negative by proving various restricted variants of VDFs to be impossible
to construct in the (Parallel) Random Oracle Model (ROM) [BR93, AS15]. In
the (Parallel) ROM, algorithms have access to a random oracle that they query
in parallel in a series of rounds. Thus, the running time of an algorithm is the
number of rounds of queries it makes.
Defining VDFs in the ROM. Let λ be a security parameter and f : {0, 1}∗ →
{0, 1}λ a random oracle. A VDF (in the ROM) is a tuple of oracle-aided (possibly
randomized) algorithms ΠVDF := (Setupf , Evalf , Verifyf ) such that Setupf , on
input a security parameter λ and a time parameter T , probabilistically outputs
public parameters pp; Evalf , on input pp and input x, deterministically outputs
an output y and probabilistically outputs a proof π; and Verifyf , on input pp and
an input-output-proof triple (x, y, π), deterministically outputs a bit indicating
acceptance or rejection. ΠVDF must satisfy efficiency, completeness, sequentiality,
and uniqueness:
 – Efficiency requires that Setupf (λ, T ) makes at most qs ∈ poly(T, λ) queries
   to f , Evalf (pp, x) makes at most qe ∈ poly(T, λ) queries to f in T rounds,
   and Verifyf (pp, x, y, π) makes at most qv ∈ poly(log(T ), λ).
 – Completeness requires that every honest function evaluation results in an ac-
   cepting verification, i.e., Verifyf (pp, x, y, π) = 1 for every pp ← Setupf (λ, T )
   and (y, π) ← Evalf (pp, x).
 – Sequentiality with gap ϵ ∈ [0, 1) requires that, except with negligible proba-
   bility, no two-stage adversary (A0 , A1 ) where A0 , on input pp ← Setupf (λ, T ),
   makes poly(T, λ) queries to f and outputs a state st, and A1 , on input st and
   a random domain input x, makes poly(T, λ) queries to f in T ϵ rounds and
   outputs y where (y, π) ← Evalf (pp, x).
 – Computational (non-adaptive) uniqueness (a.k.a. soundness) requires that,
   except with negligible probability, no adversary that, on input pp ← Setupf (λ, T )
   and a random domain input x, makes poly(T, λ) queries to f and finds (y ′ , π ′ )
   such that Verifyf (pp, x, y ′ , π ′ ) = 1 and y ′ ̸= y where (y, π) ← Evalf (pp, x).
   Uniqueness is perfect if there exists no such triplet (x, y ′ , π ′ ).
Related work and open problems. Both [DGMV20, MSW20] rule out tight
VDFs in the ROM. Informally, a VDF is tight if it can be evaluated in time T but
not less than T − T δ for any constant δ < 1. Even without the (non-standard)
tightness requirement, [MSW20] proves that perfectly-unique VDFs cannot be
constructed in the ROM. Recently, this result was extended to rule out even
VDFs with computational uniqueness in the ROM [GRY25].
    However, there are a few caveats to these negative results. On the one
hand, [MSW20] and [GRY25] rule out non-tight VDFs with “efficient” setup,

                                        2
i.e., when Setup runs in time at most poly(log(T ), λ), and leave open the pos-
sibility of constructing standard VDFs in the ROM when setup is “expensive”,
i.e., when Setup runs in time poly(T, λ). On the other hand, while [MSW20] al-
lows for efficient private-coin setup, [GRY25] only considers public-coin setup,
i.e., when pp also contains the random coins used by Setup. Furthermore, in
a second result in [MSW20], tight VDFs with expensive private-coin setup are
ruled out by ruling out the weaker object of tight Proofs of Sequential Work
(PoSW) [MMV13, MSW20] with expensive private-coin setup in the ROM. A
PoSW can be seen as a VDF without the uniqueness guarantee. Interestingly, the
techniques of [MSW20] that rule out tight PoSWs/VDFs with expensive setup
don’t seem to readily extend to standard/non-tight VDFs and the authors left
this as an open problem [MSW20, Section 4.1].
     Therefore, these negative results [DGMV20, MSW20, GRY25] leave open the
possibility of constructing standard/non-tight VDFs in the ROM (without any
computation assumptions) with computational uniqueness and expensive private-
coin setup. We remark that this is the most general case, and hence, it is
conceivable that it is easier to construct VDFs in this relaxed setting where
setup is expensive and uniqueness is only computational.

1.1    Our Results
We resolve this open problem and show that no (even non-tight) VDFs exist
in the plain ROM (i.e., without additional computational assumptions), even
when considering expensive private-coin setup. We summarize the comparison
between our results and prior works on standard VDFs in Table 1.

                         Expensive             Efficient          Expensive
                        Public-Coin          Private-Coin        Private-Coin
                           Setup                Setup               Setup
       Perfect            [MSW20],             [MSW20]              this work
      Uniqueness           [GRY25]
 Computational             [GRY25]             this work            this work
  Uniqueness

  Table 1. Comparison between prior works on (non-tight) VDFs and our results.


    Concretely, consider a VDF in the ROM, i.e., all algorithms have access to
a random oracle f (see Definition 1 for a formal description). Assume that the
Setup, Eval and Verify algorithms make at most qs , qe and qv queries to f , respec-
tively, where qe ∈ poly(T, λ), qv ∈ poly(log(T ), λ), and qs ∈ poly(log(T ), λ) for
efficient setup or qs ∈ poly(T, λ) for expensive setup. Our results are informally
stated below, and we refer to Corollary 1 for the formal statement.
Theorem 1 (Informal). Let ΠVDF be any VDF (with private-coin setup) in
the ROM, then at least one of the following holds:


                                         3
 – There exists an adversary As that breaks sequentiality of ΠVDF by making
   O(qs qe qv ) queries in the preprocessing phase and O(qv ) rounds of queries in
   the online phase.
 – There exists an adversary Au that breaks computational uniqueness of ΠVDF
   by making at most O(qs qe qv ) queries.

    In order to prove Theorem 1, we first rederive in Section 4 the results
of [GRY25], which were based on techniques from the field of query complex-
ity (concretely, from decision tree algorithms), using the techniques developed
in prior ROM separations [MMV11, MSW20, DGMV20]. We regard this re-
formulation of the techniques from [GRY25] as an additional contribution, as
it renders the results of [GRY25] more accessible to the broader cryptographic
community. Furthermore, this reformulation allows us to reconcile the techniques
developed in both [MSW20] and [GRY25], and in turn extend them to the setting
of standard/non-tight VDFs (with expensive private-coin setup) in Section 5.


1.2   Additional Related Work

The area of timed cryptography started with Time-Lock Puzzles (TLPs) [RSW96],
which are similar to VDFs in the sense that they also provide strong sequen-
tiality guarantees. Mahmoody et al. [MMV11] showed an impossibility result for
TLPs in the ROM. The techniques developed in that work turned out to be
useful also for the impossibility results on VDFs [MSW20].
    A timed primitive strongly related to VDFs is Proofs of Sequential Work
(PoSWs) [MMV13], which are proofs of work with sequentiality guarantees. The
main difference between PoSWs and VDFs is that PoSWs do not provide any
uniqueness guarantees. Not accounting for VDFs, all PoSW constructions are in
the plain ROM [MMV13, CP18, AKK+ 19, DLM19, AFGK22, AC23, Abu25].
    Delay functions [GS98, LW15, ARS24] are similar to VDFs as they provide
sequentiality guarantees, however, unlike VDFs they lack verifiability.
    Lastly, Rotem et al. [RSS20] showed that generic-group VDFs (and generic-
group delay functions) cannot be constructed in cyclic groups of known order.


1.3   Organisation

We start with an overview of our techniques in Section 2. Since our work builds
on [MSW20, GRY25], we warm up by discussing their results and techniques in
a unified language in Section 4. In Section 5, we present our main result. Finally,
the relevant definitions and notation are provided in Section 3.


2     Technical Overview

Since our work builds on [MSW20, GRY25], we warm up by discussing their re-
sults for public-coin setups and the underlying techniques in Sections 2.1 and 2.2.
In Section 2.3, we describe some existing approaches that partially deal with


                                        4
private-coin setups. Finally, in Section 2.4, we explain how we overcome these
limitations to rule out VDFs with expensive private-coin setups. For simplicity,
we focus in this technical overview on VDFs with perfect completeness – but
the argument easily generalises to VDFs with a completeness error. We refer the
reader to Sections 4 and 5 for the formal details. Let us first fix some notation
and conventions pertaining to the ROM and VDFs.

 – We work in the parallel random-oracle model (PROM) [BR93, AS15], where
   every algorithm has access to a random oracle f , which it can query in
   parallel. By “queries”, we refer to the total number of queries an algorithm
   makes to f . We will distinguish this complexity measure from “time”, which
   we will use to refer to the total number of rounds in which f is invoked by
   an algorithm, potentially involving several oracle calls in parallel per round.
   We refer to lazy sampling of a random oracle in the standard sense. We refer
   to Section 3.2 for formal definitions.
 – For a VDF Π, we use qs , qe and qv , respectively, to denote the maximum
   number of queries made to f by the setup, evaluation and verification algo-
   rithms. If T and λ are the time and security parameters, respectively, then by
   definition qe ∈ poly(T, λ) and qv ∈ poly(log(T ), λ). We say that the setup is
   “efficient” if qs ∈ poly(log(T ), λ), and “expensive” if qs ∈ poly(T, λ). Finally,
   we say the setup is “private-coin” if the random coins used to sample the
   public parameters are secret; otherwise, we say the setup is “public-coin”.
   We refer to Section 3.3 for formal definitions.

2.1     Breaking Perfectly-Unique VDFs with Public-Coin Setup

Our starting point is the work of Mahmoody, Smith and Wu [MSW20], who con-
struct a sequentiality breaker for any ROM-based VDF Π := (Setup, Eval, Verify)
that is perfectly-unique and has a public-coin setup. Their sequentiality breaker,
denoted AMSW , follows the blueprint in [IR89, Rud88, MMV11] and is described
on a high level below6 – we refer to Algorithm 2 for a formal description. The
parameter ton determines AMSW ’s online running time and is set, for reasons we
explain in the analysis below, to 6qv .

    Sequentiality Breaker AMSW

     1. Preprocess. On input public parameters pp := Setupf (λ, T ; rS ), where
        rS denotes the public random coins used for setup, initialise a partial
        function p1 with the query-response pairs involved in computing pp.
     2. Learn online. On input a challenge x, sample i ← {1, . . . , ton}, and for
        each round j ∈ {1, . . . , i}:


6
    Our presentation differs slightly from [MSW20], in which AMSW carries out the
    “Learn online” step (Step 2) for ton rounds, after which it outputs the majority
    element in {y1′ , . . . , yt′on }. Looking ahead, our variant results in a simpler analysis.


                                               5
      (a) Lazily sample a “simulated” oracle gj that extends the partial func-
          tion pj and then compute (yj′ , πj′ ) ← Evalgj (pp, x), where we say “gj
          extends pj ” if gj (m) = pj (m) holds for all queries m in pj ’s domain
          Dom(pj ).
      (b) Let Q∗ := {m1 , . . . , mℓ } denote the set of new queries made to
          gj during computation of (yj′ , πj′ ), where a query m is deemed to
          be “new” if m ̸∈ Dom(pj ). Query f on Q∗ in parallel to obtain a
          response (a1 , . . . , aℓ ).
      (c) Update knowledge of f by constructing a new partial function
                                     (
                                       pj (m) if m ∈ Dom(pj )
                   pj+1 (m) :=
                                       al     if m = ml for some ml ∈ Q∗

   3. Output yi′ .

    Following the argument in [MSW20], let us analyse why AMSW ’s output yi′
(Step 3) constitutes a valid break of Π’s sequentiality. Let (y, π) ← Evalf (pp, x),
and let QV denote the set of queries made while computing Verifyf (pp, x, y, π).
We say that AMSW “learns” in a round j if Q∗ contains at least one query from
QV , i.e., Q∗ ∩ QV ̸= ∅. Since |QV | ≤ qv and f is the given oracle subsequently
queried on Q∗ (Step 2b), there can be at most qv rounds in which AMSW learns.
Now we argue that AMSW breaks sequentiality in any round in which it does not
learn! Assuming round i is one of the rounds in which AMSW does not learn, it
is possible to exploit perfect uniqueness to argue that yi′ = y: if, for the sake of
contradiction, yi′ ̸= y, then it can be shown that relative to the “hybrid” oracle
                                     (
                                       gi (m) if m ∈ Q∗
                           hs (m) :=                                             (1)
                                       f (m)   otherwise,

Π’s uniqueness is violated. To be specific, for (yi , πi ) ← Evalhs (pp, x) both

                                 yi = yi′ ̸= y   and                               (2)

                              Verifyhs (pp, x, y, π) = 1                           (3)
hold, and therefore (y, π) is a valid break of uniqueness relative to hs . This con-
tradicts Π’s perfect uniqueness. To see why Equation (2) holds, note that hs
and the simulated oracle gi are consistent when it comes to evaluation of (pp, x):
by definition, hs agrees with gi on Dom(pi ) ∪ Q∗ , which contains all queries used
to evaluate (pp, x) relative to gi . As (yi , πi ) is output by Evalhs (pp, x), Equa-
tion (2) follows since the function output yi′ of Evalgi on public parameters pp
and input x is computed deterministically. To see why Equation (3) holds, note
that hs and f are consistent when it comes to verifying (pp, x, y, π): conditioned
on AMSW not learning in round i, Q∗ does not contain any query from QV and
thus Verifyf (pp, x, y, π) = 1 implies Verifyhs (pp, x, y, π) = 1. To complete the ar-
gument, we need to set the parameter ton appropriately. Specifically, we need to


                                          6
set ton to be sufficiently larger than qv , so that a random round i ← {1, . . . , ton}
(Step 2) is likely to be one in which AMSW does not learn. For instance, for
ton = 6qv , it can be shown that AMSW does not learn in a random round i with
probability at least 1/3 (see Theorem 2).
    Finally, let us see why AMSW constitutes a valid sequentiality breaker. Note
that the preprocessing step requires qs queries. Moreover, for the parameters
discussed above, the online learning phase (Step 2) requires at most ton = 6qv
time. It follows that AMSW is a valid breaker since qv ∈ poly(log(T ), λ) and
qe ∈ poly(T, λ). We refer the reader to Section 4.1 for more details.

2.2     Breaking Computationally-Unique VDFs with Public-Coin
        Setup
When Π’s uniqueness requirement is relaxed from perfect to computational, the
reasoning we used above to claim that uniqueness is violated relative to hs is no
longer valid. To be specific, Verifyhs (pp, x, y, π) = 1 no longer guarantees that
yi′ = y, as π could have been a bad proof relative to hs ,7 where by “bad proof” we
mean a proof that leads to Verify accepting a wrong output. Although such bad
proofs don’t exist in case Π is perfectly unique, they do exist in case Π is only
computationally unique. In fact, the computational uniqueness requirement for a
VDF states that it is hard to find such bad proofs relative to f (see Definition 1).
At this point, Guan, Riazanov and Yuan [GRY25] first observe that in case
Equations (2) and (3) do hold but yi′ ̸= y, AMSW breaks Π’s uniqueness, albeit
relative to a wrong oracle. In more detail, relative to hs we have (y, π) and
(yi′ , πi′ ) such that yi′ ̸= y and Verifyhs (pp, x, y, π) = 1. Then, [GRY25] make a
second crucial observation: the original world (f, hs ), with f and hs defined as
above, is distributed identically to a “flipped” world (hu , f ), where hu is a hybrid
oracle that is closely related to hs (to be explained soon). Whenever yi′ ̸= y, it
is therefore possible to argue that AMSW breaks uniqueness relative to f in the
flipped world with the same probability that it breaks uniqueness relative to
hs in the original world. Keeping this fact in mind, the uniqueness breaker by
[GRY25], denoted AGRY , is implemented as follows: for i ← {1, . . . , ton}, AGRY
works exactly like AMSW till round i. But then in round i, it flips the role of
simulated oracle gi and given oracle f , and uses f itself as the simulated oracle.
A more detailed description is given below – we refer to Algorithm 3 for the
formal description. Like we did for AMSW , the parameter ton can be set to 6qv .

    Uniqueness Breaker AGRY

     1. Preprocess. On input public parameters pp := Setupf (λ, T ; rS ), where
        rS denotes the public random coins used for setup, initialise a partial
        function p1 with the query-response pairs involved in computing pp.

7
    Note that π is guaranteed to be a “good proof” relative to f since it is honestly
    generated relative to f and Π is perfectly correct. However, this guarantee does not
    necessarily hold relative to hs since π is not honestly generated relative to hs .


                                            7
    2. Learn online. Sample i ← {1, . . . , ton}. For each round j ∈ [i − 1], carry
       out Step 2a to Step 2c as in AMSW .
    3. Construct hybrid oracle. For round i:
       (a) Compute (yi′ , πi′ ) = (y, π) ← Evalf (pp, x), and let Q∗ denote the
           new queries made to f during this computation.
       (b) Lazily sample a simulated oracle gi that extends pi .
       (c) Construct the hybrid oracle hu as
                                 (
                                   gi (m) if m = ml for some ml ∈ Q∗
                    hu (m) :=                                                   (4)
                                   f (m)    otherwise.

    4. Output (yi′′ , πi′′ ), where (yi′′ , πi′′ ) ← Evalhu (pp, x).

    Let us analyse why AGRY ’s output (yi′′ , πi′′ ) (Step 4) constitutes a valid break
of uniqueness. Assuming y ̸= yi′′ , we need to argue that Verifyf (pp, x, yi′′ , πi′′ ) = 1.
Since the original world and the flipped world can be shown to be identically
distributed, we can apply the same line of argument we used for AMSW to claim
that AGRY also likely does not learn in its round i if we set ton large enough,
say ton = 6qv (see Theorem 3). To be precise, we can claim that the set Q∗
(Step 3a) contains no query made while computing Verifyf (pp, x, yi′′ , πi′′ ). As a
result, the oracles f and hu are consistent when it comes to queries made by
Verifyf (pp, x, yi′′ , πi′′ ) and Verifyhu (pp, x, yi′′ , πi′′ ), which implies Verifyf (pp, x, yi′′ , πi′′ ) =
1. Translating this informal argument into a formal proof requires careful han-
dling of the random coins used by the adversaries and the challenger in the
respective security games – we refer to Section 4.2 for the details.
    Finally, note that AGRY is a valid uniqueness breaker since it is query-efficient:
the preprocessing step requires qs queries and the learning stage requires at most
6qv qe queries, the total number of queries is at most qs +6qv qe , which is poly(T, λ).

2.3    Handling Private-Coin Setups: Challenges and Existing
       Approaches
Recall how we used the notion of query learning to argue consistency of hybrid
oracles in AMSW (Equation (1)) and AGRY (Equation (4)). The main challenge
in handling a private-coin setup (efficient or expensive) is that we need to take
into account queries not only in QV but also in QS , the set of queries involved in
computing Setupf (λ, T ; rS ). We were able to avoid this issue when the setup was
public-coin since the coins rS it uses are available, and can be used to initialise the
partial function p1 to match f at QS (Step 1 in AMSW and Step 1 in AGRY ). This,
in turn, guaranteed consistency of hybrid oracles with QS throughout AMSW ’s
and AGRY ’s execution. However, for private-coin setups, rS is unavailable and we
cannot proceed as above. We can also not afford to ignore QS as it may result in
hybrid oracles that are inconsistent on QS : for example, if round j is such that
AMSW learns a query m ∈ QS , then a hybrid oracle hs constructed as described
in Equation (1) is likely to be inconsistent on QS (and thus pp). In this case, we
won’t be able to invoke perfect uniqueness (and correctness) of Π.

                                                   8
   Two approaches to partially deal with this issue are presented in [MSW20].
The first approach works when the setup additionally is efficient. The second
approach can handle expensive setups provided Π is also tight. We briefly discuss
these two approaches and explain why they don’t seem to readily extend to
standard (i.e., non-tight) VDFs with expensive setup. In fact, [MSW20] leaves
the impossibility of non-tight VDFs with expensive private-coin setup as an
unresolved question; see Section 4.1 of [MSW20].
Exploiting setup efficiency. Recall from AMSW ’s description that we set ton =
6qv to ensure that a random round i is likely to be one in which AMSW does not
learn a query from QV , and thus, hs is consistent with f on QV . To ensure
consistency of hs also with f on QS in round i, we require AMSW to not learn
any query from QV ∪ QS in round i. By the same counting argument we used
for AMSW , there can be at most qs rounds in which queries from QS can be
learnt. Taken together, it suffices to therefore, say, set ton = 6(qs + qv ). Since
we assume efficient setup, qs ∈ poly(log(T ), λ) and thus the online phase runs
for 6(qv + qs ) ∈ poly(log(T ), λ) time, which is still within a valid sequentiality
breaker’s budget. However, for an expensive setup, where qs ∈ poly(T, λ), the
sequentiality breaker is clearly invalid, i.e., runs in time greater than T .
Exploiting tightness. Recall that in a tight VDF, sequentiality holds even
against adversaries
                √       whose online time complexity is close to the evaluation time
T , say T − T for concreteness. In the second approach, [MSW20] exploits
tightness to rule out ROM-based tight VDFs with even expensive private-coin
setup.8 Keeping the goals of Section 2.4 in mind, we present their adversary in
two steps. First we present an online adversary A′MSW that breaks tight VDFs
with efficient private-coin setup. Then we describe a preprocessing algorithm
PMSW , which lifts A′MSW to break tight VDFs with expensive private-coin setup.
Towards that end, we discuss how tightness is essential to the overall strategy,
and why it does not seem to easily extend to standard (i.e., non-tight) VDFs.
      The attack relies on the insight that Verify in a tight VDF Π is “insensitive”
to small changes to Eval. Thus, to break uniqueness, A′MSW can simply output
(y ′ , π ′ ) ← Evalf (pp, x), while locally simulating a small fraction of rounds of
queries to f . An informal description follows.

    Uniqueness Breaker A′MSW
                                                          √
     1. Sample a random set S ⊆ {1, . . . , T } of size T
     2. On input (pp, x), run Eval on input (pp, x) with its i-th round oracle
        queries (m1 , . . . , mℓ ) replied to as follows:


8
    To be precise, [MSW20] rules out ROM-based tight PoSWs with expensive private-
    coin setup. Since a PoSW is simply a VDF without the uniqueness guarantee, their
    result also rules out tight VDFs with expensive private-coin setup. What we present
    is essentially their two-stage adversarial strategy for breaking sequentiality of tight
    PoSWs, suitably adapted for breaking uniqueness of tight VDFs (borrowing ideas
    from [DGMV20]).


                                             9
         – If i ∈ S then return (r1 , . . . , rℓ ), where r1 , . . . , rℓ ← {0, 1}λ
         – Else return (f (m1 ), . . . , f (mℓ )).
   3. Output (y ′ , π ′ ), which is Eval’s output in Step 2.
                                                                           √
Let (y, π) ← Evalf (pp, x). Since A′MSW runs in time T − T , y ′ ̸= y holds
with high probability due to Π’s sequentiality. Furthermore, as we explain next,
Verifyf (pp, x, y ′ , π ′ ) = 1 holds with high probability, resulting in A′MSW breaking
Π’s uniqueness. By “locally simulated” oracle, we refer to the oracle f ′ that
results from local simulation of Eval queries (Step 2). As long as none of the
queries in QS ∪ QV end up simulated, if Verify accepts (y ′ , π ′ ) relative to f ′ then
Verify accepts (y ′ , π ′ ) relative to f too. It remains to bound the probability that
a query in QS ∪ QV√ is simulated. This can be shown using a union bound to be
at most (qs + qv )/ T and thus Verify accepts (y ′ , π ′ ) with probability at least
                                         (qs + qv )
                                    1−      √       .                               (5)
                                              T
                    √
Since qs + qv ≪ T , the value of Equation (5) is close to 1 for VDFs with
efficient setup.
     For expensive setups, the bound obtained in Equation (5) is meaningless
and to resolve this issue, [MSW20] resorts to preprocessing. Deem a setup query
“heavy” if it is likely to be queried again during evaluation. The goal of prepro-
cessing is to learn the heavy setup queries, and [MSW20] proposes repeatedly
running Eval on random inputs, say for tpre := 6qs times, to collect such heavy
queries. Their preprocessing algorithm is described below (suitably adapted for
VDFs).
  Preprocessing Algorithm PMSW

   1. Initialise. Set partial function ppre to be empty.
   2. Learn. On input pp, for each j ∈ {1, . . . , tpre }:
      (a) Sample random VDF input xj and run (yj , πj ) ← Evalf (pp, xj ).
      (b) Let Q∗ := {m1 , . . . , mℓ } denote the new queries made by Eval to f
          during this computation, where “new” is now with respect to ppre .
      (c) For each m ∈ Q∗ , set ppre (m) := f (m).
   3. Output ppre .

In [MSW20], it is shown that most heavy setup queries will likely have been
collected in ppre , and it thus suffices to carry out the online phase as in A′MSW ,
except with all queries in ppre responded to honestly. They then show that the
online phase, which involves a single invocation of Eval, is unlikely to involve a
new setup query. While PMSW requires qs√       qe queries, the online phase has the
same time complexity as A′MSW , i.e., T − T . It is thus possible to argue like
before that if sequentiality holds then (y ′ , π ′ ) breaks Π’s uniqueness.
    Note however the idea underlying A′MSW , i.e., locally simulate a fraction of
Eval queries, limits it to tight VDFs: if the adversary is allowed only, say, T /2
time, then around T /2 rounds need to be locally simulated. This would once
again render the union bound meaningless.


                                          10
2.4   Handling Expensive Private-Coin Setups Using Preprocessing

We overcome the barriers explained in Section 2.3 using preprocessing. In partic-
ular, we use preprocessing to extend the [GRY25] result to expensive private-coin
setups without having to rely on tightness. Our preprocessing algorithm, denoted
P, is conceptually different from PMSW and its design and analysis are our main
technical contribution. In the remainder of this section, we explain why PMSW
falls short of serving our purpose, and how P resolves these shortcomings.
     Recall from the analysis of AMSW and AGRY that we want to ensure AMSW
does not learn any query from QV ∪ QS in most online rounds. This allowed us
to construct the consistent hybrid oracles, which aided breaking sequentiality
or uniqueness. The goal of preprocessing is to generate a partial function ppre
such that the aforementioned guarantee is still likely to hold when AMSW (and
thus AGRY ) is executed in the online learning stage with the first-round partial
function p1 initialised to ppre . That is, most of the ton online rounds must be
such that AMSW (and thus AGRY ) does not learn any query from QV ∪ QS .
     To this end, let us first analyse the straw man proposal where we replace
the preprocessing step in AMSW (Step 1) and AGRY (Step 1) with PMSW from
Section 2.3. The intention, as was for A′MSW , is to learn the heavy setup queries.
Recall however that A′MSW involved a single call to Eval, and it sufficed to avoid
queries from QS in this particular call. However, the online learning phase of
AMSW can involve ton invocations of Eval, relative to different simulated (but
not independent) random oracles g1 , . . . , gton , and we need AMSW to not learn
queries from QS for most of these rounds. When tpre = 6qs , we are unable to rule
out AMSW making new setup queries in many rounds – in fact we believe this
does not generally hold. PMSW could potentially compensate for the ton = 6qv
invocations of Eval by running its own learning phase (Step 2) for longer, say
tpre = 6qs qv . However, we were unable to analyse this strategy, or ascertain
whether or not the guarantee even holds.
     Our way around this issue is to use a different strategy for preprocessing, one
which we are actually able to analyse. Our strategy implemented by P relies on
the following crucial observation: it is not necessary to learn the heavy queries
in QS that Eval is likely to make, but only those heavy queries that AMSW (re-
spectively, AGRY ) is likely to make in the online learning stage. This is sufficient
to ensure that most rounds in the online learning phase are where AMSW (re-
spectively AGRY ) does not learn queries from QS . Thus P repeatedly runs AMSW
instead of Eval with the intention of learning the heavy queries that AMSW itself
is likely to make. An informal description of P follows – a formal description can
be found in Algorithm 4. For our analysis, we set tpre = 6qs and ton = 6qv .


  Preprocessing Algorithm P
   1. Initialise. Set partial function ppre to be empty. Sample i ← {1, . . . , tpre }.
   2. Learn online. For each j ∈ {1, . . . , i}:




                                          11
       (a) Sample random VDF input xpre , and run online learning phase of
           AMSW (Step 2) with p1 := ppre , parameter ton and challenge xpre to
           obtain ypre .
       (b) Let Q∗ denote the new queries made by AMSW to f during this
           computation, where “new” is again with respect to ppre .
       (c) For each m ∈ Q∗ , set ppre (m) := f (m).
    3. Output ppre .

Note that, since AMSW makes at most 6qe qv queries, the number of queries made
by P is at most 36qs qe qv . Now when we run AMSW in the online learning stage
with p1 := ppre generated by P, it is possible to show that in most rounds
AMSW does not learn any query from QV ∪ QS . The formal analysis largely
follows the “two-world” argument we used for AGRY , but extra attention needs
to be paid due to preprocessing. We show that the probability of AMSW breaking
sequentiality in the original world is roughly the same as the probability of AGRY
breaking uniqueness in the flipped world. We state and prove this in Lemma 3.
We refer to Section 5 for the details.


3     Preliminaries

3.1   Notation

Sets. For n ∈ N, let [n] := {1, . . . , n}, and let λ ∈ N be the security parameter.
For a set X, we write x ← X to denote that x is sampled from X uniformly at
random.
Algorithms. For a probabilistic algorithm A, we write y ← A(x), or sometimes
also A(x) → y, to denote that A run on input x with uniformly random coins
outputs y. If we need to make the random coins explicit, we write A(x; r) to
denote that algorithm A is run on input x with random coins r.
                                                                     ∗
Functions. We define the set of partial functions Pλ := {p : {0, 1} 99K {0, 1}λ :
                  ∗
Dom(p) ⊆ {0, 1} }, i.e., the set of functions p which are only defined on a subset
                  ∗
Dom(p) ⊆ {0, 1} . For a function set Fλ = {f : {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1}λ } and a partial
function p ∈ Pλ , we let Fλ |p denote the subset of Fλ that agrees with p, i.e.,
Fλ |p = {f ∈ Fλ : f (x) = p(x) ∀ x ∈ Dom(p)} .
    We denote the set of polynomial functions f : Nn → N (n ∈ N) by poly. A
function f : N → N is negligible if its absolute value is smaller than the inverse
of any polynomial (i.e., if ∀c∃k0 ∀λ ≥ k0 : |f (λ)| < 1/λc ). We denote the class of
negligible functions by negl, and hence, we write f ∈ negl or f (λ) ∈ negl(λ) if f
is a negligible function.


3.2   The Parallel Random Oracle Model (PROM)

The random oracle is defined to be the uniform distribution over the set Fλ of all
functions f : {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1}λ . In this work, random oracles will be simulated
lazily, i.e., whenever a new query x is made to f , f (x) is set to a uniformly


                                        12
random string y ← {0, 1}λ . We write f ← Fλ for this process. In the proofs later
we want to associate oracles with partially defined functions, i.e. they initially
correspond to a completely undefined partial function and with every query the
associated partial function gets updated.
   An f -oracle-aided algorithm Af , on input an initial state/input, runs in
rounds: in the i-th round it (a) makes a tuple of parallel queries Qi to f and
receives f (Qi ) := (f (x))x∈Qi , and (b) runs an arbitrary computation on its cur-
rent state and f (Qi ), and passes the result as a state to the next round. For
                                               Pk
a k-round algorithm Af we refer to q :=          i=1 |Qi | as the (total) number of
queries. If Af is a deterministic algorithm, then Q(Af ) denotes the set of queries
A makes to f . We define the time complexity of Af as the number of rounds it
takes Af to terminate.


3.3   Verifiable Delay Functions

A verifiable delay function (VDF) [BBBF18] is a function that requires many se-
quential steps to evaluate, yet the output (together with a proof) can be publicly
verified much more efficiently. We define VDFs with respect to any oracle dis-
tribution Oλ . VDFs in the ROM are obtained as a special case when Oλ := Fλ
where Fλ is defined in Section 3.2.

Definition 1 (Verifiable Delay Functions). An oracle-aided Verifiable De-
lay Function (VDF) is a triple of oracle-aided (potentially randomized) uniform
algorithms Π := (Setup, Eval, Verify), such that for any λ ∈ N and oracle distri-
bution Oλ the following hold:

 – Setup(λ, T ) → pp: On input a security parameter λ and time parameter T ,
   it outputs the public parameters pp. The public parameters determine an
   efficiently samplable finite set of inputs X, a set of outputs Y , and a set
   of proofs P . We say that Π has a public-coin setup if pp also contains the
   random coins used by Setup. Otherwise, we say that Π has a private-coin
   setup.
 – Eval(pp, x) → (y, π): On input pp and a value x, it outputs y ∈ Y and a
   (possibly empty) proof π ∈ P . The first output y is determined only by x and
   pp, i.e., y is independent of the randomness of Eval.
 – Verify(pp, x, y, π) ∈ {0, 1}: This is a deterministic algorithm that on input
   pp, values x, y, and a proof π, outputs a bit indicating whether it accepts or
   rejects.

   We require Π to satisfy efficiency, completeness, sequentiality and uniqueness
as defined below.

 – Efficiency. Π is efficient if the following hold for every O ∈ Oλ :
    • SetupO makes at most qs ∈ poly(T, λ) queries to O,
    • EvalO makes at most qe ∈ poly(T, λ) queries to O in at most T rounds.
    • VerifyO makes at most qv ∈ poly(log(T ), λ) queries to O.


                                        13
 – α-Completeness. Π is complete with error α if for any λ, T ∈ N, every
   O ∈ Oλ , any pp ← SetupO (λ, T ), and any x ∈ X
            h                                                i
        Pr VerifyO (pp, x, y, π) = 1 : (y, π) ← EvalO (pp, x) ≥ 1 − α(λ).

   We say Π satisfies perfect completeness if α = 0.
 – Sequentiality. Π satisfies sequentiality with ϵ ∈ [0, 1) gap if for every λ, T ∈
   N and every two-stage oracle-aided adversary A = (A0 , A1 ) such that A makes
   in total poly(T, λ) oracle queries and A1 makes its queries in T ϵ rounds, it
   holds that
                                              O ← Oλ
                                                       
                                  pp ← SetupO (λ, T ) 
                                          st ← AO
                                                       
                                                 0 (pp) 
                      ′                                
                  Pr y = y :
                                                         ∈ negl(λ).
                                              x←X     
                                        ′      O
                                      y ← A (st, x) 
                                               1
                                 (y, π) ← EvalO (pp, x)

 – (Non-adaptive) Computational Uniqueness. Π satisfies computational
   uniqueness if for any λ, T ∈ N and oracle-aided adversary A that makes
   q ∈ poly(T, λ) oracle queries, it holds that

                                                            O ← Oλ
                                                                     
       
        ′                                       pp ← SetupO (λ, T ) 
                       O         ′   ′
                                                                      
       y ̸= y ∧ Verify (pp, x, y , π ) = 1 :
    Pr                                                      x←X      ∈ negl(λ).
                                                   ′  ′     O
                                               (y , π ) ← A (pp, x) 
                                               (y, π) ← EvalO (pp, x)
                                                                                (6)

    We say that Π satisfies perfect uniqueness if q is unbounded and Equa-
    tion (6) holds with probability 0.

Remark 1. Some VDF definitions [BBBF18, Pie19, Wes19] use the word sound-
ness to describe uniqueness. The two terms describe the same thing and we use
uniqueness following [MSW20, GRY25]. We note that previous works [BBBF18,
MSW20, DGMV20] defined uniqueness adaptively, i.e., instead of sampling x
uniformly at random and giving x to the adversary A as input, they allow A
to choose x itself. This adaptive uniqueness is stronger than our non-adaptive
uniqueness, but since our focus in this work is on impossibility results, working
with non-adaptive uniqueness implies stronger results (analogous to [GRY25]).


4   Warmup: Impossibility for Public-Coin Setup
In this section, we set up the stage for our main results which we present in
Section 5. To do so, we first unify the language [MSW20] and [GRY25] use
to describe their adversaries. To accommodate this unification, we provide a


                                        14
Algorithm 1 The preprocessing algorithm Ppub for public-coin setup.
    Input Public parameters pp
                                             ∗           λ
    Output A partial function ppre : {0, 1} 99K {0, 1}
 1: Initialize ppre as the empty partial function with Dom(ppre ) = ∅
 2: Run Setupf (λ, T ; rS ) with the random coins rS contained in pp (cf. Definition
    1)
 3: Set ppre (m) = f (m) for each query m ∈ Q(Setupf (λ, T ; rS ))
 4: Return ppre



different analysis to the results of [GRY25]. We crucially rely on this new analysis
in Section 5 to extend the results of [GRY25] to VDFs with private-coin and
expensive setups.
    In Section 4.1 we present the simplest case of perfectly unique VDFs with
public-coin setup, as considered by [MSW20], and in Section 4.2, we consider
the case of computationally unique VDFs with public-coin setup, as handled by
[GRY25].
    Let Π := (Setup, Eval, Verify) be a VDF in the ROM. At the heart of the
results of both Section 4.1 and Section 4.2 is the sequentiality breaker (Ppub , As )
where Ppub and As are formally depicted in Algorithms 1 and 2, respectively. This
breaker is based on the sequentiality breaker of [MSW20], with the difference
that in As we select the output from a uniformly random iteration instead of
using majority-based output selection. This turns out to simplify the analysis.
    The online phase of the adversary Afs with oracle access f , takes as input
public parameters pp, x ∈ X, and a partial function ppre computed by the
preprocessing algorithm Pf . The preprocessing algorithm for the public-coin
                                                                                  f
setup case we consider in this section is simple: on input pp, the algorithm Ppub
simply runs the setup algorithm with the public random coins contained in pp,
and stores the queries made to f during this process in the partial function ppre .
    For our results regarding VDFs in the private-coin setup in Section 5, As is
the same but we employ a more sophisticated preprocessing phase.
    In Figure 1 we formally describe an execution of the sequentiality game with
the sequentiality breaker (P, As ), where P is the preprocessing algorithm.

4.1     Perfectly Unique VDFs
In this section, we consider the case of perfectly unique VDFs Π with public-coin
setup. For simplicity, we first assume that Π is also perfectly correct.
    Preprocessing as per Algorithm 1 ensures that for all queries m made in
Setupf (λ, T ; rS ) we have gj (m) = f (m) for all j ∈ [i]. The argument for the
sequentiality breaker of both [GRY25] and [MSW20], depicted in Algorithm 2,
now works as follows.
9
    The algorithm Ppub used in this section is actually deterministic, so it would ignore
    random coins rP . However, in Section 5 we will use a randomized preprocessing
    algorithm Ppub .


                                           15
Algorithm 2 The sequentiality breaker Afs , essentially [MSW20, Algorithm 1].
    Input: Public parameters pp, an element x ∈ X, and a partial function ppre
    Hard-Coded: Running time parameter ton
    Output: An element y ∈ Y
 1: Set p1 := ppre
 2: Sample i ← {1, . . . , ton} uniformly at random
 3: for j = 1, . . . , i do
 4:   Lazily sample gj ← Fλ |pj
 5:   Sample random coins rj and run (yj′ , πj′ ) ← Evalgj (pp, x; rj )
 6:   Initialize pj+1 as the partial function with pj+1 (m) = pj (m) for m ∈
    Dom(pj )
 7:   Set pj+1 (m) = f (m) in parallel for every m ∈ Q(Evalgj (pp, x; rj )) \
    Dom(pj )
 8: end for
 9: Return yi′


   1. The challenger samples a random function f ← Fλ .
   2. The challenger samples random coins rS and runs pp :=
      Setupf (λ, T ; rS ).
   3. The adversary samples random coins9 rP and runs ppre := Pf (pp; rP ).
   4. The challenger samples an input x ← X uniformly at random.
   5. The adversary runs yi′ ← Afs (pp, x, ppre ).
   6. The challenger samples random coins rE and runs (y, π) :=
      Evalf (pp, x; rE ).
   7. The adversary succeeds if and only if yi′ = y.




Fig. 1. The execution of the sequentiality game of Definition 1 with adversary (P, As ).


     Consider the case that in the i-th iteration of Algorithm 2, i.e., the last
iteration, no new query is made to gi that is also made in Q(Verifyf (pp, x, y, π)),
i.e., we have
           (Q(Evalgi (pp, x; ri )) \ Dom(pi )) ∩ Q(Verifyf (pp, x, y, π)) = ∅.       (7)
We will sketch the proof of how Afs breaks sequentiality whenever Equation (7)
holds. To do so, we construct a hybrid oracle hs as
                    (
                      gi (m) if m ∈ Q(Evalgi (pp, x; ri )) \ Dom(pi )
           hs (m) =                                                        (8)
                      f (m) otherwise.

By construction and perfect completeness, we now have
            (yi′ , πi′ ) = Evalhs (pp, x; ri )   and   Verifyhs (pp, x, y, π) = 1.   (9)


                                                 16
Hence, perfect uniqueness implies yi′ = y. Thereby, Afs breaks sequentiality when-
ever Equation (7) holds.
    It remains to show that Equation (7) holds often. Recall that the oracles
gj get updated in each iteration and every query is made to f at most once.
Furthermore, the number i of iterations of the for-loop is sampled uniformly
at random from [ton]. Since there are qv queries made in Q(Verifyf (pp, x, y, π)),
there can be at most qv iterations where a query in Q(Verifyf (pp, x, y, π)) is made
to f , hence, we obtain that i hits an iteration where Equation (7) is not satisfied
with probability at most qv /ton, which results in a success probability for Afs of
at least 1 − qv /ton.
    In the case that Π satisfies only α-completeness, Equation (9) only holds
with probability 1 − α, which causes a loss of α in the adversary’s advantage.
We obtain the following result, which is, given that the exact construction of
the sequentiality breaker differs slightly, essentially [MSW20, Theorem 3.1 and
Section 4].

Theorem 2 (Corollary of [MSW20, Theorem 3.1 and Section 4]). Let
Π be a VDF in the ROM with public-coin setup satisfying perfect uniqueness and
α-completeness, having running time parameters qs , qe and qv , as in Definition 1.
Let Ppub and As be the algorithms constructed in Algorithms 1 and 2, where the
parameter ton can be chosen as any positive natural number.
   Now, independently of the choice of f ∈ Fλ , the pair (Ppub , As ) wins the
sequentiality game with probability at least 1 − qv /ton − α. Here, Ppub makes at
most qs queries to f , and As makes at most qe · ton queries to f , in at most ton
rounds.


4.2   Computationally Unique VDFs

Next we consider the case of computationally unique VDFs Π with public-
coin setup. For simplicity, we first assume that Π satisfies perfect completeness.
The argument of breaking sequentiality for perfectly unique VDFs fails when
considering VDFs that are only computationally unique. This is so as it might
happen that yi′ ̸= y while Equation (7) holds. However, the authors of [GRY25]
observe that it is possible to break uniqueness with the same probability as this
bad event is happening, i.e., they construct an adversary that breaks uniqueness
with the same probability as the event

  (Q(Evalgi (pp, x; ri )) \ Dom(pi )) ∩ Q(Verifyf (pp, x, y, π)) = ∅ ∧ yi′ ̸= y    (10)

occurs for Afs . As Verifyf (pp, x, y, π) makes only qv queries, the first line of Equa-
tion (10) holds with probability at least 1−qv /ton (as seen in Section 4.1), hence,
the probability that Equation (10) holds is, up to an additive error of at most
qv /ton, equal to the probability that the sequentiality breaker fails.
    The uniqueness breaker of [GRY25] is (Ppub , Au ) where Ppub and Au are de-
picted in Algorithms 1 and 3, respectively. Syntactically, the uniqueness breaker
doesn’t have a preprocessing phase, hence, the tuple (Ppub , Au ) is a (two-stage)


                                          17
Algorithm 3 The uniqueness breaker Afu , essentially [GRY25, Algorithm 5].
    Input: Public parameters pp, an element x ∈ X, and a partial function ppre
    Hard-Coded: Running time parameter ton
    Output: An output-proof pair (y, π) ∈ Y × P
 1: Set p1 := ppre
 2: Sample i ← {1, . . . , ton}.
 3: for j = 1, . . . , i − 1 do
 4:    Lazily sample gj ← Fλ |pj
 5:    Sample random coins rj and run (yj′ , πj′ ) := Evalgj (pp, x; rj )
 6:    Initialize pj+1 as the partial function with pj+1 (m) = pj (m) for m ∈
    Dom(pj )
 7:    Set pj+1 (m) = f (m) in parallel for every m ∈ Q(Evalgj (pp, x; rj )) \
    Dom(pj )
 8: end for
 9: Sample random coins ri and set (y, π̃) := Evalf (pp, x; ri )
10: Define a function hu as follows. For m ∈ (Q(Evalf (pp, x; ri )) \ Dom(pi )),
    sample the value of hu (m) uniformly at random; otherwise, set hu (m) =
    f (m)
11: Sample random coins rE and run (yi′′ , πi′′ ) := Evalhu (pp, x; rE )
12: Return (yi′′ , πi′′ )



uniqueness adversary. The first stage Ppub is the same as the sequetiality breaker
preprocessing. The second stage As executes the exact same first i − 1 itera-
tions of the sequentiality breaker of Algorithm 2, but then, in the last iteration,
interchanges the roles of f and gi , and constructs a function hu such that run-
ning the evaluation algorithm with oracle access to hu breaks uniqueness, i.e.,
(yi′′ , πi′′ ) = Evalhu (pp, x; rE ) using random coins rE is used as the tuple to break
uniqueness.
      Before sketching the proof of breaking uniqueness, let’s recall the execution
of the uniqueness game with the uniqueness breaker (P, Au ) in Figure 2.
      The first step towards showing that (Ppub , Au ) indeed breaks uniqueness is to
observe that if Equation (10) holds for Afs , then we have, by perfect correctness,

            Verifyhs (pp, x, y, π) = Verifyf (pp, x, y, π) = 1   ∧    yi′ ̸= y.       (11)

Here, hs is the hybrid oracle from Equation (8), (y, π) = Evalf (pp, x; rE ) and
(yi′ , πi′ ) = Evalhs (pp, x; ri ). In other words, in case of perfect correctness, we
obtain a break of uniqueness of the VDF (namely, the tuple (y, π)) although
only for the wrong oracle hs , not f . This in particular means, that for any f we
                                              f
can find an oracle hs such that when (Ppub       , Afs ) fails to break sequentiality, then
the original evaluation algorithm Evalf succeeds in breaking uniqueness for hs .
      However, this is not sufficient for our final statement, for which we need to
show that for a uniformly random f we have a non-negligible probability that
either the sequentiality or the uniqueness breaker succeeds. (Note that the oracle


                                            18
   1. The challenger samples a random function f ← Fλ .
   2. The challenger samples random coins rS and runs pp :=
      Setupf (λ, T ; rS ).
   3. The challenger samples an input x ← X uniformly at random.
   4. The adversary samples random coins rP and runs ppre := Pf (pp; rP ).
   5. The adversary runs (yi′′ , πi′′ ) ← Afu (pp, x, ppre ).
   6. The adversary succeeds if and only if Verifyf (pp, x, yi′′ , πi′′ ) = 1 and
      yi′′ ̸= y where y is the correct output, i.e., y is computed as (y, π) ←
      Evalf (pp, x).




Fig. 2. The execution of the uniqueness game of Definition 1 with adversary (P, Au ).



hs is not uniform and independent of As ’s random coins, but was made up by Afs
itself!) To prove our final statement, it suffices to prove that the pair (yi′′ , πi′′ ),
                 f
output by (Ppub    , Afu ), when viewed as a random variable, breaks uniqueness with
respect to the oracle f with the same probability as (y, π), produced by Evalf ,
breaks uniqueness with respect to hs as implicitly sampled by Afs . We prove this
formally in Section 5.1 and only give a high-level overview below.
    The proof utilized an auxiliary oracle f ′ that we define in terms of the lazily
sampled f and gi . Before defining f ′ , we need to make certain aspect of the
sequentiality breaker/game more precise. At the beginning of the i-th itera-
tion, all of the values of f that are determined are stored in the partial func-
tion pi . Now, for As , we call Evalgi (pp, x; ri ) where gi is a function satisfying
gi (m) = pi (m) = f (m) for m ∈ Dom(pi ). During this call, queries at new values
                         ∗
m1 , . . . , mℓ ∈ {0, 1} \ Dom(pi ) might come up. Whenever such a query is made,
                                                   λ
we sample a new random value γi,j ← {0, 1} such that at the end of the i-th
iteration we have that

                       gi (mj ) = γi,j   for each j ∈ {1, . . . , ℓ}.

Later in the i-th iteration of As , the values of f are determined. We then have

                       f (mj ) = ϕi,j    for each j ∈ {1, . . . , ℓ},

                              λ
where ϕi,1 , . . . , ϕi,ℓ ∈ {0, 1} are all sampled uniformly at random.
   With these assignments for f and gi , let’s consider the uniqueness breaker/game,
but with respect to a different oracle f ′ , rather than f , where f ′ is defined by a
function f ′ : {0, 1}∗ 99K {0, 1}λ where
                                  (
                        ′             f (m)        if m ∈ Dom(pi )
                       f (m) :=
                                      γi,j         if m = mj .

                                              19
Note that in this case, we have
                                                            ′
                            {m1 , . . . , mℓ } = Q(Evalf (pp, x; ri )).

If then, as in the last few lines of Algorithm 3, the function hu is sampled as
                                  (
                                    ϕi,j      if m = mj
                        hu (m) =
                                    f ′ (m)   otherwise,

then by inspection we have (f, hs ) = (hu , f ′ ). That is, what was f in the original
case is now hu , and what was hs is now f ′ .
      We now observe that if the pair (f, hs ) makes Equation (11) occur in the
sequentiality game, then in the uniqueness game (and assuming all other random
coins, in particular ri , rE , are the same in the two experiments), with respect to
f ′ , we have:
         ′                               ′
 Verifyf (pp, x, yi′′ , πi′′ ) = Verifyf (pp, x, y ′′ , π ′′ ) = 1   ∧   yi′′ = y ̸= yi′ = y ′′ , (12)
                                              ′
where we denoted (y ′′ , π ′′ ) := Evalf (pp, x; ri ). Stated differently, Equation (12)
shows that the pair (yi′′ , πi′′ ) breaks uniqueness with respect to the oracle f ′ . It
remains to show that Equation (12) holds. This follows from observing that

      hu = f       ⇒     (yi′′ , πi′′ ) := Evalhu (pp, x; rE ) = Evalf (pp, x; rE ) =: (y, π)
                                                                     ′
     hs = f ′      ⇒     (yi′ , πi′ ) := Evalhs (pp, x; ri ) = Evalf (pp, x; ri )

and that yi′ = y ′′ , which holds since by definition of VDFs, the first output of
      ′
Evalf is deterministically computed, and hence does not depend on ri resp. rE .
    The crucial point now is that it is equally likely that the pair (f, hs ) gets
sampled in the sequentiality game, as it is that the pair (f ′ , hu ) gets sampled
in the uniqueness game: (f, hs ) occurs if the challenger samples values ϕi,j and
As samples values γi,j , whereas (f ′ , hu ) occurs if Au samples values ϕi,j and the
challenger samples values γi,j , where both γi,j and ϕi,j are independently and
uniformly distributed over {0, 1}λ . In other words, the pairs of random variables
(f, hs ) and (hu , f ′ ) are equally distributed. Furthermore, if Equation (10) occurs
for As for (f, hs ) then Au breaks uniqueness for (hu , f ′ ). Hence, this implies
that Afu breaks uniqueness with at least the same probability as Equation (10)
happens in the sequentiality game. It is important to stress that Au does not
break uniqueness in case Equation (10) holds, but rather it breaks uniqueness
with (at least) the same probability as that of Equation (10) holding. In other
words, the probability of Au winning the uniqueness game is, up to an additive
factor qv /ton, the same as that of As failing in the sequentiality game.
    If Π only satisfies α-completeness, Equation (11) only holds with probability
1 − α. This causes a loss of α in the success rate of the uniqueness breaker.
We obtain the following result, which is essentially the statement of [GRY25,
Theorem 5.1]. Their constructions of the adversaries differ slightly, resulting in
slightly different bounds.

                                                  20
Theorem 3 (Essentially [GRY25, Theorem 5.1]). Let Π be a VDF in the
ROM with public-coin setup and α-completeness, having running time param-
eters qs , qe and qv , as in Definition 1. Let Ppub , As and Au be the algorithms
constructed in Algorithms 1 to 3, where the parameter ton can be chosen as any
positive natural number.
    If (Ppub , As ) breaks sequentiality of Π with probability εs ,10 then (Ppub , Au )
breaks uniqueness of Π with probability at least 1−εs −qv /ton −α. In other words,
Π either fails to satisfy sequentiality or computational uniqueness. Furthermore,
the complexity of these algorithms is as follows.

 – As runs in at most ton rounds and makes at most qe queries in each round.
 – Au makes at most qe · (ton + 1) queries in total.
 – Ppub makes at most qs queries.


5    Our Results: Impossibility for Private-Coin Setup

In this section, we extend the known impossibility result for computationally
unique VDFs with public-coin setup to setup algorithms that are both private-
coin and expensive. The general outline of the argument follows that of Sec-
tion 4.2: we construct a sequentiality breaker and a uniqueness breaker such that
either the sequentiality or the uniqueness breaker succeeds with a non-negligible
probability.
    However, unlike the result and analysis of Section 4, the setup algorithm is
private-coin, i.e., neither the sequentiality nor the uniqueness breaker gets to
see the random coins used by the setup algorithm to sample the VDF’s public
parameters. The challenge of extending the impossibility result of VDFs with
public-coin to private-coin setup is to learn, by some way or another, most of
the queries made by the private-coin setup. We discuss this matter in more
detail after we discuss the preprocessing algorithm and its effect on the success
probability of our adversaries.
    Formally, assume towards contradiction that (Setup, Eval, Verify) is a VDF
in the ROM. We construct a sequentiality breaker (Ppriv , As ) and a uniqueness
breaker11 (Ppriv , Au ) such that at least one of them succeeds with a non-negligible
probability. The algorithms As , Au , and Ppriv are formally depicted in Algorithms
2, 3, and 4, respectively.
    As alluded to before, the challenge of extending the impossibility of VDFs
with public-coin setup from Section 4 to those with private-coin setup, regardless
of whether the setup is expensive or not, comes from the need to not only con-
sider the overlap of the set of new queries made of the sequentiality/uniqueness
10
   Here, probabilities are always taken over the choice of f ← Fλ , the randomness used
   in the generation of the public parameters pp, the random choice of the input x and
   all of the randomness used during the execution of the adversaries.
11
   Syntactically, the uniqueness breaker in the uniqueness game (cf. Definition 1) is a
   single-stage adversary with no assigned meaning to preprocessing. We view (Ppriv , Au )
   as the uniqueness adversary that first runs Ppriv and then Au (using output of Ppriv ).


                                           21
breaking algorithms with the set of verification queries, but also to consider
the overlap of such queries with the (unknown) set of setup queries. This in
particular requires a more sophisticated preprocessing algorithm than the one
considered in Section 4. We formally describe preprocessing in Ppriv , Algorithm
4, and discuss it later after Theorem 4.
    Looking ahead, the success probability of our uniqueness breaker will depend
on two events: the event that the sequentiality breaker fails and a specific event
E that may or may not happen during the execution of the sequentiality breaker.
    We define the event E as the conjunction of two events E1 and E2 , where
E1 considers the overlap of new queries made during the i-th iteration of the
sequentiality breaker with the queries made by the verification algorithm and
E2 considers such overlap with the queries made by the private-coin setup. E is
formally given in Definition 2.
Definition 2 (Event E). Interpreting the variables in the execution of the se-
quentiality game in Figure 1 with the adversary A = (Ppriv , As ) (cf. Algorithms 2
and 4) as random variables, let E := E1 ∧E2 where events E1 and E2 are defined
as follows.
 – E1 is the event that
               (Q(Evalgi (pp, x; ri )) \ Dom(pi )) ∩ Q(Verifyf (pp, x, y, π)) = ∅.
 – E2 is the event that
                (Q(Evalgi (pp, x; ri )) \ Dom(pi )) ∩ Q(Setupf (λ, T ; rS )) = ∅.
    Note that if the sequentiality breaker (Ppriv , As ) fails, i.e., it outputs yi′ ̸= y,
but the event E happens, then (Ppriv , As ) breaks uniqueness w.r.t. (the wrong)
oracle hs defined in Equation (8) in Section 4.12 Using an argument about the
distributions occurring in the executions of the sequentiality and uniqueness
games with the adversaries (Ppriv , As ) and (Ppriv , Au ), respectively, we can bound
the success probability of (Ppriv , Au ) in terms of the probabilities that yi′ = y (i.e.
(Ppriv , As ) wins) and event E occurs. We formalize this in the following theorem
and refer to Section 5.1 for its proof.
Theorem 4. Let Π := (Setup, Eval, Verify) be an α-complete VDF in the ROM,
As , Au and Ppriv be as in Algorithms 2, 3, and 4, respectively, and fix preprocess-
ing and running time parameters tpre and ton, respectively. If εs is the probabil-
ity that the tuple (Ppriv , As ) breaks sequentiality of Π, then the tuple (Ppriv , Au )
breaks uniqueness of Π with probability Pr[E] − εs − α, where E is defined in
Definition 2.
    We now show how to bound Pr[E], resulting in the impossibility result for
VDFs in the ROM given as Corollary 1. As E = E1 ∧ E2 , we have Pr[E] ≥ 1
− Pr[E1 ] − Pr[E2 ]. Now we can bound Pr[E1 ] by a simple counting argument
(see the case of perfect uniqueness above), i.e. Pr[E1 ] ≤ qv /ton.
12
     Note that in the case of public-coin setup (as considered in Section 4), E2 is always
     true. This is why we only considered event E1 in that case.


                                             22
Lemma 1 (Event E1 ). With event E1 as in Definition 2, ton as in Theorem
4 and qv as in Definition 1, we have

                                  Pr[E1 ] ≤ qv /ton .

Proof. (of Lemma 1) This follows the same line of arguments as we have seen in
Section 4.1. Recall that the oracles gj simulated by Afs are consistent with the
partial functions pj , which get updated in each iteration. During this process,
every query is made to f at most once. Furthermore, the number i of iterations
is sampled uniformly at random from [ton]. Since there are qv queries made in
Verifyf (pp, x, y, π), there can be at most qv of the ton iterations in which such
a query is made. Hence, we obtain that the new queries made in round i hit a
query in Q(Verifyf (pp, x, y, π)) with probability at most qv /ton.

    Now, how do we bound Pr[E2 ]? Here the preprocessing algorithm Ppriv de-
picted in Algorithm 4 comes into play. Informally, Ppriv simulates a number of
executions of As on random inputs. The purpose of this simulation is to find
most queries made by Setupf (λ, T ; rS ), with secret random coins rS , that are
relevant for the execution of our adversaries. The more simulated executions of
As that Ppriv makes, the higher the chance it finds all such relevant queries, and
hence the lower the chance that E2 holds.
    To make this precise, we first define an event D, which implies E2 and cap-
tures the event of Ppriv finding all queries made by setup that are relevant to our
adversaries.

Definition 3 (Event D). Interpreting the variables in the execution of the se-
quentiality game in Figure 1 with the adversary A = (Ppriv , As ) (cf. Algorithms 2
and 4) as random variables, let D be the event that during the i-th execution of As
in Line 4 of Algorithm 4, no new query to f at a value m ∈ Q(Setupf (λ, T ; rS ))
is made.
    Note that D implies E2 , as any new query made by Evalgi (pp, x; ri ), as part
of As , is later also made to f . We can bound Pr[D] with an argument very similar
to the one used to bound Pr[E1 ] in Lemma 1.

Lemma 2 (Event D). With event D as in Definition 3, tpre , ton as in Theorem
4 and qs as in Definition 1, we have

                                  Pr[D] ≤ qs /tpre .
                                      f
Proof. Consider an execution of Ppriv    (pp, tpre , ton) with i set to tpre in Line 2.
No query is made to f twice, as each query made to f is immediately stored in
ppre . Thereby, each m ∈ Q(Setupf (λ, T ; rS )) can occur in at most one of the i
iterations. In particular, in at most qs of the tpre iterations of Line 4 of Algorithm
4 a new query to f at a value m ∈ Q(Setupf (λ, T ; rS )) is made. Thereby, since
i ← [tpre ] is sampled uniformly at random, the probability of D occurring is at
most qs /tpre . The claim follows.


                                          23
                                         f
Algorithm 4 The preprocessing algorithm Ppriv for private-coin setup.
    Input Public parameters pp
    Hard-Coded: Running time parameters tpre , ton
                                                ∗           λ
    Output A partial function ppre : {0, 1} 99K {0, 1}
 1: Initialize ppre as the empty partial function with Dom(ppre ) = ∅
 2: Sample i ← {1, . . . , tpre }
 3: for j = 1, . . . , i do
 4:    Run Afs (pp, xpre , ppre ) from Algorithm 2 for a uniformly random xpre ← X
 5:   Set ppre (m) = f (m) for each query m ∈     / Dom(ppre ) made by Afs to f
 6: end for
 7: Return ppre



Corollary 1 (VDFs cannot exist in the ROM). Let Π, As , Au , Ppriv ,
tpre , ton be as in Theorem 4, and qs , qv as in Definition 1. If (Ppriv , As ) breaks
sequentiality of Π with probability13 εs , then (Ppriv , Au ) breaks uniqueness of Π
with probability at least 1 − εs − qv /ton − qs /tpre − α. That is, Π either fails
to satisfy sequentiality or computational uniqueness. Furthermore, complexity of
these algorithms is as follows.
 – As runs in at most ton rounds and makes at most qe queries in each round.
 – Au makes at most qe (ton + 1) queries in total.
 – Ppriv runs in at most tpre · ton rounds and makes at most qe queries in each
   round.
For example, we can fix tpre = 6qs , ton = 6qv . (Recall that by Definition 1,
qe ∈ poly(T, λ), qv ∈ poly(log(T ), λ) and setup is allowed to be expensive, i.e.,
qs ∈ poly(T, λ), otherwise it is efficient, i.e., qs ∈ poly(log(T ), λ).) It follows that
at least one of the following holds:
 – (Ppriv , As ) breaks sequentiality with probability at least 1/3 − α/2. Note that
   if setup is efficient, i.e., qs ∈ poly(log(T ), λ), then so is the preprocessing,
   i.e., Ppriv runs in poly(log(T ), λ) rounds with a total of poly(T, λ) queries.
   Regardless of the (in)efficiency of setup, the online adversary is efficient,
   i.e., As runs in poly(log(T ), λ) rounds with a total of poly(T, λ) queries.
   qs ∈ poly(log(T ), λ), then so is (tpre ) · ton.
 – (Ppriv , Au ) breaks uniqueness with probability at least 1/3 − α/2. Note that in
   general, (Ppriv , Au ) runs in a total of poly(T, λ) rounds and queries.
Proof. (of Corollary 1) As E = E1 ∧ E2 , we have Pr[E] ≥ 1 − Pr[E1 ] − Pr[E2 ].
Given that event D implies E2 , Lemmas 1 and 2 imply Pr[E] ≥ 1 − qv /ton −
qs /tpre . Theorem 4 implies that (Ppriv , Au ) breaks uniqueness with probability
                   Pr[E] − εs − α ≥ 1 − εs − qv /ton − qs /tpre − α.
13
     The probability is taken over the choice of f ← F, the randomness used in the
     generation of the public paramters pp, the random choice of the input x and all of
     the randomness used while running the adversaries.


                                           24
Plugging in tpre = 6qs , ton = 6qv leads to the final claim.


5.1   The Success Rate of the Computational Uniqueness Breaker

The aim of this section is to prove Theorem 4. More precisely, we prove that,
denoting the success rate of the uniqueness breaker (Ppriv , Au )—as depicted in
Algorithms 3 and 4—by εu , and the success rate of the sequentiality breaker
(Ppriv , As )—as depicted in Algorithms 3 and 4—by εs , the bound

                               εs + εu ≥ 1 − Pr[E] − α

holds. Here, E is the event defined in Definition 2, and α is the completeness
parameter. To this aim, analogous to event E for the sequentiality game (Def-
inition 2), we introduce the event E ′ = E1′ ∧ E2′ for the uniqueness game. The
events E1′ and E2′ are very similar to E1 and E2 from Definition 2, the parts
where they differ from their respective counterparts are color-coded below.

Definition 4 (Event E ′ ). Interpreting the variables in the execution of the se-
quentiality game in Figure 2 with the adversary A = (Ppriv , Au ) (cf. Algorithms 3
and 4) as random variables, let E ′ := E1′ ∧E2′ where events E1′ and E2′ are defined
as follows.

 – E1′ is the event that
                                           
            Q(Evalf (pp, x; ri )) \ Dom(pi ) ∩ Q(Verifyhu (pp, x, yi′′ , πi′′ )) = ∅.


 – E2′ is the event that
                                              
               Q(Evalf (pp, x; ri ) \ Dom(pi )) ∩ Q(Setupf (λ, T ; rS )) = ∅.

Lemma 3. Let Π := (Setup, Eval, Verify) be an α-complete VDF in the ROM,
Au and Ppriv be as in Algorithms 3 and 4, respectively, and fix preprocessing and
running time parameters tpre and ton, respectively. Then the tuple (Ppriv , Au )
breaks uniqueness of Π with probability Pr[(yi′′ ̸= y) ∧ E ′ ] − α, where E ′ is
defined in Definition 4.

Proof of Lemma 3. We first show that
                   h                                      i
                Pr Verifyf (pp, x, yi′′ , πi′′ ) = 1 | E ′ ≥ 1 − α.                     (13)

To this end, note that f and hu only differ at values m ∈ (Q(Evalf (pp, x; ri )) \
Dom(pi )). If E ′ occurs, then in particular E2′ occurs, implying that for every
m ∈ Q(Setupf (λ, T ; rS )), we have hu (m) = f (m). Hence,

                     pp := Setupf (λ, T ; rS ) = Setuphu (λ, T ; rS ).


                                            25
Since (yi′′ , πi′′ ) := Evalhu (pp, x; rE ) and Π satisfies α-completeness, we find that
                           h                                       i
                        Pr Verifyhu (pp, x, yi′′ , πi′′ ) = 1 | E2′ ≥ 1 − α.

Now, if Verifyhu (pp, x, yi′′ , πi′′ ) = 1 and E1′ occurs, then for all queries m made
by Verifyhu (pp, x, yi′′ , πi′′ ), we have hu (m) = f (m), and we therefore obtain
Verifyf (pp, x, yi′′ , πi′′ ) = 1. This implies Equation (13). If additionally y ̸= yi′′
holds, then (Ppriv , Au ) breaks uniqueness of Π, and the claim follows.
    For the proof of Theorem 4, it remains to prove the inequality

                             Pr[(yi′′ ̸= y) ∧ E ′ ] ≥ Pr[E] − εs .                          (14)

    We do so by proving the equality

                         Pr[(yi′′ ̸= y) ∧ E ′ ] = Pr[(yi′ ̸= y) ∧ E],                       (15)

which gives

   Pr[(yi′′ ̸= y) ∧ E ′ ] = Pr[(yi′ ̸= y) ∧ E] = Pr[E] − Pr[(yi′ = y) ∧ E]
                                                    ≥ Pr[E] − Pr[yi′ = y] = Pr[E] − εs .

    We prove Equation (15) by carefully analyzing the randomness used during
the execution of both the sequentiality game with (Ppriv , As ) and the compu-
tational uniqueness game with (Ppriv , Au ). We analyze the random coins that
determine whether event yi′ = y and event E, resp. yi′′ ̸= y and E ′ occur.
    To this end, we define the notion of random tapes. For us, a random tape is
a triple t = (t1 , t2 , t3 ), where
 1. t1 ∈ {1, . . . , ton} determines the value of i.
 2. t2 = (rS , rP , rx , r1 , . . . , ri , rE ) denotes the random coins sampled during an
    execution of the sequentiality game with the adversary (Ppriv , As ) (see Fig-
    ure 1), or the uniqueness game with the adversary (Ppriv , Au ) (see Figure 2).
    That means, rS is used to run Setup, rP to run Ppriv , rx to sample x ← X.
    Randomness rj for j ∈ [i] and rE is used, depending on whether the sequen-
    tiality or the uniqueness game is considered, for the i runs of Eval by As
    and the run of Eval by the challenger, or for the (i + 1) respective Eval calls
    within Au .
 3. t3 determines the values of the random functions f and (gj )1≤j≤i , both of
    which we interpret as lazily determined. We formally accomplish this by
    writing t3 = (Φ, Γ ), where Φ = (ϕS , ϕP , ϕ1 , . . . , ϕi , ϕE ) and Γ = (γ1 , . . . , γi ),
    where furthermore ϕS := (ϕS,1 , . . . , ϕS,qs ) ∈ {0, 1}λ×qs denotes the tape used
    to sample the random values of f at the values queried by Setupf (λ, T ; rS ).
                                                                     ∗
    Here, when f is queried at a first value m1 ∈ {0, 1} , we have f (m1 ) = ϕS,1 ,
    etc. Similarly, ϕP denotes the tape used to sample the random images of
                                                          f
    values queried during the execution of Ppriv             (pp; rP ), and γj and ϕj denote,
                                           λ×qe
    for 1 ≤ j ≤ i, elements in {0, 1}             , determining the random image values


                                               26
      of gj and f on input values queried in round j, in each of the algorithms.
                                                     λ×q
      Moreover, γi and ϕi denote elements in {0, 1} e , determining the random
      image values of gi and f on input values queried in the i-th round of As , and
      of hu and f in the i-th round of Au .14 Finally, ϕE ∈ {0, 1}λ×qe denotes the
      image values of f for the sequentiality game, resp. for hu for the uniqueness
      game, on new queries coming up in the respective executions of Eval with
      random coins rE , which is done by the challenger in case of the sequentiality
      game, and by Au in case of the uniqueness game.

     We denote the set of all possible tapes by Tapes. This is a finite set, and
it is naturally equipped with a (uniform) probability measure. Any tape t =
(t1 , t2 , t3 ) ∈ Tapes provides enough random coins to run all of the sequentiality
game, and enough random coins to completely run Au in the uniqueness game
and decide whether events yi′ = y and E, or yi′′ = y and E ′ , occur, respectively.
We write t =⇒ (yi′ ̸= y) ∧ E if (yi′ ̸= y) ∧ E occurs when the sequentiality
game uses the randomness specified in t. Similarly, we write t =⇒ (yi′′ ̸=
y) ∧ E ′ if (yi′′ ̸= y) ∧ E ′ occurs when the computational uniqueness game uses
the randomness specified in t.
     Given a tape t = (t1 , t2 , t3 ), we denote by t′ the tape (t′1 , t′2 , t′3 ) where
t1 = t1 , t′2 = t2 and t′3 is constructed as follows. Recall that we write t3 =
 ′

(Φ, Γ ) for Φ = (ϕS , ϕP , ϕ1 , . . . , ϕi , ϕE ) and Γ = (γ1 , . . . , γi ). Now, we define
t′3 as the tape obtained by swapping ϕi and γi , i.e., t′3 = (Φ′ , Γ ′ ) where Φ′ =
(ϕS , ϕP , ϕ1 , . . . , ϕi−1 , γi , ϕE ) and Γ ′ = (γ, . . . , γi−1 , ϕi ). Clearly, we have Pr[{t}] =
Pr[{t′ }] for tape t ∈ Tapes.

Lemma 4. For any t ∈ Tapes,

                 (t =⇒ (yi′ ̸= y) ∧ E) ⇐⇒ (t′ =⇒ (yi′′ ̸= y) ∧ E ′ ) .

In particular, we have Pr[(yi′ ̸= y) ∧ E] = Pr[(yi′′ ̸= y) ∧ E ′ ].

Proof. We denote by git the function gi as determined by t. We use the same
notation for other random variables, if the passage from t to t′ makes a difference.
    If we use tape t to run the sequentiality game, then the event E2 reads
         t                                  t
Q(Evalgi (pp, x; ri ) \ Dom(pi )) ∩ Q(Setupf (λ, T ; rS )) = ∅. This means that none
                                                            t
of the f t -images of the new queries made to git by Evalgi (pp, x; ri ) was set already
in the setup phase, hence, in particular, at the beginning of the i-th iteration, f t
                                                                        ′
is not yet determined on those queries. Now, if we denote by f t the function f
as determined when using t′ to run the computational uniqueness game, hence
                         ′                                     t
                      f t (m) = git (m) for m ∈ Q(Evalgi (pp, x; ri )).                        (16)
14
     Note that the set of queries made in round i depends on γi in the sequentiality game,
     whereas it depends on ϕi in the soundness game. This will be crucial in the proof of
     Lemma 4.


                                                27
                                        t                                                 t′
This in particular implies Q(Evalgi (pp, x; ri )) \ Dom(pi ) = Q(Evalf (pp, x; ri )) \
Dom(pi ), which immediately implies that t′ makes E2′ occur. The reverse direc-
tion can be shown exactly the same way, hence we obtain

                              (t =⇒ E2 ) ⇐⇒ (t′ =⇒ E2′ ) .

   Again we use t to run the sequentiality game and t′ to run the computational
uniqueness game, and now assume t =⇒ ((yi′ ̸= y) ∧ E). In particular, we
have t =⇒ E2 , and by Equation 16 the same sequence of queries is made in
     t                             t′
Evalgi (pp, x; ri ) and in Evalf (pp, x; ri ). Hence, exactly the same random coins
                                                                               ′
that are used to sample f t in the sequentiality game are used to sample htu in
the computational uniqueness game, and vice versa. More concretely, we have
         ′                 ′                      t
f t = htu and git (m) = f t (m) for m ∈ Q(Evalgi (pp, x; ri )). This implies
                               t                     t′                           ′        ′
          (y t , π t ) = Evalf (pp, x; rE ) = Evalh (pp, x; rE ) = (y ′′t , π ′′t ),
                               t                    t′                    ′           ′
         (yi′t , πi′t ) = Evalgi (pp, x; ri ) = Evalf (pp, x; ri ) = (y t , π̃ t ), and
                          t                               t′         ′        ′
                 Verifyf (pp, x, y t , π t ) = Verifyh (pp, x, y ′′t , π ′′t ).

Here, equality between algorithms not only means that their outputs are equal,
but also that they pass the exact same states during execution, and in particular
make the same queries to their respective oracles. As t =⇒ ((yi′ ̸= y) ∧ E), these
equalities immediately imply t′ =⇒ ((yi′′ ̸= y) ∧ E ′ ). The opposite implication
can be proven similarly.

   This concludes the proof of Theorem 4.


Acknowledgments
Hamza Abusalah is supported by the PICOCRYPT project that has received
funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Unions
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant agreement No. 101001283),
partially supported by ESPADA (PID2022-142290OB-I00) and CEX2024-001471-
M funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033/. Erkan Tairi is supported in
part by the France 2030 ANR-22-PECY-003 SecureCompute Project, by the
Austrian Science Fund (FWF) Project J4879-N, by the Bakar Funds and Peder
Sather Funds.




                                              28
References

ABBK16. Frederik Armknecht, Ludovic Barman, Jens-Matthias Bohli, and Ghas-
         san O. Karame. Mirror: Enabling proofs of data replication and retriev-
         ability in the cloud. In Thorsten Holz and Stefan Savage, editors, USENIX
         Security 2016, pages 1051–1068. USENIX Association, August 2016.
Abu25.   Hamza Abusalah. On graphs of incremental proofs of sequential work. In
         Tibor Jager and Jiaxin Pan, editors, PKC 2025, Part V, volume 15678 of
         LNCS, pages 203–233. Springer, Cham, May 2025.
AC23.    Hamza Abusalah and Valerio Cini. An incremental PoSW for general
         weight distributions. In Carmit Hazay and Martijn Stam, editors, EURO-
         CRYPT 2023, Part II, volume 14005 of LNCS, pages 282–311. Springer,
         Cham, April 2023.
AFGK22. Hamza Abusalah, Georg Fuchsbauer, Peter Gazi, and Karen Klein.
         SNACKs: Leveraging proofs of sequential work for blockchain light clients.
         In Shweta Agrawal and Dongdai Lin, editors, ASIACRYPT 2022, Part I,
         volume 13791 of LNCS, pages 806–836. Springer, Cham, December 2022.
AKK+ 19. Hamza Abusalah, Chethan Kamath, Karen Klein, Krzysztof Pietrzak, and
         Michael Walter. Reversible proofs of sequential work. In Yuval Ishai and
         Vincent Rijmen, editors, EUROCRYPT 2019, Part II, volume 11477 of
         LNCS, pages 277–291. Springer, Cham, May 2019.
ARS24.   Damiano Abram, Lawrence Roy, and Mark Simkin. Time-based cryptog-
         raphy from weaker assumptions: Randomness beacons, delay functions and
         more. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2024/769, 2024.
AS15.    Joël Alwen and Vladimir Serbinenko. High parallel complexity graphs
         and memory-hard functions. In Rocco A. Servedio and Ronitt Rubinfeld,
         editors, 47th ACM STOC, pages 595–603. ACM Press, June 2015.
BBBF18. Dan Boneh, Joseph Bonneau, Benedikt Bünz, and Ben Fisch. Verifiable
         delay functions. In Hovav Shacham and Alexandra Boldyreva, editors,
         CRYPTO 2018, Part I, volume 10991 of LNCS, pages 757–788. Springer,
         Cham, August 2018.
BCH+ 22. Nir Bitansky, Arka Rai Choudhuri, Justin Holmgren, Chethan Kamath,
         Alex Lombardi, Omer Paneth, and Ron D. Rothblum. PPAD is as hard as
         LWE and iterated squaring. In Eike Kiltz and Vinod Vaikuntanathan, edi-
         tors, TCC 2022, Part II, volume 13748 of LNCS, pages 593–622. Springer,
         Cham, November 2022.
BHR+ 21. Alexander R. Block, Justin Holmgren, Alon Rosen, Ron D. Rothblum,
         and Pratik Soni. Time- and space-efficient arguments from groups of un-
         known order. In Tal Malkin and Chris Peikert, editors, CRYPTO 2021,
         Part IV, volume 12828 of LNCS, pages 123–152, Virtual Event, August
         2021. Springer, Cham.
BR93.    Mihir Bellare and Phillip Rogaway. Random oracles are practical: A
         paradigm for designing efficient protocols. In Dorothy E. Denning, Ray-
         mond Pyle, Ravi Ganesan, Ravi S. Sandhu, and Victoria Ashby, editors,
         ACM CCS 93, pages 62–73. ACM Press, November 1993.
CLM23.   Valerio Cini, Russell W. F. Lai, and Giulio Malavolta. Lattice-based suc-
         cinct arguments from vanishing polynomials - (extended abstract). In He-
         lena Handschuh and Anna Lysyanskaya, editors, CRYPTO 2023, Part II,
         volume 14082 of LNCS, pages 72–105. Springer, Cham, August 2023.


                                        29
CP18.    Bram Cohen and Krzysztof Pietrzak.            Simple proofs of sequential
         work. In Jesper Buus Nielsen and Vincent Rijmen, editors, EURO-
         CRYPT 2018, Part II, volume 10821 of LNCS, pages 451–467. Springer,
         Cham, April / May 2018.
CP19.    Bram Cohen and Krzysztof Pietrzak. The chia network blockchain, 2019.
         Last accessed on August 28, 2025 at https://www.chia.net/wp-content/
         uploads/2022/07/ChiaGreenPaper.pdf.
CSRT22. Jorge Chávez-Saab, Francisco Rodrı́guez-Henrı́quez, and Mehdi Tibouchi.
         Verifiable isogeny walks: Towards an isogeny-based postquantum VDF. In
         Riham AlTawy and Andreas Hülsing, editors, SAC 2021, volume 13203 of
         LNCS, pages 441–460. Springer, Cham, September / October 2022.
DGMV20. Nico Döttling, Sanjam Garg, Giulio Malavolta, and Prashant Nalini Va-
         sudevan. Tight verifiable delay functions. In Clemente Galdi and Vladimir
         Kolesnikov, editors, SCN 20, volume 12238 of LNCS, pages 65–84. Springer,
         Cham, September 2020.
DLM19.   Nico Döttling, Russell W. F. Lai, and Giulio Malavolta. Incremental proofs
         of sequential work. In Yuval Ishai and Vincent Rijmen, editors, EURO-
         CRYPT 2019, Part II, volume 11477 of LNCS, pages 292–323. Springer,
         Cham, May 2019.
DMPS19. Luca De Feo, Simon Masson, Christophe Petit, and Antonio Sanso. Verifi-
         able delay functions from supersingular isogenies and pairings. In Steven D.
         Galbraith and Shiho Moriai, editors, ASIACRYPT 2019, Part I, volume
         11921 of LNCS, pages 248–277. Springer, Cham, December 2019.
EFKP20a. Naomi Ephraim, Cody Freitag, Ilan Komargodski, and Rafael Pass. Con-
         tinuous verifiable delay functions. In Anne Canteaut and Yuval Ishai, edi-
         tors, EUROCRYPT 2020, Part III, volume 12107 of LNCS, pages 125–154.
         Springer, Cham, May 2020.
EFKP20b. Naomi Ephraim, Cody Freitag, Ilan Komargodski, and Rafael Pass.
         SPARKs: Succinct parallelizable arguments of knowledge. In Anne Can-
         teaut and Yuval Ishai, editors, EUROCRYPT 2020, Part I, volume 12105
         of LNCS, pages 707–737. Springer, Cham, May 2020.
GRY25.   Ziyi Guan, Artur Riazanov, and Weiqiang Yuan. Breaking verifiable delay
         functions in the random oracle model. In Yael Tauman Kalai and Seny F.
         Kamara, editors, CRYPTO 2025, Part VII, volume 16006 of LNCS, pages
         161–191. Springer, Cham, August 2025.
GS98.    David M. Goldschlag and Stuart G. Stubblebine. Publicly verifiable lotter-
         ies: Applications of delaying functions. In Rafael Hirschfeld, editor, FC’98,
         volume 1465 of LNCS, pages 214–226. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, Febru-
         ary 1998.
HHK+ 22. Charlotte Hoffmann, Pavel Hubácek, Chethan Kamath, Karen Klein, and
         Krzysztof Pietrzak. Practical statistically-sound proofs of exponentia-
         tion in any group. In Yevgeniy Dodis and Thomas Shrimpton, editors,
         CRYPTO 2022, Part II, volume 13508 of LNCS, pages 370–399. Springer,
         Cham, August 2022.
HHKK23. Charlotte Hoffmann, Pavel Hubácek, Chethan Kamath, and Tomás Krnák.
         (Verifiable) delay functions from lucas sequences. In Guy N. Rothblum and
         Hoeteck Wee, editors, TCC 2023, Part IV, volume 14372 of LNCS, pages
         336–362. Springer, Cham, November / December 2023.
IR89.    Russell Impagliazzo and Steven Rudich. Limits on the provable conse-
         quences of one-way permutations. In 21st ACM STOC, pages 44–61. ACM
         Press, May 1989.


                                         30
JMRR21.    Samuel Jaques, Hart Montgomery, Razvan Rosie, and Arnab Roy. Time-
           release cryptography from minimal circuit assumptions. In Avishek Ad-
           hikari, Ralf Küsters, and Bart Preneel, editors, INDOCRYPT 2021, volume
           13143 of LNCS, pages 584–606. Springer, Cham, December 2021.
LM23.      Russell W. F. Lai and Giulio Malavolta. Lattice-based timed cryptogra-
           phy. In Helena Handschuh and Anna Lysyanskaya, editors, CRYPTO 2023,
           Part V, volume 14085 of LNCS, pages 782–804. Springer, Cham, August
           2023.
LSS20.     Esteban Landerreche, Marc Stevens, and Christian Schaffner. Non-
           interactive cryptographic timestamping based on verifiable delay functions.
           In Joseph Bonneau and Nadia Heninger, editors, FC 2020, volume 12059
           of LNCS, pages 541–558. Springer, Cham, February 2020.
LV20.      Alex Lombardi and Vinod Vaikuntanathan. Fiat-shamir for repeated squar-
           ing with applications to PPAD-hardness and VDFs. In Daniele Micciancio
           and Thomas Ristenpart, editors, CRYPTO 2020, Part III, volume 12172
           of LNCS, pages 632–651. Springer, Cham, August 2020.
LW15.      Arjen K. Lenstra and Benjamin Wesolowski. A random zoo: sloth, unicorn,
           and trx. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2015/366, 2015.
MMV11.     Mohammad Mahmoody, Tal Moran, and Salil P. Vadhan. Time-lock
           puzzles in the random oracle model.            In Phillip Rogaway, editor,
           CRYPTO 2011, volume 6841 of LNCS, pages 39–50. Springer, Berlin, Hei-
           delberg, August 2011.
MMV13.     Mohammad Mahmoody, Tal Moran, and Salil P. Vadhan. Publicly verifi-
           able proofs of sequential work. In Robert D. Kleinberg, editor, ITCS 2013,
           pages 373–388. ACM, January 2013.
MSW20.     Mohammad Mahmoody, Caleb Smith, and David J. Wu. Can verifiable
           delay functions be based on random oracles? In Artur Czumaj, Anuj Dawar,
           and Emanuela Merelli, editors, ICALP 2020, volume 168 of LIPIcs, pages
           83:1–83:17. Schloss Dagstuhl, July 2020.
OKC+ 25.   Michal Osadnik, Darya Kaviani, Valerio Cini, Russell W. F. Lai, and
           Giulio Malavolta. Papercraft: Lattice-based verifiable delay function im-
           plemented. In Marina Blanton, William Enck, and Cristina Nita-Rotaru,
           editors, 2025 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, pages 1603–1621.
           IEEE Computer Society Press, May 2025.
Pie19.     Krzysztof Pietrzak. Simple verifiable delay functions. In Avrim Blum,
           editor, ITCS 2019, volume 124, pages 60:1–60:15. LIPIcs, January 2019.
RSS20.     Lior Rotem, Gil Segev, and Ido Shahaf. Generic-group delay functions re-
           quire hidden-order groups. In Anne Canteaut and Yuval Ishai, editors,
           EUROCRYPT 2020, Part III, volume 12107 of LNCS, pages 155–180.
           Springer, Cham, May 2020.
RSW96.     R. L. Rivest, A. Shamir, and D. A. Wagner. Time-lock puzzles and timed-
           release crypto. Technical report, USA, 1996.
Rud88.     Steven Rudich. Limits on the provable consequences of one-way functions.
           Technical report, USA, 1988.
Sta20.     StarkWare. Veedo, 2020. Last accessed on August 28, 2025 at https:
           //medium.com/starkware/presenting-veedo-e4bbff77c7ae.
Wes19.     Benjamin Wesolowski. Efficient verifiable delay functions. In Yuval Ishai
           and Vincent Rijmen, editors, EUROCRYPT 2019, Part III, volume 11478
           of LNCS, pages 379–407. Springer, Cham, May 2019.



                                         31
