                                            Randomised enumeration of small witnesses using a
                                                           decision oracle
                                                                                  Kitty Meeks∗
                                                               School of Computing Science, University of Glasgow
                                                                           kitty.meeks@glasgow.ac.uk

                                                                                 January 2018
arXiv:1509.05572v4 [cs.DS] 4 Jan 2018




                                                                                     Abstract
                                                    Many combinatorial problems involve determining whether a universe of n ele-
                                                ments contains a witness consisting of k elements which have some specified prop-
                                                erty. In this paper we investigate the relationship between the decision and enu-
                                                meration versions of such problems: efficient methods are known for transforming
                                                a decision algorithm into a search procedure that finds a single witness, but even
                                                finding a second witness is not so straightforward in general. We show that, if the
                                                decision version of the problem can be solved in time f (k) · poly(n), there is a ran-
                                                domised algorithm which enumerates all witnesses in time ek+o(k) ·f (k)·poly(n)·N ,
                                                where N is the total number of witnesses. If the decision version of the problem
                                                is solved by a randomised algorithm which may return false negatives, then the
                                                same method allows us to output a list of witnesses in which any given witness will
                                                be included with high probability. The enumeration algorithm also gives rise to
                                                an efficient algorithm to count the total number of witnesses when this number is
                                                small.


                                        1       Introduction
                                        Many well-known combinatorial decision problems involve determining whether a uni-
                                        verse U of n elements contains a witness W consisting of exactly k elements which have
                                        some speciﬁed property; we refer to such problems as k-witness problems. Although the
                                        decision problems themselves are of interest, it is often not suﬃcient for applications to
                                        output simply “yes” or “no”: we need to find one or more witnesses. The issue of ﬁnding
                                        a single witness using an oracle for the decision problem has previously been investigated
                                        by Björklund, Kaski, and Kowalik [6], motivated by the fact that the fastest known pa-
                                        rameterised algorithms for a number of widely studied problems (such as graph motif [5]
                                        and k-path [4]) are non-constructive in nature. Moreover, for some problems (such as
                                        k-Clique or Independent Set [3] and k-Even Subgraph [17]) the only known FPT
                                            The author is supported by a Royal Society of Edinburgh Personal Research Fellowship, funded by
                                            ∗

                                        the Scottish Government.

                                                                                          1
decision algorithm relies on a Ramsey theoretic argument which says the answer must be
“yes” provided that the input graph avoids certain easily recognisable structures.
   Following the ﬁrst approach used in [6], we begin by assuming the existence of a de-
terministic inclusion oracle (a black-box decision procedure), as follows.

INC-ORA(X, U, k)
  Input: X ⊆ U and k ∈ N
  Output: 1 if some witness of size k in U is entirely contained in X; 0 otherwise.

Such an inclusion oracle can easily be obtained from an algorithm for the basic decision
problem in the case of self-contained k-witness problems, where we only have to examine
the elements of a k-element subset (and the relationships between them) to determine
whether they form a witness: we simply call the decision procedure on the substruc-
ture induced by X. Examples of k-witness problems that are self-contained in this sense
include those of determining whether a graph contains a k-vertex subgraph with some
property, such as the well-studied problems k-Path, k-Cycle and k-Clique; algorithms
to count the number of witnesses in problems of this form have been designed for ap-
plications ranging from the analysis of biological networks [23] to the design of network
security tools [16, 25, 26].
    Given access to an oracle of this kind, a naı̈ve approach easily ﬁnds a single witness
using Θ(n) calls to INC-ORA: we successively delete elements of the universe, following
each deletion with an oracle call, and if the oracle answers “no” we reinsert the last
deleted element and continue. Assuming we start with a yes-instance, this process will
terminate when only k elements remain, and these k elements must form a witness. In [6],
ideas from combinatorial group testing are used to make a substantial improvement on
this strategy for the extraction of a single witness: rather than deleting a single element
at a time, large subsets are discarded (if possible) at each stage. This gives an algorithm
                                               n
                                                 
that extracts a witness with only 2k log2 k + 2 oracle queries.
    However, neither of these approaches for ﬁnding a single witness can immediately be
extended to ﬁnd all witnesses, a problem which is of interest even if an eﬃcient decision
algorithm does output a single witness. Both approaches for ﬁnding a ﬁrst witness rely
on the fact that we can safely delete some subset of elements from our universe provided
we know that what is left still contains at least one witness; if we need to look for a
second witness, the knowledge that at least one witness will remain is no longer suﬃcient
to guarantee we can delete a given subset. Of course, for any k-witness problem we can
check all possible subsets of size k, and hence enumerate all witnesses, in time O(nk );
indeed, if every set of k vertices is in fact a witness then we will require this amount of
time simply to list them all. However, we can seek to do much better than this when the
number of witnesses is small by making use of a decision oracle.
    The enumeration problem becomes straightforward if we have an extension oracle,1
deﬁned as follows.

EXT-ORA(X,Y ,U,k)
  Input: X ⊆ U, Y ⊆ X, and k ∈ N
   1
     Such an oracle is sometimes called an interval oracle, as in the enumeration procedure described by
Björklund, Kaski, Kowalik and Lauri [7] which builds on earlier work by Lawler [21].


                                                   2
   Output: 1 if there exists a witness W with Y ⊆ W ⊆ X; 0 otherwise.

The existence of an eﬃcient procedure EXT-ORA(X,Y ,U,k) for a given self-contained
k-witness problem allows us to use standard backtracking techniques to devise an eﬃcient
enumeration algorithm. We explore a binary search tree of depth O(n), branching at level
i of the tree on whether the ith element of U belongs to the solution. Each node in the
search tree then corresponds to a speciﬁc pair (X, Y ) with Y ⊆ X ⊆ U; we can call EXT-
ORA(X,Y ,U,k) to determine whether any descendant of a given node corresponds to a
witness. Pruning the search tree in this way ensures that no more than O(n · N) oracle
calls are required, where N is the total number of witnesses.
    Note that, with only the inclusion oracle, we can determine whether there is a witness
that does not contain some element x (we simply call INC-ORA(U \ {x}, U, k)), but
we cannot determine whether there is a witness which does contain x. Moreover, as we
will show in Section 3, there are natural (self-contained) k-witness problems for which the
inclusion problem can be solved eﬃciently but there is no fpt-algorithm for the extension
decision problem unless FPT=W[1]. This motivates the development of enumeration
algorithms that do not rely on such an oracle.
    The main result of this paper is just such an algorithm; speciﬁcally, we prove the
following theorem.
Theorem 1.1. There is a randomised algorithm to enumerate all witnesses of size k
in a k-witness problem exactly once, whose expected number of calls to a deterministic
inclusion oracle is at most ek+o(k) log2 n · N, where N is the total number of witnesses. If
an oracle call can be executed in time g(k) · nO(1) for some computable function g, then
the expected total running time of the algorithm is
                                  ek+o(k) · g(k) · nO(1) · N.
Moreover, the total space required by the algorithm is at most ek+o(k) · nO(1) .
    The key tool we use to obtain this algorithm is a colour coding method, using a family
of k-perfect hash functions. This technique was introduced by Alon, Yuster and Zwick
in [1] and has been widely used in the design of parameterised algorithms for decision
and approximate counting (see for example [15, Chapters 13 and 14] and [12, Chapter
8]), but to the best of the author’s knowledge has not yet been applied to enumeration
problems.
    The main limitation of Theorem 1.1 is that it requires access to a deterministic inclu-
sion oracle INC-ORA which always returns the correct answer. However, in a number of
cases (including k-Path [4] and Graph Motif [5]) the fastest known decision algorithm
for a self-contained k-witness problem (and hence for the corresponding inclusion prob-
lem) is in fact randomised and has a small probability of returning an incorrect answer.
We will also show that the same algorithm can be used in this case, at the expense of a
small increase in the expected running time (if the oracle can return false positives) and
the loss of the guarantee that we will output every witness exactly once: for each witness
in the instance, there is a small probability that we will omit it from the list due to the
oracle returning false negatives. Speciﬁcally, we prove the following theorem.
Theorem 1.2. Given a randomised inclusion oracle for the k-witness problem Π, whose
probability of returning an incorrect answer is at most c < 21 , there is a randomised

                                              3
algorithm which takes as input an instance of Π and a constant ǫ > 0, and outputs a
list of witnesses of size k in the instance such that no witness appears more than once
and, for any witness W , the probability that W is included in the list is at least 1 − ǫ.
In expectation, the algorithm makes at most ek+o(k) · log(ǫ−1 ) · log3 n (log log n) · N oracle
calls, where N is the total number of witnesses in the instance, and if an oracle call can
be executed in time g(k) · nO(1) for some computable function g, then the expected running
time of the algorithm is

                              ek+o(k) · log(ǫ−1 · g(k) · nO(1) · N.

Moreover, the total space required by the algorithm is ek+o(k) · nO(1) .
    This result initiates the study of approximate algorithms for enumeration problems:
in contrast with the well-established ﬁeld of approximate counting, this relaxation of the
requirements for enumeration does not seem to have been addressed in the literature to
date.
    In the study of counting complexity it is standard practice, when faced with a #P-
hard problem, to investigate whether there is an eﬃcient method to solve the counting
problem approximately. The answer to this question is considered to be “yes” if and only
if the problem admits a fully polynomial randomised approximation scheme (FPRAS),
deﬁned as follows.
Definition. An FPRAS for a counting problem Π is a randomised approximation scheme
that takes an instance I of Π (with |I| = n), and real numbers ǫ > 0 and 0 < δ < 1, and
in time poly(n, 1/ǫ, log(1/δ)) outputs a rational number z such that

                         P[(1 − ǫ)Π(I) ≤ z ≤ (1 + ǫ)Π(I)] ≥ 1 − δ.

In the parameterised setting, the analogue of this is a fixed parameter tractable randomised
approximation scheme (FPTRAS), in which the running time is additionally allowed to
depend arbitrarily on the parameter.
    Perhaps the most obvious way to translate this notion in to the setting of enumeration
would be to look for an algorithm which, with probability at least (1 − δ), would output
at least (1 − ǫ)-proportion of all witnesses. In the setting of counting, all witnesses are
essentially interchangeable, so it makes sense to consider only the total number of objects
counted in relation to the true answer. However, this deﬁnition perhaps allows too much
freedom in the setting of enumeration: we could design an algorithm which satisﬁes these
requirements and yet will never output some collection of hard-to-ﬁnd witnesses, so long
as this collection is not too large compared with the total number of witnesses.
    Instead, we propose here a more demanding notion of approximate enumeration: given
ǫ > 0, we want a (randomised) algorithm such that, for any witness W , the probability
we output W is at least 1 − ǫ. This implies that we will, with high probability (depending
on ǫ) output a large proportion of all possible witnesses, but also ensures that we cannot
choose to ignore certain potential witnesses altogether. It may also be desirable to permit
a witness to be repeated in the output with small probability: we can allow this ﬂexibility
by requiring only that, for each witness W , the probability that W is included in the
output exactly once is at least 1 − ǫ. We give a formal deﬁnition of eﬃcient approximate
enumeration in Section 2.

                                               4
    Theorem 1.1 is proved in Section 4, and Theorem 1.2 in Section 5. We then discuss
some implications of our enumeration algorithms for the complexity of related counting
problems in Section 6. We begin in Section 2 with some background on relevant com-
plexity theoretic notions, before discussing the hardness of the extension version of some
self-contained k-witness problems in Section 3.


2     Parameterised enumeration
There are two natural measures of the size of a self-contained k-witness problem, namely
the number of elements n in the universe and the number of elements k in each witness, so
the running time of algorithms is most naturally discussed in the setting of parameterised
complexity. There are two main complexity issues to consider in the present setting: ﬁrst
of all, as usual, the running time, and secondly the number of oracle calls required.
    For general background on the theory of parameterised complexity, we refer the reader
to [12, 15]. The theory of parameterised enumeration has been developed relatively
recently [13, 9, 8], and we refer the reader to [9] for the formal deﬁnitions of the diﬀerent
classes of parameterised enumeration algorithms. To the best of the author’s knowledge,
this is the ﬁrst occurrence of a randomised parameterised enumeration algorithm in the
literature, and so we introduce randomised analogues of the four types of parameterised
enumeration algorithms introduced in [9] (for a problem with total input size n and
parameter k, and with f : N → N assumed to be a computable function throughout):

    • an expected-total-fpt algorithm enumerates all solutions and terminates in expected
      time f (k) · nO(1) ;

    • an expected-delay-fpt algorithm enumerates all solutions with expected delay at
      most f (k) · nO(1) between the times at which one solution and the next are output
      (and the same bound applies to the time before outputting the ﬁrst solution, and
      between outputting the ﬁnal solution and terminating);

    • an expected-incremental-fpt algorithm enumerates all solutions with expected delay
      at most f (k) · (n + i)O(1) between outputting the ith and (i + 1)th solution;

    • an expected-output-fpt algorithm enumerates all solutions and terminates in ex-
      pected time f (k)·(n+N)O(1) , where N is the total number of solutions enumerated.

    Under these deﬁnitions, Theorem 1.1 says that, if there is an FPT decision algorithm
for the inclusion version of a k-witness problem, then there is an expected-output-fpt
algorithm for the corresponding enumeration problem.
    In the setting of approximate enumeration, we deﬁne a fully output polynomial ran-
domised enumeration scheme (FOPRES) to be an algorithm which, given an instance I
of an enumeration problem (with total input size n) and a rational ǫ ∈ (0, 1), outputs, in
time bounded by a polynomial function of n, N and ǫ−1 (where N is the total number
of solutions to I), a list of solutions to I with the property that, for any solution W , the
probability that W appears exactly once in the list is at least 1 − ǫ. In the parameterised
setting, we analogously deﬁne a fully output fpt randomised enumeration scheme (FOF-
PTRES) to be an algorithm which, given an instance I of a parameterised enumeration

                                             5
problem (with total input size n and parameter k) and a rational ǫ ∈ (0, 1), outputs, in
time bounded by f (k) · p(n, N, ǫ−1 ), where p is a polynomial, f is any computable func-
tion, and N is the total number of solutions to I, a list of solutions to I with the property
that, for any solution W , the probability that W appears exactly once in the list is at
least 1 − ǫ. An expected -FOPRES (respectively expected -FOFPTRES) is a randomised
algorithm which satisﬁes the deﬁnition of a FOPRES (resp. FOFPTRES) if we replace
the condition on the running time by the same condition on the expected running time.
We can make analogous deﬁnitions for total-polynomial, total-fpt, delay-polynomial etc.
    Under these deﬁnitions, Theorem 1.2 says that, if there is a randomised FPT decision
algorithm for the inclusion version of a k-witness problem with error probability less than
a half, then the corresponding enumeration problem admits a FOFPTRES.


3     Hardness of the extension problem
Many combinatorial problems have a very useful property, often referred to as self-
reducibility, which allows a search or enumeration problem to be reduced to (smaller
instances of) the corresponding decision problem in a very natural way (see [9, 20, 27]).
A problem is self-reducible in this sense if the existence of an eﬃcient decision proce-
dure (answering the question: “Does the universe contain at least one witness of size
k?”) implies that there is an eﬃcient algorithm to solve the extension decision problem
(equivalent to EXT-ORA). While many self-contained k-witness problems do have this
property, we will demonstrate that there exist self-contained k-witness problems that
do not (unless FPT=W[1]), and so an enumeration procedure that makes use only of
INC-ORA and not EXT-ORA is desirable.
    In order to demonstrate this, we show that there exist self-contained k-witness prob-
lems whose decision versions belong to FPT, but for which the corresponding extension
decision problem is W[1]-hard. We will consider the following problem, which is clearly
a self-contained k-witness problem.

    k-Clique or Independent Set
    Input: A graph G = (V, E) and k ∈ N.
    Parameter: k.
    Question: Is there a k-vertex subset of V that induces either a clique or an indepen-
    dent set?

This problem is known to belong to FPT [3]: any graph with at least 22k vertices must
be a yes-instance by Ramsey’s Theorem. We now turn our attention to the extension
version of the problem, deﬁned as follows.

    k-Extension Clique or Independent Set
    Input: A graph G = (V, E), a subset U ⊆ V and k ∈ N.
    Parameter: k.
    Question: Is there a k-vertex subset S of V , with U ⊆ S, that induces either a clique
    or an independent set?



                                             6
It is straightforward to adapt the hardness proof for k-Multicolour Clique or In-
dependent Set [22, Proposition 3.7] to show that k-Extension Clique or Inde-
pendent Set is W[1]-hard.

Proposition 3.1. k-Extension Clique or Independent Set is W[1]-hard.

Proof. We prove this result by means of a reduction from the W[1]-complete problem
k-Clique. Let (G, k) be the input to an instance of k-Clique. We now deﬁne a new
graph G′ , obtained from G by adding one new vertex v, and an edge from v to every
vertex u ∈ V (G). It is then straightforward to verify that (G′ , {v}, k + 1) is a yes-instance
for k-Extension Clique or Independent Set if and only if G contains a clique of
size k.
    This demonstrates that k-Extension Clique or Independent Set is a problem
for which there exists an eﬃcient decision procedure but no eﬃcient algorithm for the
extension version of the decision problem (unless FPT=W[1]). Both of these arguments
(inclusion of the decision problem in FPT, and hardness of the extension version) can
easily be adapted to demonstrate that the following problem exhibits the same behaviour.

    k-Induced Regular Subgraph
    Input: A graph G = (V, E) and k ∈ N.
    Parameter: k.
    Question: Is there a k-vertex subset of V that induces a subgraph in which every
    vertex has the same degree?

Indeed, the same method can be applied to any problem in which putting a restriction
on the degree of one of the vertices in the witness guarantees that the witness induces a
clique (or some other induced subgraph for which it is W[1]-hard to decide inclusion in
an arbitrary input graph).


4     The randomised enumeration algorithm
In this section we describe our randomised witness enumeration algorithm and analyse
its performance when used with a deterministic oracle, thus proving Theorem 1.1.
    As mentioned above, our algorithm relies on a colour coding technique. A family F
of hash functions from [n] to [k] is said to be k-perfect if, for every subset A ⊂ [n] of size
k, there exists f ∈ F such that the restriction of f to A is injective. We will use the
following bound on the size of such a family of hash functions.

Theorem 4.1. [24] For all n, k ∈ N there is a k-perfect family Fn,k of hash functions
from [n] to [k] of cardinality ek+o(k) · log n. Furthermore, given n and k, a representation
of the family Fn,k can be computed in time ek+o(k) · n log n.

   Our strategy is to solve a collection of ek+o(k) · log n colourful enumeration problems,
one corresponding to each element of a family F of k-perfect hash functions. In each of
these problems, our goal is to enumerate all witnesses that are colourful with respect to
the relevant element f of F (those in which each element is assigned a distinct colour by


                                              7
f ). Of course, we may discover the same witness more than once if it is colourful with
respect to two distinct elements in F , but it is straightforward to check for repeats of
this kind and omit duplicate witnesses from the output. It is essential in the algorithm
that we use a deterministic construction of a k-perfect family of hash functions rather
than the randomised construction also described in [1], as the latter method would allow
the possibility of witnesses being omitted (with some small probability).
    The advantage of solving a number of colourful enumeration problems is that we can
split the problem into a number of sub-problems with the only requirement being that we
preserve witnesses in which every element has a diﬀerent colour (rather than all witnesses).
This makes it possible to construct a number of instances, each (roughly) half the size
of the original instance, such that every colourful witness survives in at least one of the
smaller instances. More speciﬁcally, for each k-perfect hash function we explore a search
tree: at each node, we split every colour-class randomly into (almost) equal-sized parts,
and then branch to consider each of the 2k combinations that includes one (nonempty)
subset of each colour, provided that the union of these subsets still contains at least one
witness (as determined by the decision oracle). This simple pruning of the search tree
will not prevent us exploring “dead-ends” (where we pursue a particular branch due to
the presence of a non-colourful witness), but turns out to be suﬃcient to make it unlikely
that we explore very many branches that do not lead to colourful witnesses.
    We describe the algorithm in pseudocode (Algorithm 1), making use of two subrou-
tines. In addition to our oracle INC-ORA(X,U,k), we also deﬁne a procedure RAND-
PART(X) which we use, while exploring the search tree, to obtain a random partition
of a subset of the universe.

RANDPART(X)
  Input: X ⊆ U
  Output: A partition (X1 , X2 ) of X with ||X1 | − |X2 || ≤ 1, chosen uniformly at ran-
  dom from all such partitions of X.

We prove the correctness of the algorithm and discuss the space used in Section 4.1, and
bound the expected running time in Section 4.2.

4.1    Correctness of the algorithm
In order to prove that our algorithm does indeed output every witness exactly once, we
begin by showing that we will identify a given k-element subset X during the iteration
corresponding to the hash-function f ∈ F if and only if X is a colourful witness with
respect to f .

Lemma 4.2. Let X be a set of k vertices in the universe U. In the iteration of Algorithm 1
corresponding to f ∈ F , we will execute 9 to 11 with A = X if and only if:

  1. X is a witness, and

  2. X is colourful with respect to f .




                                             8
 Algorithm 1: Randomised algorithm to enumerate all k-element witnesses in the
 universe U, using a decision oracle.
 1 if INC − ORA(U, U, k) = 1 then
 2     Construct a family F = {f1 , f2 , . . . , f|F | } of k-perfect hash functions from U to
        [k];
 3     for 1 ≤ r ≤ |F | do
 4         Initialise an empty FIFO queue Q;
 5         Insert U into Q;
 6         while Q is not empty do
 7             Remove the ﬁrst element A from Q;
 8             if |A| = k then
 9                 if A is not colourful with respect to fs for any s ∈ {1, . . . , r − 1}
                     then
10                     Output A;
11                 end if
12             else
13                 for 1 ≤ i ≤ k do
14                     Set Ai to be the set of elements in A coloured i by fr ;
                               (1)  (2)
15                     Set (Ai , Ai ) = RANDPART(Ai );
16                 end for
17                 for each j = (j1 , . . . , jk ) ∈ {1, 2}k do
                             (j )
18                     if |Ai ℓ | > 0 for each 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k then
                                         (j )             (j )
19                         Set Aj = Ai 1 ∪ · · · ∪ Ai k ;
20                         if INC − ORA(Aj , U, k) = 1 then
21                              Add Aj to Q;
22                         end if
23                     end if
24                 end for
25             end if
26         end while
27     end for
28 end if




                                               9
Proof. We ﬁrst argue that we only execute lines 9 to 11 with A = X if X is a witness and
is colourful with respect to f . We claim that, throughout the execution of the iteration
corresponding to f , every subset B in the queue Q has the following properties:

  1. there is some witness W such that W ⊆ B, and

  2. B contains at least one vertex receiving each colour under f .

Notice that we check the ﬁrst condition before adding any subset A to Q (lines 1 and
20), and we check the second condition for any A 6= U in line 18 (U necessarily satisﬁes
condition 2 by construction of F ), so these two conditions are always satisﬁed. Thus, if
we execute lines 9 to 11 with A = X, these conditions hold for X; note also that we only
execute these lines with A = X if |X| = k. Hence, as there is a witness W ⊆ X where
|W | = |X| = k, we must have X = W and hence X is a witness. Moreover, as X must
contain at least one vertex of each colour, and contains exactly k elements, it must be
colourful.
    Conversely, suppose that W = {w1 , . . . , wk } is a witness such that f (wi ) = i for
each 1 ≤ i ≤ k; we need to show that we will at some stage execute lines 9 to 11 with
A = W . We argue that at the start of each execution of the while loop, if W has not
yet been output, there must be some subset B in the queue such that W ⊆ B. This
invariant clearly holds before the ﬁrst execution of the loop (U will have been inserted
into Q, as U contains at least one witness W ). Now suppose that the invariant holds
before starting some execution of the while loop. Either we execute lines 9 to 11 with
A = W on this iteration (in which case we are done), or else we proceed to line 13. Now,
                                                                          (j )
for 1 ≤ i ≤ k, set ji to be either 1 or 2 in such a way that wi ∈ Ai i . The subset Aj ,
where j = (j1 , . . . , jk ) will then pass both tests for insertion into Q, and W ⊆ Aj by
construction, so the invariant holds when we exit the while loop. Since the algorithm
only terminates when Q is empty, it follows that we must eventually execute lines 9 to
11 with A = W .
    The key property of k-perfect families of hash functions then implies that the algo-
rithm will identify every witness; it remains only to ensure that we avoid outputting any
witness more than once. This is the purpose of lines 9 to 11 in the pseudocode. We know
from Lemma 4.2 that we ﬁnd a given witness W while considering the hash-function f
if and only if W is colourful with respect to f : thus, in order to determine whether we
have found the witness in question before, it suﬃces to verify whether it is colourful with
respect to any of the colourings previously considered. Hence we see that every witness
is output exactly once, as required.
    Note that the most obvious strategy for avoiding repeats would be to maintain a list
of all the witnesses we have output so far,  and check for membership of this list; however,
                                          n
in general there might be as many as k witnesses, so both storing this list and searching
it would be costly. The approach used here means that we only have to store the family
F of k-perfect hash functions (requiring space ek+o(k) n log n). Since each execution of the
outer for loop clearly requires only polynomial space, the total space complexity of the
algorithm is at most ek+o(k) nO(1) , as required.




                                             10
4.2    Expected running time
We know from Theorem 4.1 that a family F of k-perfect hash functions from U to [k], with
|F | = ek+o(k) log n, can be computed in time ek+o(k) n log n; thus line 2 can be executed in
time ek+o(k) n log n and the total number of iterations of the outer for-loop (lines 2 to 34)
is at most ek+o(k) log n.
    Moreover, it is clear that each iteration of the while loop (lines 6 to 26) makes at most
2k oracle calls. If an oracle call can be executed in time g(k) · nO(1) for some computable
function g, then the total time required to perform each iteration of the while loop is at
most max{|F |, kn + 2k · g(k) · nO(1) } = ek+o(k) · g(k) · nO(1) .
    Thus it remains to bound the expected number of iterations of the while loop in any
iteration of the outer for-loop; we do this in the next lemma.

Lemma 4.3. The expected number of iterations of the while-loop in any given iteration
of the outer for-loop is at most N (1 + ⌈log n⌉), where N is the total number of witnesses
in the instance.

Proof. We ﬁx an arbitrary f ∈ F , and for the remainder of the proof restrict our attention
to the iteration of the outer for-loop corresponding to f .
    We can regard this iteration of the outer for-loop as the exploration of a search tree,
with each node of the search tree indexed by some subset of U. The root is indexed by U
itself, and every node has up to 2k children, each child corresponding to a diﬀerent way
of selecting one of the two randomly constructed subsets for each colour. A node may
have strictly fewer than 2k children, as we use the oracle to prune the search tree (line
20), omitting the exploration of branches indexed by a subset of U that does not contain
any witness (colourful or otherwise). Note that the search tree deﬁned in this way has
depth at most ⌈log n⌉: at each level, the size of each colour-class in the indexing subset
is halved (up to integer rounding).
    In this search tree model of the algorithm, each node of the search tree corresponds
to an iteration of the while-loop, and vice versa. Thus, in order to bound the expected
number of iterations of the while-loop, it suﬃces to bound the expected number of nodes
in the search tree.
    Our oracle-based pruning method means that we can associate with every node v
of the search tree some representative witness Wv (not necessarily colourful), such that
Wv is entirely contained in the subset of U which indexes v. (Note that the choice of
representative witness for a given node need not be unique.) We know that in total there
are N witnesses; our strategy is to bound the expected number of nodes, at each level of
the search tree, for which any given witness can be the representative.
    For a given witness W , we deﬁne a random variable XW,d to be the number of nodes
at depth d (where the root has depth 0, and children of the root have depth 1, etc.) for
which W could be the representative witness. Since every node has some representative
witness, it follows that the total number of nodes in the search tree is at most
                                                 ⌈log n⌉
                                     X               X
                                                           XW,d .
                                  W a witness        d=0

Hence, by linearity of expectation, the expected number of nodes in the search tree is at

                                                11
most
                              ⌈log n⌉                           ⌈log n⌉
                  X               X                              X
                                        E [XW,d ]    ≤     N                max         E [XW,d] .
                                                                          W a witness
               W a witness        d=0                            d=0

    In the remainder of the proof, we argue that E[XW,d ] ≤ 1 for all W and d, which will
give the required result.
    Observe ﬁrst that, if W is in fact a colourful witness with respect to f , then XW,d = 1
for every d: given a node whose indexing set contains W , exactly one of its children will
be indexed by a set that contains W . So we will assume from now on that W intersects
precisely ℓ colour classes, where ℓ < k.
    If a given node is indexed by a set that contains W , we claim that the probability
                                                                                     k−ℓ
that W is contained in the set indexing at least one of its children is at most 21 . For
this to happen, it must be that for each colour i, all elements of W having colour i are
assigned to the same set in the random partition. If ci elements     in W have colour i, the
                                                         1 ci −1
                                                           
probability of this happening for colour i is at most 2          (the ﬁrst vertex of colour i
can be assigned to either set, and each subsequent vertex has probability at most 21 of
being assigned to this same set). Since the random partitions for each colour class are
independent, the probability that the witness W survives is at most
                                   ci−1  k−|{i:W ∩f −1 (i)6=∅}|  k−ℓ
                     Y             1       1                         1
                                         =                         =       .
                                   2       2                         2
                 W ∩f −1 (i)6=∅


Moreover, if W is contained in the set indexing at least one of the child nodes, it will be
contained in the indexing sets for exactly 2k−ℓ child nodes: we must select the correct
subset for each colour-class that intersects W , and can choose arbitrarily for the remaining
k − ℓ colour classes. Hence, for each node indexed by a set that contains W , the expected
                                                                                  k−ℓ k−ℓ
number of children which are also indexed by sets containing W is at most 12          ·2    =
1.
   We now prove by induction on d that E [XW,d ] ≤ 1 (in the case that W is not colourful).
The base case for d = 0 is trivial (as there can only be one node at depth 0), so suppose
that d > 0 and that the result holds for smaller values. Then, if E[Y |Z = s] is the
conditional expectation of Y given that Z = s,
                                 X
                      E[XW,d ] =     E[XW,d |XW,d−1 = t] P[XW,d−1 = t]
                                        t≥0
                                        X
                                   ≤          t P[XW,d−1 = t]
                                        t≥0

                                   = E[XW,d−1 ]
                                   ≤ 1,

by the inductive hypothesis, as required. Hence E[XW,d ] ≤ 1 for any witness W , which
completes the proof.
   By linearity of expectation, it then follows that the expected total number of exe-
cutions of the while loop will be at most |F | · N (1 + ⌈log n⌉), and hence that the ex-
pected number of oracle calls made during the execution of the algorithm is at most

                                                      12
ek+o(k) log2 n · N. Moreover, if an oracle call can be executed in time g(k) · nO(1) for some
computable function g, then the expected total running time of the algorithm is

                                   ek+o(k) · g(k) · nO(1) · N,

as required.


5      Using a randomised oracle
In this section we show that the method described in Section 4 will in fact work almost
as well if we only have access to a randomised decision oracle, thus proving Theorem
1.2. The randomised decision procedures in [4, 5] only have one-sided errors, but for the
sake of generality we consider the eﬀect of both false positives and false negatives on our
algorithm.
    False positives and false negatives will aﬀect the behaviour of the algorithm in diﬀerent
ways. If the decision procedure gives false positives then, provided we add a check
immediately before outputting a supposed witness that it really is a witness, the algorithm
is still sure to output every witness exactly once; however, we will potentially waste time
exploring unfruitful branches of the search tree due to false positives, so the expected
running time of the algorithm will increase. If, on the other hand, our algorithm outputs
false negatives, then this will not increase the expected running time; however, in this
case, we can no longer be sure that we will ﬁnd every witness as false negatives might
cause us to prune the search tree prematurely. We will show, however, that we can still
enumerate approximately in this case.
    Before turning our attention to the speciﬁc eﬀects of false positives and false neg-
atives on the algorithm, we observe that, provided our randomised oracle returns the
correct answer with probability greater than a half, we can obtain a decision procedure
with a much smaller failure probability by making repeated oracle calls. We make the
standard assumption that the events corresponding to each oracle call returning an error
are independent.

Lemma 5.1. Let c > 12 be a fixed constant, and let ǫ > 0. Suppose that we have access to
a randomised oracle for the decision version of a self-contained k-witness problem which,
on each call, returns the correct answer independently with probability at least c. Then
there is a decision procedure for the problem, making O (k + log log n + log ǫ−1 ) calls to
this oracle, such that:

    1. the probability of obtaining a false positive is at most 2−k , and
                                                                     ǫ
    2. the probability of obtaining a false negative is at most ⌈log n⌉+1

Proof. Our procedure is as follows: we make t oracle calls (where t is a value to be
determined later) and output whatever is the majority answer from these calls. We
need to choose t large enoughnto ensure that o the probability that the majority answer is
incorrect is at most δ := min 2−k , ⌈log n⌉+1 .
                                         ǫ

    The probability that we obtain the correct answer from a given oracle call is at least
c, so the number of correct answers we obtain out of t trials is bounded below by the

                                               13
random variable X, where X has distribution Bin(t, c). Thus E[X] = tc. We will return
the correct answer so long as X > 2t .
   Using a Chernoﬀ bound, we can see that
                                                  
                                t                 1
                        P X≤        = P X ≤ tc ·
                                2                2c
                                                             
                                                       2c − 1
                                    = P X ≤ tc 1 −
                                                         2c
                                                       2 !
                                            1 2c − 1
                                    ≤ exp −                 tc
                                            2       2c
                                            (2c − 1)2 t
                                                       
                                    = exp −               .
                                                 8c
It is enough to ensure that this is at most δ, which we achieve if
                                   (2c − 1)2 t
                                 −             < ln δ
                                       8c
                                                  −8c ln δ
                                   ⇐⇒        t>            ,
                                                 (2c − 1)2

so we can take t = O(log δ −1 ). Thus the number of oracle calls required is
              (                                −1 )!
                         −1              ǫ
     O max log 2−k                                     = O k + log log n + log ǫ−1 ,
                                                                                 
                            , log
                                    ⌈log n⌉ + 1

as required.
    We now show that, if the probability that our oracle gives a false positive is suﬃciently
small, then such errors do not increase the expected running time of Algorithm 1 too
much. Just as when bounding the expected running time in Section 4.2, it suﬃces to
bound the expected number of iterations of the while loop corresponding to a speciﬁc
colouring f in our family F of hash functions.
Lemma 5.2.
        n Suppose o   that the probability that the oracle returns a false positive is at
          −k      1
most min 2 , ⌈log n⌉+1 . Then the expected number of iterations of the while-loop in
any given iteration of the outer for-loop is at most O(N · log2 n), where N is the total
number of witnesses in the instance.
Proof. We ﬁx an arbitrary f ∈ F , and for the remainder of the proof we restrict our
attention or the iteration of the outer for-loop corresponding to f . As in the proof of
Lemma 4.3, we can regard this iteration of the outer for-loop as the exploration of a
search tree, and it suﬃces to bound the expected number of nodes in the search tree.
   We can associate with each node of the search tree some subset of the universe, and
we prune the search tree in such a way that we only have a node corresponding to a
subset A of the universe if a call to the oracle with input A has returned yes. This
means that for the node corresponding to the set A, either there is some representative
witness W ⊆ X, or the oracle gave a false positive. We call a node good if it has some

                                             14
representative witness, and bad if it is the result of a false positive. We already bounded
the expected number of good nodes in the proof of Lemma 4.3, so it remains to show
that the expected number of bad nodes is not too large.
    We will assume initially that there is at least one witness, and so the root of the search
tree is a good node. Now consider a bad node v in the search tree; v must have some
ancestor u in the search tree such that u is good (note that the root will always be such
an ancestor in this case). Since the subset of the universe associated with any node is
a subset of that associated with its parent, no bad vertex can have a good descendant.
Thus, any path from the root to the bad node v must consist of a segment of good nodes
followed by a segment of bad nodes; we can therefore associate with every bad node v a
unique good node good(v) such that good(v) is the last good node on the path from the
root to v. In order to bound the expected number of bad nodes in the tree, our strategy
is to bound, for each good node u, the number of bad nodes v such that good(v) = u.
    As in the proof of Lemma 4.3, we will write XW,d for the number of nodes at depth d
for which W is the representative witness. For c > d, we further deﬁne YW,d,c to be the
number of bad nodes v such that v is at depth c, good(v) is at depth d, and W is the
representative witness for good(v).
    Since every node can have at most 2k children, and the probability that the oracle
gives a false positive is at most 2−k , the expected number of bad children of any node is
at most one. Thus we see that
                                    X
                     E [YW,d,d+1] =     E [YW,d,d+1 |XW,d = t] P [XW,d = t]
                                       t≥0
                                     X
                                 ≤           tP [WW,d = t]
                                       t≥0

                                 = E [XW,d] .

Observe also that if u and w are bad nodes such that u is the child of w, then good(u) =
good(w) (and so good(u) and good(w) are at the same depth and have the same repre-
sentative witness). For c > d + 1 we can then argue inductively:
                                X
                   E [YW,d,c] =   E [YW,d,c |YW,d,c−1 = t] P [YW,d,c−1 = t]
                                 t≥0
                                 X
                             =         tP [YW,d,c−1 = t]
                                 t≥0

                             = E [YW,d,c−1]
                             = E [XW,d] .




                                                   15
We can therefore bound the expected number of nodes in the search tree by
                                                       
                          ⌈log n⌉         ⌈log n⌉
                    X      X               X
              E                  XW,d +         YW,d,c 
                    W a witness d=0                  c=d+1
                                                                                           
                                             ⌈log n⌉                     ⌈log n⌉
                                      X       X                           X
                               =                       E [XW,d] +                 E [YW,d,c ]
                                   W a witness d=0                       c=d+1
                                                                                           
                                             ⌈log n⌉                     ⌈log n⌉
                                      X       X                           X
                               =                       E [XW,d] +                 E [XW,d ]
                                   W a witness d=0                       c=d+1
                                             ⌈log n⌉
                                      X       X
                               =                       (⌈log n⌉ − d + 1) E [XW,d] .
                                   W a witness d=0

As we know from the proof of Lemma 4.3 that E [XW,d ] ≤ 1, we can therefore deduce
that the expected number of nodes is at most
                       ⌈log n⌉                               ⌈log n⌉+1
                X       X                                      X
                                 (⌈log n⌉ − d + 1) = N                   i
             W a witness d=0                                   i=1
                                                         N
                                                       =   (⌈log n⌉ + 1) (⌈log n⌉ + 2)
                                                         2
                                                       = O(N log2 n),

as required. This completes the proof in the case that the instance contains at least one
witness.
    If there is in fact no witness in the instance, we know that there are no good
nodes in the tree. Moreover, the expected number of bad nodes at depth 0 is at most
1/ (⌈log n⌉ + 1) (the probability that the oracle returns a false positive). Since we have al-
ready argued that the expected number of bad children of any node is at most 1, it follows
that the expected number of bad nodes at each level is at most 1/ (⌈log n⌉ + 1), and so
the total expected number of bad nodes is at most 1/ (⌈log n⌉ + 1) (1 + ⌈log n⌉) = 1.
    To complete the proof of Theorem 1.2, it remains to show that, so long as the prob-
ability that the oracle returns a false negative is suﬃciently small, our algorithm will
output any given witness with high probability.

Lemma 5.3. Fix ǫ ∈ (0, 1), and suppose that the probability that the oracle returns a false
negative is at most ⌈log ǫn⌉+1 . Then, for any witness W , the probability that the algorithm
does not output W is at most ǫ.

Proof. By construction of F , we know that there is some f ∈ F such that W is colourful
with respect to f . We wil now restrict our attention to the iteration of the outer for-loop
corresponding to f ; it suﬃces to demonstrate that we will output W during this iteration
with probability at least 1 − ǫ.
   If we obtain the correct answer from each oracle call, we are sure to output W . The
only way we will fail to output W is if our oracle gives us an incorrect answer on at

                                                     16
least one occasion when it is called with input V ⊇ W . This can either happen in line 1
when we make the initial check that we have a yes-instance, or when we check whether a
subset is still a yes-instance in line 20. Note that we execute line 20 with Aj = W at most
⌈log n⌉ times, so the total number of times we call INC-ORA(V ,U,k) with some V ⊇ W
during the iteration of the outer for-loop corresponding to f is at most ⌈log n⌉ + 1. By
the union bound, the probability that we obtain a false negative on at least one of these
calls is at most
                                                      ǫ
                                 (⌈log n⌉ + 1) ·             = ǫ,
                                                 ⌈log n⌉ + 1
as required.


6      Application to counting
There is a close relationship between the problems of counting and enumerating all wit-
nesses in a k-witness problem, since any enumeration algorithm can very easily be adapted
into an algorithm that counts the witnesses instead of listing them. However, in the case
that the number N of witnesses is large, an enumeration algorithm necessarily takes time
at least Ω(N), whereas we might hope for much better if our goal is simply to determine
the total number of witnesses.
    The family of self-contained k-witness problems studied here includes subgraph prob-
lems, whose parameterised complexity from the point of view of counting has been a
rich topic for research in recent years [14, 18, 19, 10, 11, 22, 17]. Many such count-
ing problems, including those whose decision problem belongs to FPT, are known to
be #W[1]-complete (see [15] for background on the theory of parameterised counting
complexity). Positive results in this setting typically exploit structural properties of the
graphs involved (e.g. small treewidth) to design (approximate) counting algorithms for
inputs with these properties, avoiding any dependence on N [2, 3, 18].
    In this section we demonstrate how our enumeration algorithms can be adapted to
give eﬃcient (randomised) algorithms to solve the counting version of a self-contained
k-witness problem whenever the total number of witnesses is small. This complements
the fact that a simple random sampling algorithm can be used for approximate counting
when the number of witnesses is very large [22, Lemma 3.4], although there remain many
situations which are not covered by either result.
    We begin with the case in which we assume access to a deterministic oracle for the
decision problem.

Theorem 6.1. Let Π be a self-contained k-witness problem, and suppose that 0 <
δ ≤ 21 and M ∈ N. Then there exists a randomised algorithm which makes at most
ek+o(k) log2 n M log(δ −1 ) calls to a deterministic decision oracle for Π, and

    1. if the number of witnesses in the instance of Π is at most M, outputs with probability
       at least 1 − δ the exact number of witnesses in the instance;

    2. if the number of witnesses in the instance of Π is strictly greater than M, always
       outputs “More than M.”



                                             17
Moreover, if there is an algorithm solving the decision version of Π in time g(k) · nO(1) for
some computable function g, then the expected running time of the randomised algorithm
is bounded by ek+o(k) · g(k) · nO(1) · M · log(δ −1 ).

Proof. Note that Algorithm 1 can very easily be adapted to give a randomised counting
algorithm which runs in the same time as the enumeration algorithm but, instead of
listing all witnesses, simply outputs the total number of witnesses when it terminates.
We may compute explicitly the expected running time of our randomised enumeration
algorithm (and hence its adaptation to a counting algorithm) for a given self-contained
k-witness problem Π in terms of n, k and the total number of witnesses, N. We will write
T (Π, n, k, N) for this expected running time.
     Now consider an algorithm A, in which we run our randomised counting algorithm for
at most 2T (Π, n, k, M) steps; if the algorithm has terminated within this many steps, A
outputs the value returned, otherwise A outputs “FAIL”. Since our randomised counting
algorithm is always correct (but may take much longer than the expected time), we know
that if A outputs a numerical value then this is precisely the number of witnesses in our
problem instance. If the number of witnesses is in fact at most M, then the expected
running time of the randomised counting algorithm is bounded by T (Π, n, k, M), so by
Markov’s inequality the probability that it terminates within 2T (Π, n, k, M) steps is at
least 1/2. Thus, if we run A on an instance in which the number of witnesses is at most
M, it will output the exact number of witnesses with probability at least 1/2.
     To obtain the desired probability of outputting the correct answer, we repeat A a
total of ⌈log(δ −1 )⌉ times. If any of these executions of A terminates with a numerical
answer that is at most M, we output this answer (which must be the exact number of
witnesses by the argument above); otherwise we output “More than M.”
     If the total number of witnesses is in fact less than or equal to M, we will output the
exact number of witnesses unless A outputs “FAIL” every time it is run. Since in this
case A outputs “FAIL” independently with probability at most 1/2 each time we run it,
the probability that we output “FAIL” on every one of the ⌈log(δ −1 )⌉ repetitions is at
most (1/2)⌈log(δ )⌉ ≤ 2log δ = δ. Finally, note that if the number of witnesses is strictly
                  −1


greater than M, we will always output “More than M” since every execution of A must
in this case return either “FAIL” or a numerical answer greater than M.
     The total running time is at most O (log(δ −1 ) · T (Π, n, k, M)) and hence, using the
bound on the running time of our enumeration algorithm from Theorem 1.1, is bounded
by ek+o(k) · g(k) · nO(1) · M · log(δ −1 ), as required.
   Finally, we prove an analogous result in the case that we only have access to a ran-
domised oracle.

Theorem 6.2. Let Π be a self-contained k-witness problem, suppose that 0 < ǫ < 1,
0 < δ ≤ 12 and M ∈ N, and that we have access to a randomised oracle for the decision
problem whose error probability is at most some constant c < 21 . Then there exists a
randomised algorithm which makes at most ek+o(k) log3 n M log(δ −1 ) calls to this oracle
and, with probability at least 1 − δ, if the total number of witnesses in the instance is
exactly N, does the following:

  1. if N ≤ M, outputs a number N ′ such that (1 − ǫ)N ≤ N ′ ≤ N;


                                             18
  2. if N ≥ M, outputs either a number N ′ such that (1 − ǫ)N ≤ N ′ ≤ M or “More
     than M.”
Moreover, if there is a randomised algorithm solving the decision version of Π (with error
probability at most c < 12 ) in time g(k) · nO(1) for some computable function g, then the
expected running time of the randomised counting algorithm is bounded by ek+o(k) · g(k) ·
nO(1) · M · log(δ −1 ).
Proof. We claim that it suﬃces to demonstrate that there is a procedure which makes at
most ek+o(k) · log3 n · M oracle calls and, with probability greater than 21 , outputs
 (a) a number N ′ such that (1 − ǫ)N ≤ N ′ ≤ N if N ≤ M, and
 (b) either a number N ′ such that (1 − ǫ)N ≤ N ′ ≤ N or “FAIL” if N > M.
Given such a procedure, we run it log(δ −1 ) times; if the largest numerical value returned
on any run (if any) is at most M then we return this maximum value, otherwise we return
“More than M.” Conditions (a) and (b) ensuer that the procedure never returns a value
strictly greater than N, so the largest numerical value returned (if any) is sure to be the
best estimate. Therefore we only return an answer that does not meet the conditions of
the theorem if all of the executions of the procedure fail to return an answer that meets
conditions (a) and (b), which happens with probability at most 2− log(δ ) = δ.
                                                                             −1


    To obtain the required procedure, we modify the enumeration algorithm used to prove
Theorem 1.2 so that it counts the total number of witnesses found rather than listing
them; we will run this randomised enumeration procedure with error probability ǫ2 /4. We
can compute explicitly the expected running time of this adapted algorithm for a given k-
witness problem Π in terms of n, k, N and ǫ; we write T (Π, n, k, ǫ, N) for this expectation.
We will allow the adapted algorithm to run for time 4T (Π, n, k, ǫ, M), outputting “FAIL”
if we have not terminated within this time.
    There are two ways in which the procedure could fail to meet conditions (a) and (b).
First of all, the adapted enumeration algorithm might not terminate within the required
time. Secondly, it might terminate but with an answer N ′ where N ′ < (1 − ǫ)N (recall
that enumeration algorithm never repeats a witness, and that we can verify each witness
deterministically, ensuring that only ever output a subset of the witnesses actually present
in the instance). In the remainder of the proof, we will argue that the probability of each
of these two outcomes is strictly less than 14 , so the probability of avoiding both is greater
than 21 , as required.
    First, we bound the probability that the algorithm does not terminate within the
required time. By Markov’s inequality, the probability that a random variable takes a
value greater than four times its expectation is less than 14 , so we see immediately that if
the total number of witnesses is at most M then the probability that the algorithm fails
to terminate within the permitted time is less than 14 .
    Next, we need to bound the probability that the procedure outputs a value N ′ <
(1 − ǫ)N. Let the random variable Z denote the number of witnesses omitted by the
procedure. Then E[Z] ≤ ǫ2 N/4, so by Markov’s inequality we have
                                          ǫ2 N/4    ǫ    1
                               P[Z > ǫN] ≤       = < ,
                                            ǫN      4    4
as required. This completes the argument that the procedure outputs the an answer that
meets conditions (a) and (b) with probability greater than 21 , and hence the proof.

                                              19
7    Conclusions and open problems
Many well-known combinatorial problems satisfy the deﬁnition of the k-witness problems
considered in this paper. We have shown that, given access to a deterministic decision
oracle for the inclusion version of a k-witness problem (answering the question “does this
subset of the universe contain at least one witness?”), there is a randomised algorithm
which is guaranteed to enumerate all witnesses and whose expected number of oracle
calls is at most ek+o(k) log2 n · N, where N is the total number of witnesses. Moreover,
if the decision problem belongs to FPT (as is the case for many self-contained k-witness
problems), our enumeration algorithm is an expected-output-fpt algorithm.
    We have also shown that, in the presence of only a randomised decision oracle, we
can use the same strategy to produce a list of witnesses so that the probability of any
given witness appearing in the list is at least 1 − ǫ, with only a factor log n increase in
the expected running time. This result initiates the study of algorithms for approximate
enumeration.
    Our results also has implications for counting the number of witnesses. In particular, if
the total number of witnesses is small (at most f (k) · nO(1) for some computable function
f ) then our enumeration algorithms can easily be adapted to give fpt-algorithms that
will, with high probability, calculate a good approximation to the number of witnesses
in an instance of a self-contained k-witness problem (in the setting where we have a
deterministic decision oracle, we in fact obtain the exact answer with high probability).
The resulting counting algorithms satisfy the conditions for a FPTRAS (Fixed Parameter
Tractable Randomised Approximation Scheme, as deﬁned in [3]), and in the setting with
a deterministic oracle we do not even need the full ﬂexibility that this deﬁnition allows:
with probability 1 − δ we will output the exact number of witnesses, rather than just an
answer that is within a factor of 1 ± ǫ of this quantity.
    While the enumeration problem can be solved in a more straightforward fashion for
self-contained k-witness problems that have certain additional properties, we demon-
strated that several self-contained k-witness problems do not have these properties, unless
FPT=W[1]. A natural line of enquiry arising from this work would be the characterisation
of those self-contained k-witness problems that do have the additional properties, namely
those for which an fpt-algorithm for the decision version gives rise to an fpt-algorithm for
the extension version of the decision problem.
    Our approach assumed the existence of an oracle to determine whether a given subset
of the universe contains a witness of size exactly k. An interesting direction for future
work would be to explore the extent to which the same techniques can be used if we only
have access to a decision procedure that tells us whether some subset of the universe
contains a witness of size at most k.
    Another key question that remains open after this work is whether the existence of
an fpt-algorithm for the inclusion version of a k-witness problem is suﬃcient to guaran-
tee the existence of an (expected-)delay-fpt or (expected-)incremental-fpt algorithm for
the enumeration problem. Finally, it would be interesting to investigate whether the
randomised algorithm given here can be derandomised.




                                             20
References
 [1] Noga Alon, Raphael Yuster, and Uri Zwick, Color-coding, Journal of the ACM 42
     (1995), no. 4, 844–856.

 [2] N. Alon, P. Dao, I. Hajirasouliha, F. Hormozdiari, S. C. Sahinalp, Biomolecular
     network motif counting and discovery by color coding, Bioinformatics 24(13), 241–
     249, 2008.

 [3] V. Arvind and Venkatesh Raman, Approximation algorithms for some parameterized
     counting problems, ISAAC 2002, LNCS, vol. 2518, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg,
     2002, pp. 453–464.

 [4] Andreas Björklund, Thore Husfeldt, Petteri Kaski, and Mikko Koivisto, Narrow
     sieves for parameterized paths and packings, arXiv:1007.1161 [cs.DS], 2010.

 [5] Andreas Björklund, Petteri Kaski, and Lukasz Kowalik, Probably Optimal Graph
     Motifs, 30th International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science
     (STACS 2013), LIPIcs, vol. 20, Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik,
     Dagstuhl, Germany, 2013, pp. 20–31.

 [6] Andreas Björklund, Petteri Kaski, and Lukasz Kowalik, Fast witness extraction us-
     ing a decision oracle, Algorithms (ESA 2014), LNCS, vol. 8737, Springer Berlin
     Heidelberg, 2014, pp. 149–160.

 [7] Andreas Björklund, Petteri Kaski, Lukasz Kowalik, and Juho Lauri, Engineering
     motif search for large graphs, 2015 Proc. of the Seventeenth Workshop on Algorithm
     Engineering and Experiments (ALENEX 2015), SIAM, 2015, pp. 104–118.

 [8] Nadia Creignou, Raı̈da Ktari, Arne Meier, Julian-Steﬀen Müller, Frédéric Olive, and
     Heribert Vollmer, Parameterized enumeration for modification problems, Language
     and Automata Theory and Applications (LATA 2015), LNCS, vol. 8977, Springer
     International Publishing, 2015, pp. 524–536.

 [9] Nadia Creignou, Arne Meier, Julian-Steﬀen Müller, Johannes Schmidt, and Heribert
     Vollmer, Paradigms for parameterized enumeration, Mathematical Foundations of
     Computer Science (MFCS 2013), LNCS, vol. 8087, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013,
     pp. 290–301.

[10] Radu Curticapean, Counting matchings of size k is #W[1]-hard, Automata, Lan-
     guages, and Programming (ICALP 2013), LNCS, vol. 7965, Springer Berlin Heidel-
     berg, 2013, pp. 352–363.

[11] Radu Curticapean and Dániel Marx, Complexity of counting subgraphs: Only the
     boundedness of the vertex-cover number counts, 55th Annual IEEE Symposium on
     Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS 2014), 2014.

[12] Rodney G. Downey and Michael R. Fellows, Fundamentals of parameterized com-
     plexity, Springer London, 2013.


                                            21
[13] Henning Fernau, On parameterized enumeration, Computing and Combinatorics
     (COCOON 2002), LNCS, vol. 2387, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2002, pp. 564–573.

[14] J. Flum and M. Grohe, The parameterized complexity of counting problems, SIAM
     Journal on Computing 33 (2004), no. 4, 892–922.

[15] J. Flum and M. Grohe, Parameterized complexity theory, Springer, 2006.

[16] B. Gelbord, Graphical techniques in intrusion detection systems, Information Net-
     working, 2001. Proc. 15th International Conference on, 2001, pp. 253–258.

[17] Mark Jerrum and Kitty Meeks, The parameterised complexity of counting even and
     odd induced subgraphs, Combinatorica, 2016, doi:10.1007/s00493-016-3338-5.

[18] Mark Jerrum and Kitty Meeks, The parameterised complexity of counting connected
     subgraphs and graph motifs, Journal of Computer and System Sciences 81 (2015),
     no. 4, 702 – 716.

[19] Mark Jerrum and Kitty Meeks, Some hard families of parameterised counting prob-
     lems, ACM Transactions on Computation Theory 7 (2015), no. 3.

[20] Samir Khuller and Vijay V. Vazirani, Planar graph coloring is not self-reducible,
     assuming P 6= NP, Theoretical Computer Science 88 (1991), no. 1, 183 – 189.

[21] Eugene L. Lawler, A procedure for computing the k best solutions to discrete op-
     timization problems and its application to the shortest path problem, Management
     Science 18 (1972), no. 7, 401–405.

[22] Kitty Meeks, The challenges of unbounded treewidth in parameterised subgraph count-
     ing problems, Discrete Applied Mathematics 198 (2016), 170 – 194.

[23] R. Milo, S. Shen-Orr, S. Itzkovitz, N. Kashtan, D. Chklovskii, and U. Alon, Network
     motifs: Simple building blocks of complex networks, Science 298 (2002), no. 5594,
     824–827.

[24] M. Naor, L. J. Schulman and A. Srinivasan, Splitters and near-optimal derandom-
     ization, Proceedings of IEEE 36th Annual Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS
     1995), Milwaukee, WI, 1995, pp. 182-191. doi: 10.1109/SFCS.1995.492475

[25] V. Sekar, Y. Xie, D.A. Maltz, M.K. Reiter, and H. Zhang, Toward a framework for
     internet forensic analysis, Third Workshop on Hot Topics in Networking (HotNets-
     III), 2004.

[26] S. Staniford-Chen, S. Cheung, R. Crawford, M. Dilger, J. Frank, J. Hoagland,
     K. Levitt, C. Wee, R. Yip, and D. Zerkle, GrIDS - A graph based intrusion detec-
     tion system for large networks, In Proc. of the 19th National Information Systems
     Security Conference, 1996, pp. 361–370.

[27] C.P. Schnorr, Optimal algorithms for self-reducible problems, Proc. of the 3rd ICALP,
     Edinburgh University Press, 1976, pp. 322 – 337.


                                           22
