11:  combinatorial structure of circuits does not appear in it. Open Problem 1. Improve the lower bound on the dimension of a matrix A with entries that are linear functions in {xi,j }i,j∈[n] such that DET(A) = PER
19: egree is not too small, can cause a severe blow-up in size. Open Problem 2. Are homogeneous formulas super-polynomially weaker than general formulas? In Ref. [HY09b] it was shown that for multilinear formu
19: ssary or not. Specifically, the following question is open. Open Problem 3. Are multilinear circuits super-polynomially weaker than general circuits? Furthermore, given a multilinear circuit it is very nat
19: ear circuit. However, the following question is still open. Open Problem 4. Are multilinear circuits super-polynomially more powerful than syntactically multilinear circuits? 
21: xj (f ) = ∂xi (∂xj (f )) (the order does not matter). It is not known whether one can compute all the order n2 second partial derivatives with only a constant increase in size. Having such a result will automat
21: , yj is (AB)i,j . Therefore, if the answer to the following open problem is positive then we can multiply two matrices in time O(n2 ). Open Problem 5. Does an analog of Theorem 2.5 hold for second order partial
21:  positive then we can multiply two matrices in time O(n2 ). Open Problem 5. Does an analog of Theorem 2.5 hold for second order partial derivatives? We mention that Raz [Raz03] showed that any bounded-coef
26: form n1+c for some constant c > 0, see Refs. [Raz08, SS91]. Open Problem 6. Prove super-polynomial lower bounds for the size of depth-4 circuits over fields of characteristic 6= 2. 2.5 Coping with Divisio
31: n log r). Improving this lower bound is a long-standing open problem. Open Problem 7. Prove a better lower bound for general circuits. For example, prove a super-linear lower bound for the size of a circuit
31: Improving this lower bound is a long-standing open problem. Open Problem 7. Prove a better lower bound for general circuits. For example, prove a super-linear lower bound for the size of a circuit computing an 
32:  lower bounds for arithmetic formulas is a great challenge. Open Problem 8. Prove a super-polynomial lower bound on the size of arithmetic formulas. 3.3 Monotone Circuits Monotone arithmetic circuits are 
33: r [HY09c], although their arguments only apply to formulas. Open Problem 9. Prove a separation between general and monotone circuits for polynomials of constant degree. 3.4 Noncommutative Computation In t
35: Y10a] for proving lower bounds for noncommutative circuits. Open Problem 10. Prove a super-polynomial lower bound on the size of noncommutative circuits. We remark that the fact that rank(Mk (f )) ≤ t (in 
38: sing D = n2 /(4e log n), the theorem follows by induction. Open Problem 11. Prove super-polynomial lower bounds on the size of ΣΠΣ circuits over infinite fields. For depths higher than three weaker lower 
41: an proving lower bound on the size of a ΣΠΣ circuit for f . Open Problem 12. Prove super-polynomial lower bounds on m(f ) over C. Currently the best lower bound known on m(f ) is linear in n [Shp02]. Thus,
42: ower bound on the size of noncommutative circuits [HWY10a]. Open Problem 13. Prove a super-polynomial lower bound on the size of multilinear circuits. We now move on to discussing the ideas required to prov
44: r computational power compared to that of general formulas. Open Problem 14. Are multilinear formulas weaker than general formulas? We now give a sketch of the proof of Theorem 3.12. In fact we will sketch
49: eral circuits computing constant degree polynomials (recall Open Problem 7). 44 
51: hard polynomials). However, the following question is open. Open Problem 15. Find an explicit three-dimensional tensor whose rank is ω(n). We now discuss a recent connection between tensor rank and formula-
54: not be “embedded” in a polynomial size determinant, solving Open Problem 1. To argue this, GCT suggests to look at the symmetries of both determinant and permanent. Consider the determinant of an n × n matr
56: r discussion see Aaronson’s blog post on the topic [Aar08]. Open Problem 16. Give an arithmetic analog of Razborov and Rudich’s result. Specifically, give an algebraic analog for pseudo-random function generato
59: for finding perfect matchings [MVV87] which is an important open problem. Besides its algorithmic implications, derandomization of PIT may lead to strong lower bounds for arithmetic circuits. In particular, as 
59: algorithms work for general arithmetic circuits. The second research direction is trying to better understand the hardness of derandomizing PIT, mainly by connecting deterministic PIT algorithms to circuit lowe
65:  algorithm. 5 Recall that PIT is in co − RP, but is not known to be in NSUBEXP. 60 
67: lgorithm one can get a lower bound for a polynomial in VNP. Open Problem 17. Assume that an arithmetic circuit class C has a PIT algorithm that runs in time poly(s) for circuits of size s. Does the permanent re
69: uestion is thus as interesting as the general PIT question. Open Problem 18. Derandomize the black-box PIT problem for ΣΠΣΠ arithmetic circuits. The result of Agrawal and Vinay requires an exp(n) lower bou
69: ear in some variable, without increasing the depth by much. Open Problem 19. Let f (x1 , . . . , xn , z) be computed by a depth-d size s circuit. Is it true that any factor of f can be computed by a depth-O(d) 
70: tand whether this can be achieved for other models as well. Open Problem 20. Is there a way to transform lower bounds for multilinear circuits to PIT al- gorithms for some model of multilinear circuits or formu
70: ained in the lower bounds proofs to design such algorithms. Open Problem 21. Give a deterministic sub-exponential time identity testing algorithm for multi- linear formulas. 4.4 Sparse Polynomials Sparse 
75: ike. We end this section by stating two open questions. Open Problem 22. Derandomize black-box PIT for noncommutative arithmetic formulas. Another interesting problem is to derandomize PIT for noncommut
76:  polynomial lower bound for noncommutative circuits (recall Open Problem 10). Open Problem 23. Derandomize PIT for noncommutative arithmetic circuits. Finally, we note that while for general circuits Kabane
76: bound for noncommutative circuits (recall Open Problem 10). Open Problem 23. Derandomize PIT for noncommutative arithmetic circuits. Finally, we note that while for general circuits Kabanets and Impagliazzo
76:  4.7), no such result is known for noncommutative circuits. Open Problem 24. Obtain an analog of Theorem 4.7 for noncommutative circuits. I.e., show that an exponential lower bound for noncommutative circuits c
76: till the question of derandomizing PIT for depth-3 circuits remains open. We note that for depth-3 circuits the interesting case is ΣΠΣ circuits and not ΠΣΠ circuits, as the latter follows by the depth-2 case. 
76: ot ΠΣΠ circuits, as the latter follows by the depth-2 case. Open Problem 25. Give a deterministic sub-exponential time PIT algorithm for ΣΠΣ circuits. As the general question is still open, research has fo
81: spite of all the work the following question is still open. Open Problem 26. Give a deterministic sub-exponential time PIT algorithm for multilinear ΣΠΣ circuits. In Section 4.5 we saw a white-box PIT algo
81: commutative formulas. As a first step towards understanding Open problem 26 one can try to solve the following problem, for which we already saw a white-box algorithm. 
82: Open Problem 27. Give a deterministic sub-exponential time black-box PIT algorithm for set- multilinear ΣΠΣ circuits. Another sub-model of depth-
89:  circuits. We mention an obvious next-step question. Open Problem 28. Give a subexponential time PIT algorithm for ΣΠΣΠ(k) circuits. The generator of [SV09] In this section we construct a map from F2t
90: here is no PIT algorithm even for multilinear ΣΠΣ formulas (Open Problem 26). Due to this lack of progress, the model of read-once formulas (ROF) – a restricted model of multilinear formulas – was considered. R
95: = O(1). In particular the following question is still open. Open Problem 29. Give a polynomial time black-box PIT algorithm for read-once formulas. In Ref. [SV09] it was shown that (a slightly modified ve
97: oblem. Similarly to the case of PIT, it is a long- standing open question whether there is an efficient deterministic algorithm for factoring multivariate polynomials (see Refs. [vzGG99, Kay07]). Moreover, ther
99: sable factors belong to the same restricted family. This is not known for the case of general factors, see e.g. Open Problem 19. The second interesting aspect is that the theorem transforms a PIT algorithm for 
99: This is not known for the case of general factors, see e.g. Open Problem 19. The second interesting aspect is that the theorem transforms a PIT algorithm for a weak class to decomposition of a slightly weaker c
100:  of ΣΠΣ circuits (and hopefully ΣΠΣΠ circuits) is answering Open Problem 27. Namely, giving an efficient deterministic black-box identity testing algorithm for set-multilinear ΣΠΣ circuits. Another possible app
100: . , xn . This question is open even in the white-box model. Open Problem 30. Give a deterministic PIT algorithm for polynomials of the form f = σr,m (`1 , . . . , `m ). At the end of the Section we saw a c
100:  case of general factorization no such result is known, see Open Problem 19. 95 
102: las, even the sum of two read-once formulas, is still open. Open Problem 31. Give sub-exponential reconstruction algorithm for the sum of a small number of read-once arithmetic formulas. Although there is 
104: n by asking whether a similar result can be proved for VNP. Open Problem 32. Prove that if an arithmetic circuit class C is learnable then the permanent does not have polynomial size circuits from C. 5.2 
111:  polynomials than those guaranteed by Theorem 5.2 (see e.g. Open Problem 32). The situation with reconstruction algorithms is even more depressing. We believe that one should be able to reconstruct circuits in 
112: problem of reconstructing sums of read-once formulas, Open Problem 31, is an interesting question in this direction. The special case of reconstructing read-once formulas is known but was not covered in t