100:  OPTBP (I)+O(log2 (OPTBP (I))) bins. It is an important open question whether this result can be improved; it is possible that the bin-packing problem can be approximated within an additive error of 1; howe
344: y better results (such as O(logc n) colors) remains a large open question. 13.3 Unique games In this section, we introduce the unique games problem. The unique games problem is a type of constraint sati
445: esolving the status of the conjecture is a very interesting open question in the area of approximation algorithms. Electronic web edition. Copyright 2011 by David P. Williamson and David B. Shmoys. 
447: turning our attention to questions of algorithm design, our Open Problem 0 is the resolution of Conjecture 16.43, the unique games conjecture of Khot [192]. Of course, it is possible that the conjecture is fals
448: example worse than 4/3 is known (see Figure 17.1). Our ﬁrst open problem is to give an improved algorithm for the TSP, and in particular to show that one can obtain a 4/3-approximation algorithm based on this l
448: r- formance guarantee of O(log n/ log log n). As our second open problem, we ask for a constant approximation algorithm for the metric asymmetric TSP. Again, the natural approach is via the LP relaxation given 
449: gress on this problem in the interim, and this is our third open problem. Showing that one can compute a packing with only a constant number of extra bins would be remarkable progress; again there is an LP rela
449: lity (or on the simplex method in practice). For our fourth open problem, we focus on the survivable network design problem; in Section 11.3, we presented the iterative rounding 2-approximation algorithm of Jai
449: , Plotkin, Shmoys, Tardos, and Williamson [135]. Our fourth open problem is to design a primal-dual 2-approximation algorithm for this optimization problem. Problem 5: a relaxation-based algorithm for the 
449: such relaxation-based result is known, and this is our ﬁfth open problem. Problem 6: the generalized Steiner tree problem. There is a rich literature of fundamental optimization problems for which a well-k
450: ttle far more of these, and we focus only on those problems not known to be related to this conjecture (and its variants). For our sixth open problem, we turn to a special case of the survivable network design 
450: elated to this conjecture (and its variants). For our sixth open problem, we turn to a special case of the survivable network design problem just discussed, the generalized Steiner tree problem introduced in Se
450: lower bound in the intervening 25 years, and so our seventh open problem is, for some α < 2, to provide an α-approximation algorithm. One particular ray of hope for this problem lies in a very recent result of 
450:  few central open problems of this type, and for our eighth open problem we would like to highlight one of these. One of the earliest approximation al- gorithm results is that of Graham [142], who gave a 2-appr
450: ) colors for a 3-colorable graph, and to do so is our ninth open problem. Problem 10: a primal-dual algorithm for the maximum cut problem. Finally, Electronic web edition. Copyright 2011 by David P. 
451: gorithms in this context is particularly profound. Our last open problem is to return to the starting point of semideﬁnite programming in approximation algorithms, the maximum cut problem and to derive a direct