                                                  KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC
                                                            RANDOMNESS
arXiv:2004.02851v1 [math.LO] 6 Apr 2020




                                                JOHANNA N.Y. FRANKLIN AND CHRISTOPHER P. PORTER




                                                                       Contents
                                            1. Introduction                                                    1
                                            1.1. Notation                                                      3
                                            1.2. Computability theory                                          4
                                            1.3. Core mathematical concepts                                    9
                                            2. Early developments                                             12
                                            2.1. Randomness via initial segment complexity                    13
                                            2.2. Martin-Löf randomness                                       15
                                            2.3. Schnorr’s contributions                                      17
                                            3. Intermittent work: The late twentieth century                  19
                                            3.1. The contributions of Demuth and Kučera                      19
                                            3.2. The contributions of Kurtz, Kautz, and van Lambalgen         20
                                            4. Rapid growth at the turn of the century                        23
                                            4.1. The Turing degrees of random sequences                       23
                                            4.2. Chaitin’s Ω                                                  24
                                            4.3. Randomness-theoretic reducibilities                          25
                                            4.4. Other randomness notions and lowness for randomness          27
                                            4.5. Effective notions of dimension                               35
                                            5. Recent developments                                            37
                                            6. Acknowledgments                                                38
                                            References                                                        38


                                                                   1. Introduction
                                             The goal of this introductory survey is to present the major devel-
                                          opments of algorithmic randomness with an eye toward its historical
                                          development. While two highly comprehensive books [26, 81] and one
                                          thorough survey article [21] have been written on the subject, our goal
                                          is to provide an introduction to algorithmic randomness that will be
                                          both useful for newcomers who want to develop a sense of the field
                                            Date: June 10,2019.
                                                                             1
2                        FRANKLIN AND PORTER

quickly and interesting for researchers already in the field who would
like to see these results presented in chronological order.
   We begin in this section with a brief introduction to computability
theory as well as the underlying mathematical concepts that we will
later draw upon. Once these basic ideas have been presented, we will se-
lectively survey four broad periods in which the primary developments
in algorithmic randomness occurred: (1) the mid-1960s to mid-1970s,
in which the main definitions of algorithmic randomness were laid out
and the basic properties of random sequences were established, (2) the
1980s through the 1990s, which featured intermittent and important
work from a handful of researchers, (3) the 2000s, during which there
was an explosion of results as the discipline matured into a full-fledged
subbranch of computability theory, and (4) the early 2010s, which we
briefly discuss as a lead-in to the remaining surveys in this volume,
which cover in detail many of the exciting developments in this later
period.
   We do not intend this to be a full reconstruction of the history of
algorithmic randomness, nor are we claiming that the only significant
developments in algorithmic randomness are the ones recounted here.
Instead, we aim to provide readers with sufficient context for appre-
ciating the more recent work that is described in the surveys in this
volume. Moreover, we highlight those concepts and results that will be
useful for our readers to be aware of as they read the later chapters in
this volume.
   Before we proceed with the technical material, we briefly comment
upon several broader conceptual questions which may occur to the
newcomer upon reading this survey: What is a definition of algorithmic
randomness intended to capture? What is the aim of studying the
properties of the various types of randomness? And why are there so
many definitions of randomness to begin with? It is certainly beyond
the scope of this survey to answer these questions in any detail. Here
we note first that more recent motivations for defining randomness
and studying the properties of the resulting definitions have become
unmoored from the original motivation that led to early definitions
of randomness, namely, providing a foundation for probability theory
(see, for example, [85]).
   This original motivation led to the desire for a definition of a ran-
dom sequence satisfying the standard statistical properties of almost
every sequence (such as the strong law of large numbers and the law of
the iterated logarithm). Martin-Löf’s definition was the first to satisfy
this constraint. Moreover, this definition proved to be robust, as it
          KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                       3

was shown to be equivalent to definitions of randomness with a sig-
nificantly different informal motivation: while Martin-Löf’s definition
was motivated by the idea that random sequences are statistically typi-
cal, later characterizations were given in terms of incompressibility and
unpredictability.
   With such a robust definition of randomness, one can inquire into just
how stable it is: if we modify a given technical aspect of the definition,
is the resulting notion equivalent to Martin-Löf randomness? As we
will see below, the answer is often negative. As there are a number of
such modifications, we now have a number of nonequivalent definitions
of randomness. Understanding the relationships between these notions
of randomness, as well as the properties of the sequences that satisfy
them, is certainly an important endeavor.
   One might legitimately express the concern that such work amounts
to simply concocting new definitions of randomness and exploring their
features. However, not every new variant of every notion of randomness
has proven to be significant. Typically, attention is given to definitions
of randomness that have multiple equivalent formalizations, or which
interact nicely with computability-theoretic notions, or which provide
insight into some broader phenomenon such as the analysis of almost
sure properties that hold in classical mathematics. Many such devel-
opments are outlined in the surveys in this volume.

1.1. Notation. Our notation will primarily follow [26] to make it eas-
ier to cross-reference these results. The set of natural numbers will
be denoted by ω, and we will usually name elements of this set using
lowercase Latin letters such as m and n. Subsets of ω will be denoted
by capital Latin letters such as A and B. Without loss of generality,
we may associate an element of 2ω (that is, an infinite binary sequence)
with the subset of ω consisting of the places at which the infinite binary
sequence is equal to 1. Finite binary strings, or elements of 2<ω , will
be denoted by lowercase Greek letters such as σ and τ .
   We will often wish to discuss the subset of 2ω whose elements all
begin with the same prefix σ; we will denote this by [σ]. We will
further extend this to an arbitrary subset S of 2<ω :

                [S] = {A ∈ 2ω | σ  A for some σ ∈ S}.

The first n bits of a binary sequence X of length at least n, be it infinite
or finite, will be denoted by X↾n, and the length of a finite binary string
σ will be denoted by |σ|. The concatenation of two binary strings σ
and τ will be denoted by στ .
4                       FRANKLIN AND PORTER

1.2. Computability theory. This section is intended for researchers
in other areas of mathematics who are encountering computability the-
ory for the first time and require an introduction to the underlying
concepts; others may safely skip it. While each of Chapter 2 of [26]
and Chapter 1 of [81] contains all the fundamental concepts of com-
putability theory that will be required for this volume in more detail,
researchers who wish to acquire a deeper understanding of the subject
are urged to consult Cooper [18], Odifreddi [83, 84], or Soare [91].
   Computability theory allows us to think about mathematical func-
tions in an effective context. While there are several ways to formalize
the notions we are about to describe, including Turing machines, reg-
ister machines, the λ-calculus, and µ-recursive functions, we will not
fix such a formalization and will instead encourage the reader to think
of the concepts we describe below in terms of the calculations that a
computer with potentially unlimited memory is capable of carrying out
in a finite but unbounded amount of time.
   The most fundamental concept is that of a partial computable func-
tion ϕ, which can be thought of as an idealized computer program
that accepts natural numbers as inputs and outputs natural numbers
as well. We note that when a computer program is given an input (and
thus when a partial computable function is), it may either return an
answer at some finite point, or stage, or never halt. If a partial com-
putable function halts on every natural number (that is, it is actually
a total function), we simply call it a computable function.
   We now provide some necessary notation. If ϕ halts on input n, we
write ϕ(n)↓; if it does not, we write ϕ(n)↑. Furthermore, if ϕ halts on
input n and gives the output m within s stages, we write ϕ(n)[s] = m
to indicate the number of stages as well as the output.
   At this point, we make three observations. The first is that there
are countably many partial computable functions: each partial com-
putable function is associated with a computer program, and we can
note that a computer program is a finite sequence of characters from a
finite alphabet and that there are thus countably many such objects.
The second is that we can list the partial computable functions in a
computable way simply by generating a list of all of the “grammatically
correct” programs and that thus we can speak about, for instance, the
k th partial computable function ϕk . While there are still only count-
ably many (total) computable functions and thus we can list them as
well, it can be shown that we cannot list them in a computable way
because no computer program is capable of identifying precisely the
partial computable functions that halt on every natural number. The
           KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                            5

third is that there are computable bijections between the natural num-
bers and the set of finite binary strings and the rational numbers, so we
may discuss partial computable functions from or to these sets without
loss of generality.
   Now we can define special kinds of subsets of ω. A computably enu-
merable (c.e.) set is one that is the range of a partial computable
function, so we will often write We for the set that is the range of
the eth partial computable function ϕe . We may think of ϕe as enu-
merating We as follows: we first spend one step trying to compute
ϕe (0), then two steps trying to calculate each of ϕe (0) and ϕe (1), then
three steps trying to calculate each of ϕe (0), ϕe (1), and ϕe (2), and so
on.1 If the calculation of ϕe (n) ever halts, we will eventually discover
this through this dovetailing of computations, and when we do, we
will enumerate its value into our set We . Now we can use this idea of
set enumeration to formalize the concept of approximations to a set:
for any c.e. set We , we say that the approximation to it at stage s
is We [s] = {n | (∃k ≤ s)[ n = ϕe (k)[s] ]}. This gives us a sequence
of approximations
       S              that converge to our c.e. set; in fact, we can write
We = s∈ω We [s]. We quickly observe that there are several equivalent
definitions of a c.e. set; the other one that will be especially useful to
us is that of a c.e. set as one that is the domain of a partial computable
function.
   A set that is itself c.e. and has a c.e. complement is called a com-
putable set. Just as a computable function halts on every input n, we
can get an answer to “Is n in A?” for a computable set A for every n: to
see this, we observe that if A = We and A = Wi , then we can determine
whether n ∈ A by enumerating We and Wi as described above; n must
be in one of them, and we simply note which. These two procedures
can again be dovetailed and performed by a single function that will
give us the characteristic function of A:
                                     (
                                        1 n∈A
                            χA (n) =             .
                                        0 n 6∈ A
We can therefore show that the characteristic function of a computable
set will be a computable function. Once again, there are countably
many c.e. sets and countably many computable sets.
  1Each of these steps may be said to make up a single stage of the computation
mentioned above. These steps will be defined differently based on our formalization
of computability theory: they may be the number of states a Turing machine has
been in or the number of reduction rules applied in the λ-calculus, but, at a less
formal level, we may think of ”spending n steps” as ”running the computer program
for n seconds.”
6                        FRANKLIN AND PORTER

   Often, when we discuss randomness, we will talk about a sequence
of uniformly c.e. sets. Instead of simply requiring that each sequence
in the set be c.e., we require that there be a single computable function
that generates the entire sequence: hAi ii∈ω is uniformly c.e. if there is
a computable function f such that Ai is the range of the f (i)th partial
computable function. Later, we will generalize this concept to other
classes of sets that have some natural indexing: given such a class of
sets C, we can say that that we have a sequence of uniformly C sets
hAi ii∈ω if there is a computable function f such that f (i) gives the
index of the ith set in the sequence.
   The final topic we must consider in order to understand the concepts
in algorithmic randomness we will discuss in this survey is that of oracle
computation, or relativization. This requires us to consider Turing
functionals, usually denoted by capital Greek letters such as Φ, which
require not only a natural number n as input but a sequence X that
serves as an oracle. These functionals can make use of the standard
computational methods of partial computable functions and receive
answers to finitely many queries of the sort “Is k in X?” for use in
their computation, and they can be indexed as Φ0 , Φ1 , . . . just as the
partial computable functions can be indexed as ϕ0 , ϕ1 , . . .. When we
use the sequence X as an oracle for the Turing functional Φ, we write
ΦX . Finally, we note that our notation for stages of computations
using Turing functionals carries over directly from that for stages of
computations using partial computable functions: we write ΦX       e (n)[s]
just as we would have written ϕe (n)[s].
   We say that A is computable from, or Turing reducible to B (A ≤T
B) if there is some Turing functional that, given B as an oracle, can
compute the characteristic function of A. We then use this reducibility
to form equivalence classes of sets that we call the Turing degrees: A
and B have the same Turing degree if A ≤T B and B ≤T A. This allows
us to talk about properties related to a set’s computational strength
and not its particular members (for instance, we can talk about 0, the
Turing degree of the computable sets, rather than “the Turing degree
of the empty set”). The Turing degrees will be denoted by boldface
lowercase Latin letters such as d.
   We will also use relativization to define new sets and Turing degrees.
For instance, for each set A, we define A′ to be {n | ΦA  n (n)↓} and call
it the jump of A. The jump of the empty set, ∅′ , is therefore the set
of all natural numbers n such that {n | Φ∅n (n)↓}, or, in other words,
the indices of those Turing functions that halt given their own index
as input and no additional information. Its Turing degree, 0′ , is the
degree of the famous Halting Problem (see Chapter II.2 of [83]). Since
           KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                            7

A <T A′ for any set A, we can develop an infinite ascending chain
0 <T 0′ <T 0′′ <T . . . of Turing degrees. We note quickly that in
general, the nth jump of A is written as A(n) .
   Other, stronger reducibilities and their corresponding degree struc-
tures have also been found to be useful in the study of randomness.
Turing reductions are not required to converge on any input and, when
they do converge, the size of the elements of the oracle queried during
the computation is not necessarily bounded by any reasonable func-
tion. The next type of reducibility is weak truth-table reducibility, or
wtt-reducibility. A wtt-reduction ΦA is a Turing reduction in which the
computation of ΦA (n), should it halt, is carried out by querying only
the first f (n) bits of A for a given computable function f . Finally, the
last reducibility we will discuss in this survey is truth-table reducibility,
or tt-reducibility: a tt-reduction ΦA is one that will converge at every
input given any oracle A.2 It can be seen that
                    A ≤tt B =⇒ A ≤wtt B =⇒ A ≤T B
but that none of these implications reverse.
   As with Turing reducibility, we can also create equivalence classes of
mutually wtt- or tt-computable sets and study the wtt- and tt-degrees.
We can then ask about the properties of all of these structures—the
Turing degrees, for instance, form an upper semilattice—or types of
substructures within these structures, such as ideals, which are subsets
that are both downward closed and closed under join, or an interval
between two degrees (for instance, the interval [0, 0′ ] in the Turing
degrees). We can also discuss relationships between individual degrees;
for example, we say that two degrees c and d form a minimal pair in
their degree structure if the only degree they both compute is 0.
   It is often useful to characterize a subset of ω in terms of the num-
ber of unbounded quantifiers required to define it. A Σn set A has
a membership relation that can be defined from a computable rela-
tion R(x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , y) using n alternating quantifiers, starting with
an existential one: y ∈ A if and only if
                 ∃x1 ∀x2 ∃x3 . . . Qn xn (R(x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , y)).
Qn will be an existential quantifier if n is odd and a universal quantifier
if n is even. We observe that we can consider these quantifiers to be
strictly alternating. For instance, if we had the membership relation
                              ∃x1 ∃x2 (R(x1 , x2 , y)),
  2While this was not the original definition of a tt-reduction, it is perhaps the
most intuitive. The original definition of a tt-reduction explains its name and can
be found in Chapter III.3 of [83].
8                       FRANKLIN AND PORTER

we could use a computable pairing function p : ω 2 → ω and express
the same relation as
            ∃x∃x1 ≤ x∃x2 ≤ x(x = p(x1 , x2 ) ∧ R(x1 , x2 , y))
instead; note that the second and third existential quantifiers in this
formula are bounded and therefore that
             ∃x1 ≤ x∃x2 ≤ x(x = p(x1 , x2 ) ∧ R(x1 , x2 , y))
is a computable relation.
Example 1.1. ∅′ is Σ1 : e ∈ ∅′ if and only if
                             ∃s(Φ∅e (e)[s]↓).
Example 1.2. The set of all e such that We is finite, Fin, is Σ2 : e
belongs to Fin if and only if
                    ∃m∀s∀k(k > m → k 6∈ We [s]).
  A Πn set is defined in a similar way. It will also have n alternating
quantifiers, but this time starting with a universal quantifier; we note
that the complement of a Σn set is a Πn set and vice versa.
Example 1.3. The set of all e such that ϕe is total, Tot, is Π2 : e
belongs to Tot if and only if
                        ∀k∃s∃m(ϕe (k)[s] = m).
  Finally, we have the ∆n sets, which we define to be those sets that
can be characterized in both a Σn and a Πn way. Since we often refer
to the class of Σn sets simply as Σn (and similarly for the classes of Πn
and ∆n sets), we can write
                             ∆n = Σn ∩ Πn .
  These classes of sets—the Σn , Πn , and ∆n sets—form the arithmetic
hierarchy. We will note some fundamental facts relating these classes
to the classes of sets we have already discussed (see Chapter IV.1 of
[83]):
    (1) Σ0 = Π0 = ∆0 = ∆1 is simply the class of computable sets.
    (2) A set is Σ1 if and only if it is c.e.
    (3) A set is ∆n exactly when it is Turing computable from ∅(n−1) .
  Furthermore, this hierarchy is proper: as long as n > 0, we will
always have ∆n ( Σn and ∆n ( Πn .
  We may describe subsets of natural numbers in ways other than the
arithmetic hierarchy, too. For instance, we have the high and low sets,
which are defined based on the usefulness of the sets in question as
oracles:
          KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                       9

      • a low set A ⊆ ω is one such that A′ ≡T 0′ , and
      • a high set A ⊆ ω is one such that A′ ≥T 0′′ .
It is often more useful to define high sets in terms of the domination
property discovered by Martin [65]: A set is high if and only if it Turing
computes a function f that dominates all computable functions (that
is, for each computable g, we have f (n) ≥ g(n) for some sufficiently
large n).
   Similarly, we may consider highness and lowness in the context of tt-
reducibility: a set A is superhigh if A′ ≥tt 0′′ and superlow if A′ ≡tt 0′ .
   Another hierarchy of classes of sets that has proven useful is the
genericity hierarchy, which we can compare to a hierarchy of random-
ness notions that we will see later. Instead of classifying sets based di-
rectly on the complexity of their definitions, we classify them in terms
of the complexity of the sets they are forced to either meet or avoid.
Definition 1.4. Let S be a set of finite binary strings. We say that
an infinite binary sequence A meets S if there is some σ ∈ S that is
an initial segment of A. Furthermore, we say that A avoids S if there
is some initial segment of A that is not extended by any element of S.
   This gives us the framework necessary to define generic sets once we
have also defined a dense set of strings: a set of strings S is dense if
for every τ ∈ 2<ω , there is a σ ∈ S that extends it.
Definition 1.5. A sequence A is n-generic if it either meets or avoids
every Σn set and weakly n-generic if it meets every dense Σn set.
  These classes of sequences once again form a proper hierarchy: every
n generic is weakly n-generic, and every weakly (n + 1)-generic is n-
generic.
  Other classes of sets whose definitions are less closely tied to the
arithmetical hierarchy have also been shown to be useful. For instance,
we will make use of the sets of hyperimmune degree, which are defined,
once again, using a domination property [77]: a set A has hyperim-
mune degree if it computes a function that is not dominated by any
computable function. The sets that do not have hyperimmune degree
are said to be of hyperimmune-free degree; it is worth noting that there
are continuum many such sets and that all of them (except the com-
putable sets) are Turing incomparable to ∅′ .
1.3. Core mathematical concepts. Several concepts from classical
mathematics will prove useful; we summarize them here. First we
will recall some fundamental facts about the Cantor space, 2ω , as a
topological space and as a probability space.
10                            FRANKLIN AND PORTER

   In the Cantor space, our basic open sets have the form [σ] for σ ∈
2<ω : as previously mentioned, [σ] is the set of elements of 2ω that
extend σ. In fact, these sets are all clopen, and the clopen sets are
the finite unions of these [σ]’s. Now that we have done this, we can
describe the complexity of the open sets that we generate in this way
in terms of their generating sets. For instance, we can say that [S]
is effectively open if S is c.e., and more generally, we can define the
effective Borel hierarchy as we defined the arithmetic hierarchy in the
previous subsection: [S] is Σ01 if it is the union of a c.e. sequence of basic
open sets, Π01 if it is the complement of a Σ01 set, Σ0n for n > 1 if it is
the union of a sequence of uniformly Π0n−1 sets (that is, a computable
sequence of Π0n−1 classes), and so on. It is worth noting at this point
that it is customary to refer to a subset of the Cantor space, especially
one defined using this hierarchy, as a class.
   We can also establish the Lebesgue measure on the Cantor space:
the measure of a basic open set [σ] is µ([σ]) = 2−|σ| , and the measure
of any other measurable set is determined in the standard way.
   We will often identify the Cantor space with the unit interval (0,1)
since these spaces are measure-theoretically isomorphic. Here, we make
use of the interval topology on R, and our basic open sets are inter-
vals (a, b). We will establish the Lebesgue measure in this context
as well, denoted throughout by µ once again [57]. This is the “stan-
dard” measure on R, and the Lebesgue measure of such an interval is
µ((a, b)) = b − a for finite a and b.
   We can also describe elements of R using concepts from classical
computability theory. In general, we identify a real α in the unit inter-
val with the element A of the Cantor space such that α = 0.A.3 This
allows us to say that such a real is computable if the corresponding
A ∈ 2ω is; it is equivalent to say that a real α is computable if there
is a computable sequence of rationals hqi i converging to it such that
|qn − α| < 2−n for every n [99, 100].
   Of course, we would like to extend this to computable enumerability
as well: just as a c.e. set is one which we build up from ∅ by enu-
merating elements into it, a left-c.e. real α is one that is effectively
approximable from below; that is, there is a computable, increasing
sequence of rationals that converges to α. Correspondingly, a right-c.e.
real is one that is effectively approximable from above. Equivalently,
we could define these in terms of Dedekind cuts: a real α is left-c.e. if

     3While some reals may have two representations, this does not matter: such a real
will be rational and therefore the corresponding possibilities for A are computable
and will both have the same computational strength.
          KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                      11

and only if its left cut {q ∈ Q | q < α} is a c.e. set and right-c.e. if its
right cut (defined similarly) is a c.e. set.
   We can extend the notions of computability and computable enumer-
ability once more, this time to functions from ω or another computable
set to R. To do so, we need to be able to talk about a sequence of reals
that is uniformly computable or left-c.e. These definitions are built
directly from those of uniformly computable and uniformly c.e. sets:
Definition 1.6. A uniformly computable (left-c.e.) sequence of reals is
a sequence hri ii∈ω such that there is a computable function f : ω 2 → Q
such that for a given i, hf (i, n)in∈ω is a computable (left-c.e.) approx-
imation for ri .
Definition 1.7. A function from a computable set to R is computable
if its values are uniformly computable reals, and it is computably enu-
merable if its values are uniformly left-c.e. reals.
   Now we turn our attention to the general mathematical ideas we will
need to study randomness properly and place them in the context of
computability theory. The first concept, that of a martingale, will be
useful when we discuss the predictability framework for randomness.
In general, a martingale is a certain type of stochastic process, but here
we need only think of it as a type of betting strategy on finite binary
strings.
Definition 1.8. [59] A function d : 2<ω → R≥0 is a martingale if it
obeys the fairness condition
                                d(σ0) + d(σ1)
                         d(σ) =
                                      2
for all σ ∈ 2<ω . We say that a martingale d succeeds on A ∈ 2ω if
                           lim sup d(A↾n) = ∞,
                              n

and the success set of d, which we will write as S[d], is the set of all
sequences upon which d succeeds.
  We can think of d(σ) as expressing the amount of capital that we
have after betting on the initial string σ using the strategy inherent
in d (so d(hi) is our capital before any bets are placed) and S[d] as
the set of sequences that we can make arbitrarily much money betting
on if the payout is determined by d. As shown by Ville, P ⊆ 2ω has
Lebesgue measure zero if and only if there is some martingale d such
that P ⊆ S[d] [102].
  A computable or c.e. martingale is simply a martingale that is, re-
spectively, a computable or c.e. function.
12                        FRANKLIN AND PORTER

  To define the last of the core mathematical concepts in this section,
Hausdorff dimension, we must consider a variation of Lebesgue measure
on the Cantor space.
Definition 1.9. [40] Let 0 ≤ s ≤ 1. The s-measure of a basic open set
[σ] is µs ([σ]) = 2−s|σ| .
     This will allow us to define dimensions of subsets of Cantor space.
Definition 1.10. An n-cover of a subset S of Cantor space is a set of
strings C ⊆ 2≥n such that S ⊆ [C]. We define
                        (                                 )
                         X
          Hns (S) = inf    µs ([σ]) | C is an n-cover of S .
                           σ∈C

     The s-dimensional outer Hausdorff measure of S is
                            H s (S) = lim Hns (S),
                                       n
and the Hausdorff dimension of S is
                      dimH (S) = inf{s | H s (S) = 0}.
We note that these definitions are specialized here to Cantor space. For
details about these notions in more general settings, see, for instance,
the monographs [86] or [27].
   We further note that the effective version of Hausdorff dimension
that we will discuss later, originally due to Lutz (see, e.g. [61]), is
instead based on a type of betting strategy called an s-gale rather
than n-covers. In fact, Lutz provided an equivalent characterization of
classical dimension in terms of s-gales and then gave an effectivization
of this alternative notion.

                        2. Early developments
   During the 1960s and early 1970s, the foundation of much of the
current work in algorithmic randomness was laid. Earlier work by
von Mises, Ville, Church, and Wald in the first half of the twentieth
century highlighted the problem of defining the notion of an individual
random sequence, but no satisfactory definition of a random sequence
was provided during this time. However, several promising definitions
of randomness emerged in the work of (i) Kolmogorov in the mid-1960s,
(ii) Martin-Löf in the late 1960s, and (iii) Schnorr and Levin in the early
1970s.
   We will not rehearse the broader philosophical concerns that moti-
vated the search for a definition of an individual random sequence (for
such an account, see [85]). For our purposes, it suffices to note the key
           KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                      13

desiderata for a definition of randomness that came into focus during
the first half of the twentieth century: (1) a random sequence is one
that should not be contained in any null sets that are “nicely” definable
in some way (clarified in part by the work of Wald and Ville on von
Mises’ original definition of randomness) and (2) one should formalize
these “nicely” definable null sets in terms of effectivity (as suggested
by Church’s introduction of concepts of computability theory to the
task of defining randomness).

2.1. Randomness via initial segment complexity. The first signif-
icant breakthroughs in the task of offering such a definition of random-
ness came in the work of Kolmogorov and, independently, Solomonoff
[92, 93], who provided different accounts of the initial segment com-
plexity of sequences. We will focus here on Kolmogorov’s contribution.
   Kolmogorov did not set out to provide a definition of random se-
quences in terms of some class of effective null sets. Rather, his aim
was to provide a notion of randomness for finite strings (again, for the
motivation behind this aim, see [85]), which was, in turn, defined in
terms of Kolmogorov complexity. Such a definition is found in Kol-
mogorov’s 1965 paper “Three approaches to the quantitative definition
of information” (see [48] for the original English translation of the ar-
ticle).4 For a fixed partial computable function M : 2<ω → 2<ω , often
called a machine, and some τ ∈ 2<ω , we can consider all strings σ ∈ 2<ω
such that M(σ)↓ = τ ; if we consider each such string σ to contain infor-
mation about how to produce the string τ (via the function M), then
the shortest such string σ provides the minimal amount of information
necessary for producing τ . This gives us a measure of the complexity
of τ :
Definition 2.1. The plain Kolmogorov complexity of a string τ rela-
tive to the machine M is
                      CM (τ ) = min{|σ| | M(σ)↓ = τ },
assuming there is some τ ∈ 2<ω such that M(σ)↓ = τ ; if no such τ
exists, we set CM (τ ) = ∞.
   The dependence of the above definition on the function M is undesir-
able, for clearly, different choices of M produce different values CM (τ )
for each fixed τ ∈ 2<ω . Kolmogorov addressed this problem by defin-
ing his complexity measure in terms of a universal partial computable
  4Here we do not exactly follow the details of Kolmogorov’s presentation; he
initially defines conditional Kolmogorov complexity in his paper.
14                       FRANKLIN AND PORTER

function: If hMe ie∈ω is a fixed computable enumeration of partial com-
putable functions from 2<ω to 2<ω , then we can define a universal
partial computable U : 2<ω → 2<ω by setting U(1e 0σ) = Me (σ) for
each e ∈ ω and σ ∈ 2<ω (assuming that Me (σ)↓; otherwise, we set
U(1e 0σ)↑). Then we define C(σ) to be CU (σ) for each σ ∈ 2<ω .
  The value in defining complexity in terms of a universal partial com-
putable function is seen in the following result, which is often referred
to as the invariance theorem:
Theorem 2.2 (Kolmogorov, [48]). For every partial computable M :
2<ω → 2<ω , there is some c ∈ ω such that for every σ ∈ 2<ω ,
                          C(σ) ≤ CM (σ) + c.
   Note that the invariance theorem implies that the complexity values
determined by two different choices of universal partial computable
functions U and U ′ yield complexity measures that only differ by a
finite fixed constant c: |CU (σ) − CU ′ (σ)| ≤ c for every σ ∈ 2<ω .
   From Kolmogorov’s notion of complexity, how do we define the ran-
domness of binary strings? Let us first consider two informal examples,
a string σ1 consisting of 50,000 1’s and a string σ2 of length 50,000 ob-
tained by the tosses of a fair coin. The shortest program needed to
generate σ1 has length considerably shorter than 50,000, as such a pro-
gram only needs to specify that the symbol ‘1’ is to be repeated 50,000
times. However, any program that generates σ2 must, with high prob-
ability, have most, if not all, of the entire string σ2 hardwired into
the program, as most strings obtained by tossing a fair coin contain
very few regularities and thus cannot be compressed. Following this
example, the idea behind Kolmogorov’s definition of randomness is to
identify randomness with incompressibility. We now turn to the formal
details.
   Kolmogorov did not explicitly define randomness in his 1965 paper,
but we find the following definition in the 1969 paper [49]. Consider
those strings σ such that C(σ) ≥ |σ|. As there is no program to
generate such a string σ that is shorter than σ, the most efficient way
to produce such a string via U is simply to give it as input and copy it
directly to output.
   More generally, for a fixed c ∈ ω, we can consider the set of all
strings that cannot be compressed by more than c bits. Let us say
of a string σ ∈ 2<ω that it is c-incompressible if C(σ) ≥ |σ| − c. For
n ≥ c, since the number of strings of length strictly less than n − c
is equal to 1 + 21 + 22 + . . . + 2n−c−1 = 2n−c − 1, there are at least
2n (1 − 2−c ) − 1 c-incompressible strings of length n, thereby yielding a
plethora of random strings (for sufficiently large n).
          KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                    15

2.2. Martin-Löf randomness. It is natural to try to extend this def-
inition of randomness for finite binary strings to infinite binary se-
quences, a task that Martin-Löf sought to accomplish. Indeed, we can
define a sequence A ∈ 2ω to be c-incompressible if there is some c ∈ ω
such that C(A↾n) ≥ n − c for every n ∈ ω. However, as shown by
Martin-Löf (see [26, Theorem 3.1.4]), no sequence is c-incompressible
for every c ∈ ω. In fact, he shows that for every A ∈ 2ω , there are
infinitely many n such that C(A↾n) ≤ n − log(n) (where log(n) is the
binary logarithm).
   Instead of seeking to define random infinite sequences by modifying
the underlying notion of Kolmogorov complexity, Martin-Löf in [66]
took an alternative approach, defining randomness in terms of certain
effective statistical tests. Martin-Löf aimed to formalize the notion
of statistical tests used in hypothesis testing, where each such test
has a critical region such that, given a sequence of observations con-
tained in this region, we reject the null hypothesis at a certain level
of significance. In Martin-Löf’s formalization, such a test is given by
a computable sequence of effectively open sets hUi ii∈ω , each of which
corresponds to a critical region given by a certain level of significance.
Moreover, if a sequence is random, then it should not be contained in
the critical regions at every level of significance; eventually, we should
find a critical region at some level of significance that the random se-
quence avoids. Thus we have the following definition:
Definition 2.3. A Martin-Löf test is a sequence of uniformly Σ01 classes
hUi ii∈ω such that µ(Ui ) ≤ 2−i for every i ∈ ω.T A sequence A ∈ 2ω is
said to pass a Martin-Löf test hUi ii∈ω if A ∈
                                              / i∈ω Ui , and a sequence
is Martin-Löf random if it passes every Martin-Löf test.
   Martin-Löf also proved in [66] that there is a universal Martin-Löf
                                                                T
T a test hUi ii∈ω such that for all Martin-Löf tests hVi ii∈ω , i∈ω Vi ⊆
test:
  i∈ω Ui . This provides an easy argument that the class of Martin-
Löf random sequences has measure 1: since the sequences that are
not
T Martin-Löf random are precisely those that are not contained in
  i∈ω Ui for a universal test hUi ii∈ω , the class of Martin-Löf random
sequences must be conull. Moreover, Martin-Löf showed that common
laws of probability such as the strong law of large numbers and the
law of the iterated logarithm are satisfied by all Martin-Löf random
sequences.
   Martin-Löf also investigated the extent to which one can characterize
Martin-Löf randomness in terms of initial segment complexity, showing
that for every sequence A such that, for some c ∈ ω, C(A↾n) ≥ n − c
holds for infinitely many n ∈ ω, A is Martin-Löf random (see [67]). He
16                             FRANKLIN AND PORTER

was, however, unable to establish the converse, which in fact does not
hold, as shown much later independently by J. Miller [73] and Nies,
Stephan, and Terwijn [82] (see Section 4.4 below for more details).
   The problem of providing an initial segment complexity character-
ization of randomness for infinite sequences was solved independently
by Levin and Schnorr, who worked with an alternative notion of Kol-
mogorov complexity, namely, prefix-free Kolmogorov complexity. Re-
call that a set S ⊆ 2<ω is prefix-free if for every σ ∈ S, if τ ≻ σ, then
τ ∈/ S. We can extend the notion of being prefix-free to a machine
M : 2<ω → 2<ω by stipulating that M is prefix-free if the domain of
M is a prefix-free subset of 2<ω . Both Levin [58] and Chaitin [15] in-
dependently defined prefix-free Kolmogorov complexity in terms of a
prefix-free universal machine. Note that one can effectively enumer-
ate the collection of all prefix-free machines hMe ie∈ω and hence we can
define U as we did in Subsection 2.1 above.
Definition 2.4. The prefix-free Kolmogorov complexity of a string τ
is given by
                   K(τ ) = min{|σ| | U(σ)↓ = τ },
where U is a universal, prefix-free machine.
   For a prefix-free machine M, we write KM to stand for prefix-free
complexity relative to the machine M. One can readily verify that re-
sults such as the invariance theorem and the existence of incompressible
strings still hold for prefix-free complexity.
   With this modified notion of Kolmogorov complexity, Levin and
Schnorr independently proved the following:5
Theorem 2.5 (Levin [58], Schnorr [15]). A ∈ 2ω is Martin-Löf random
if and only if there is some c ∈ ω such that for all n ∈ ω,
                                   K(A↾n) ≥ n − c.
   As part of the proof of the Levin-Schnorr theorem, it is standard to
prove that for every A that is not Martin-Löf random, there is some
prefix-free machine M such that for every c ∈ ω, there is an n ∈ ω such
that KM (A↾n) < n − c (where KM is prefix-free complexity relative
to the machine M). More specifically, given a Martin-Löf test that A
fails to pass, we explicitly construct such a machine M. This is done
via what was earlier referred to as the Kraft-Chaitin theorem but is
currently called the KC-theorem (as in [26]) or the machine existence
theorem (as in [81]). The theorem is as follows; see the footnote in
Section 3.6 of [26] for an explanation of its origins.
     5Schnorr is given credit for this result in Chaitin’s [15].
          KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                     17

Theorem 2.6. Given P a computable     enumeration of pairs h(ni , σi )i ⊆
                            −ni
ω × 2<ω such that     i∈ω 2     ≤ 1, there is a prefix-free machine M
and a sequence of strings hτi i such that for every i, M(τi ) = σi and
|τi | = ni .

   To see the details of how this result is used in the proof of the Levin-
Schnorr theorem, see [81, Theorem 3.2.9].
   The Levin-Schnorr theorem thus establishes the equivalence of a
characterization of randomness in terms of statistical properties with
a characterization of randomness in terms of incompressibility. In fact,
the proof of the Levin-Schnorr theorem shows that (i) if a sequence
is compressible, then there is a statistical test such that its critical
regions contain the sequence at all levels of significance (each level cor-
responding to how compressible the sequence is), and (ii) if a sequence
is statistically atypical, contained in all critical regions at every level
of significance of some statistical test, then we can define a machine
to compress this sequence (and in fact, every sequence contained in all
such critical regions).


2.3. Schnorr’s contributions. Shortly after the publication of Martin-
Löf’s definition of randomness, Schnorr developed an alternative ap-
proach to algorithmic randomness using martingales as originally de-
fined by Ville. This approach constitutes the third major framework for
algorithmic randomness: the unpredictability framework. Not only did
Schnorr provide a characterization of Martin-Löf randomness in terms
of unpredictability, but he also introduced two alternative definitions of
randomness, computable randomness and Schnorr randomness in [88]
and [89]; these definitions make use of computable and c.e. martingales
as described in Section 1.3.

Theorem 2.7 (Schnorr, [88, 89]). A sequence is Martin-Löf random if
and only if no c.e. martingale succeeds on it.

   In other words, a sequence is Martin-Löf random exactly when no c.e.
martingale can predict it sufficiently well to make an arbitrarily large
amount of money on it. We quickly note that the standard proof of
this theorem involves interpreting a Martin-Löf test as a c.e. martingale
and that therefore, since there is a universal Martin-Löf test, there is
also a universal c.e. martingale.
   As noted above, in the same works, we find two new randomness
notions, namely, computable randomness and the notion now known
as Schnorr randomness. The definition of Schnorr randomness requires
18                           FRANKLIN AND PORTER

the definition of an order function, a nondecreasing and unbounded
computable function from ω to ω.6
Definition 2.8. A sequence is computably random if no computable
martingale succeeds on it.
Definition 2.9. A sequence A is Schnorr random if, for every com-
putable martingale d and order function p,
                                  d(A↾n)
                          lim sup        < ∞.
                             n     p(n)
  In other words, a sequence is computably random if no computable
martingale can predict it well enough to make an arbitrarily large
amount of money betting on it, and a sequence is Schnorr random if,
while a computable martingale may be able to predict it well enough
to make arbitrarily much betting on it, we can bound the rate at which
this occurs.
  In [89], Schnorr also showed that Schnorr randomness could be char-
acterized using a more effective form of Martin-Löf tests: rather than
require the measure of each test component to be effectively approx-
imable from below, one should require it to be approximable from both
below and above.
Definition 2.10. A Schnorr test is a Martin-Löf test hVi ii∈ω such that
the measure of the ith test component, µ(Vi ), is exactly 2−i .
   We note here that it is actually only necessary that the measures of
the test components be uniformly computable; however, it is customary
to use 2−i as the measure of the ith component.
   The primary difference between Martin-Löf randomness and the two
alternative definitions that Schnorr proposed is that the latter two def-
initions are more constructive than the former. First, Schnorr objected
to the notion of a c.e. martingale, questioning why one should only re-
quire that the values of a martingale be computably approximable from
below but not from above. Thus, in the move from c.e. martingales to
computable martingales, we arrive at the definition of computable ran-
domness. Second, Schnorr rejected the standard notion of martingale
success, pointing out the possibility of winnings of a gambler increas-
ing so slowly that this success goes undetected. A better approach, on
     6It is usual at the time of writing to require only that an order function be
increasing and unbounded. For instance, this is the definition used in Downey
and Hirschfeldt [26]. However, when Schnorr originally defined order functions, he
required that they be computable as well, and since we will not consider noncom-
putable order functions in this survey, we prefer to use his original definition for
simplicity’s sake.
         KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                   19

Schnorr’s view, is to require a computable lower bound on the success
of a martingale, so that, at least in principle, the gambler can recog-
nize that her winnings are growing without bound. In the move from
the standard notion of success to his more constructive alternative, we
then arrive at the definition of Schnorr randomness.
   While Schnorr randomness and computable randomness were the
first variations on Martin-Löf randomness to be considered, many oth-
ers have been presented since then. While several will be discussed in
later sections, two general approaches will not appear in this survey.
One is higher randomness, which allows randomness notions defined
in terms of effective descriptive set theory and is discussed in Monin’s
survey. Another is resource-bounded randomness, which allows ran-
domness notions whose definitions involve time and space bounds and
is discussed in Stull’s survey.

    3. Intermittent work: The late twentieth century
   After the initial flurry of results established primarily by Martin-
Löf, Schnorr, and Levin in the late 1960s and early 1970s, intermittent
work on algorithmic randomness was carried out in the mid-1970s, the
1980s, and the early 1990s. We highlight some of these developments,
starting with the work of Demuth and Kučera.

3.1. The contributions of Demuth and Kučera. Working in the
tradition of the Markov school of constructive analysis, the Czech math-
ematician Osvald Demuth made a number of important contributions
to the study of algorithmic randomness. As laid out in the survey [53],
not only did Demuth independently discover the notions of Martin-Löf
randomness and computable randomness, but he also developed several
notions of randomness that have proven to be fruitful in the decades
since then. For a survey on Demuth’s use of notions of randomness
in constructive analysis, particularly the notions now called Demuth
randomness and weak Demuth randomness, see [53]. For more on De-
muth’s contributions to computable analysis, see both the Rute survey
and the Porter survey in this volume.
   Kučera, who collaborated with Demuth on a number of projects in
computable analysis and effective notions of genericity, also proved a
number of key results in algorithmic randomness in the mid-1980s. We
focus primarily on the paper [51], which contains several results that
are now considered to be classical theorems in algorithmic randomness.
Theorem 3.1 (Kučera [51]). For every Π01 class P with µ(P) > 0 and
every Martin-Löf random A ∈ 2ω , there is some tail B of A, that is, a
20                         FRANKLIN AND PORTER

B such that A = σB for some σ ∈ 2<ω , such that B ∈ P. In particular,
the collection of Turing degrees of members of P includes every degree
containing a Martin-Löf random sequence.
   As noted in [9], another way to formulate the first part of this theo-
rem is that for any Π01 P class of positive measure and any Martin-Löf
random sequence X, we can apply the shift operator (each application
of which drops the initial bit of a sequence) to X a finite number of
times to eventually obtain an element of P. Seen in this light, this
result relates ergodic theory and algorithmic randomness, a topic that
has been fruitfully explored, as laid out in Towsner’s survey in this
volume.
   Next, recall that a sequence A has diagonally noncomputable degree
(or DNC degree) if there is some f ≤T A such that f (i) 6= ϕi (i) for every
i ∈ ω. Sequences of DNC degree are closely related to completions
of Peano arithmetic, which are studied in the context of the Gödel
incompleteness phenomenon. In this same paper [51], Kučera proved
the following (in a slightly different form):
Theorem 3.2. Every Martin-Löf random sequence has DNC degree.
     Lastly, we also find the following in [51]:
Theorem 3.3. For every Turing degree a ≥ 0′ , there is some Martin-
Löf random A ∈ a.
   Implicit in the proof of this last result is the theorem that for every
B ∈ 2ω , there is some Martin-Löf random A ∈ 2ω such that B ≤T A.
This result is now referred to as the Kučera-Gács theorem, as it was
independently established by Gács [36], who actually showed that there
is a computable bound on the use of the computation of B from A, in
other words, that B ≤wtt A.
   Kučera’s result is counterintuitive: How can every sequence that
computes the halting problem be Turing equivalent to a Martin-Löf
random sequence? It turns out that this phenomenon is the exception
rather than the rule, for as Sacks’ Theorem states [87], for every A ∈ 2ω ,
there are measure zero many sequences X ∈ 2ω such that A ≤T X.
Thus, only measure zero many Martin-Löf random sequences are com-
putationally strong enough to compute the halting problem. Moreover,
as we will see in Section 4.1 below, this phenomenon is incompatible
with stronger notions of randomness.
3.2. The contributions of Kurtz, Kautz, and van Lambalgen.
Now we turn to the work of Kurtz, Kautz and van Lambalgen. While
Kučera focused on situating the Martin-Löf random sequences within
           KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                              21

the Turing degrees, Kurtz created true hierarchies of randomness no-
tions for the first time in his 1981 dissertation [55]: the n-random and
weakly n-random sequences.
Definition 3.4. A ∈ 2ω is n-randomPif for every sequence hSi ii∈ω of
uniformly Σ0n subsets of 2ω such that i∈ω µ(Si ) is finite, A belongs to
only finitely many Si ’s. A is weakly n-random if it is not contained in
any Π0n class of Lebesgue measure zero, or equivalently, if it belongs to
every conull Σ0n subset of 2ω .
   The relationships between these hierarchies that we would expect to
hold based on their names actually do: every n-random set is weakly
n-random, every weakly (n + 1)-random set is n-random, and these
inclusions are strict for all n ≥ 1.7 We can also note that a result
of Solovay shows us that the 1-random sets are precisely the Martin-
Löf random sets [94], giving us another type of test characterization
for Martin-Löf randomness. Furthermore, weak 1-randomness has been
extensively studied in its own right and is now known as Kurtz random-
ness. For instance, Kurtz showed that every hyperimmune degree is in
fact Kurtz random. This notion of randomness is therefore very weak,
and it can reasonably be claimed that it is not a “proper” randomness
notion.8
   Ten years later, Kautz would continue Kurtz’s investigations of n-
randomness and weak n-randomness as well as his own measure-theoretic
pursuits in his dissertation [44]. In particular, he showed that n-
randomness can be characterized using more traditional methods such
as tests of the same form as Martin-Löf tests, Kolmogorov complex-
ity, and martingales. We define a Σ0n -test to be a sequence hVi ii∈ω of
uniformly Σ0n classes such that µ(Vi ) ≤ 2−i for all i. We also consider
randomness relative to an oracle for the first time in this survey. When
we say that A is random relative to B (for a given randomness notion),
we mean in general that access to B does not allow us to derandomize
A. For n-randomness, this is straightforward: we simply use ∅(n−1) as
an oracle for the universal machine, the universal martingale, or the
components of the universal test that we are using to determine the
randomness of A. However, for other randomness notions, it is far less
  7Kurtz himself only proved that there are n-random degrees that are not weakly
(n + 1)-random; the other separation was proven later by Kautz [44].
   8
    We note that randomness notions that result in large classes of random se-
quences are often called weak, even though the tests used to describe such notions
are necessarily more restricted: it is easier to pass every test in a smaller class of
tests. Similarly, a randomness notion describing a relatively small class of random
sequences is called strong.
22                      FRANKLIN AND PORTER

straightforward; see Franklin’s survey in this volume for a discussion
of the issues that arise.
   We will write K A (σ) as the prefix-free Kolmogorov complexity of σ
relative to A.
Theorem 3.5 (Kautz, [44]). For A ∈ 2ω , the following are equivalent:
  (1) A is n-random.
  (2) For every Σ0n test hVi i, A 6∈ i Vi .
                                    T
  (3) A is 1-random relative to ∅(n−1) .
                           (n−1)
  (4) For some c ∈ ω, K 0        (A↾m) ≥ m − c for all m.
           0
  (5) No Σn martingale succeeds on A.
   Kurtz also studied the Turing jumps of n-randoms; for instance, he
shows that the class {A | A(n−1) ≥T ∅(n) } is null and does not contain
any (n + 1)-random sets.
   Finally, Kautz considered randomness with respect to computable
measures in general and not just the Lebesgue measure, allowing him
to define n-randomness with respect to an arbitrary computable mea-
sure ν. He further examined the extent to which 1-randomness is pre-
served under effective transformations, and how to translate between
randomness with respect to various computable measures. Porter con-
tinues this discussion of randomness with respect to different measures,
both computable and noncomputable, in his survey.
   Kautz also demonstrated that any computable subset of an n-random
sequence is itself n-random and that, in particular, a computable sub-
set of an n-random sequence cannot be computed from “the rest” of
the sequence and is in fact n-random relative to it [44]. In contrast,
he also showed that for every n ≥ 1, there is a weakly n-random set
A ⊕ B such that A is not weakly n-random relative to B. This work
is parallel to that of van Lambalgen who, in [101], precisely character-
ized the circumstances under which the join of two Martin-Löf random
sequences would itself be random:
Theorem 3.6 (van Lambalgen, [101]). For A, B ∈ 2ω , the following
are equivalent:
    (1) A ⊕ B is n-random.
    (2) A is n-random and B is n-random relative to A.
   As an immediate consequence, we get that a sequence A is n-random
relative to an n-random sequence B if and only if B is n-random rel-
ative to A. This symmetry of relative randomness has proven to be
an extremely useful tool in the study of Martin-Löf randomness. A
more detailed discussion of this theorem, specifically in the context of
         KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                   23

alternative notions of randomness, can be found in Franklin’s survey
in this volume.

        4. Rapid growth at the turn of the century
   During the early 2000s, interest in algorithmic randomness grew con-
siderably in the computability theory community. Here we highlight
some of the more significant results.

4.1. The Turing degrees of random sequences. As discussed in
Section 2, Schnorr introduced two alternatives to Martin-Löf random-
ness, namely Schnorr randomness and computable randomness. Sepa-
rations of these notions were initially established by Schnorr [88] and
Wang [104, 105]. The results were extended by Nies, Stephan, and Ter-
wijn [82], who proved that these notions could be separated in precisely
the high degrees.
Theorem 4.1 (Nies, Stephan, and Terwijn [82]). The following are
equivalent for A ∈ 2ω :
     (i) A has high Turing degree (that is, A′ ≥T ∅′′ ).
    (ii) There is some B ≡T A that is computably random but not
         Martin-Löf random.
   (iii) There is some C ≡T A that is Schnorr random but not com-
         putably random.
   Nies, Stephan, and Terwijn also proved that this theorem holds when
we consider only left-c.e. reals, so we can separate these notions even
in that more limited context.
   Another degree-theoretic result established in this period by Stephan
characterizes the Martin-Löf random sequences that are Turing com-
plete.
Theorem 4.2 (Stephan [96]). For every Martin-Löf random sequence
A ∈ 2ω , A ≥T ∅′ if and only if A has PA degree, that is, A computes a
consistent completion of Peano arithmetic.
  Recall from the previous section that Kučera proved that every Tur-
ing degree above 0′ contains a Martin-Löf random sequence. From
Stephan’s results, these are precisely the PA degrees that contain a
Martin-Löf sequence. Later, Franklin and Ng would characterize these
using a new randomness notion, difference randomness [32].
  Lastly, a key result on the Turing degrees of Martin-Löf random
sequences relative to various oracles, known as the XYZ theorem, is
the following:
24                       FRANKLIN AND PORTER

Theorem 4.3 (J. Miller and Yu [76]). For a Martin-Löf random se-
quence X, if X ≤T Y , where Y is Martin-Löf random with respect to
some Z ∈ 2ω , then X is also Martin-Löf random with respect to Z.
  The phenomenon described in the XYZ theorem can be seen as a
kind of preservation of randomness: if we map a random sequence Y
to a random sequence X, this map preserves relative randomness, in
the sense that if an oracle Z does not detect Y as non-random, then it
does not detect X as non-random.
  It immediately follows from this result that every Martin-Löf random
sequence Turing reducible to an n-random sequence for n ≥ 2 is itself
n-random.

4.2. Chaitin’s Ω. In [15], Chaitin introduced his celebrated number
Ω, the halting probability, which is defined to be
                                 X
                             Ω=       2−|σ| ,
                                  U (σ)↓

where U is a fixed universal, prefix-free machine. That is, Ω is the
probability that U halts on some initial segment of an infinite input
sequence.
   Given that this definition is dependent on the choice of universal
machine U, it is more accurate to define the family of Ω-numbers ΩU
for every universal prefix-free U. However, we will still refer to a fixed
Ω-number as Ω, with the understanding that any property that we
attribute to this Ω-number will hold of all Ω-numbers.
   Clearly Ω is left-c.e., since it is the limit of a computable sequence
of partial sums determined by running U for only finitely many steps.
More significantly, Chaitin proved that Ω is both Turing complete and
Martin-Löf random. That is, Ω encodes all of the information of the
halting problem, and yet the bits of Ω are arranged in such a way as
to pass all Martin-Löf tests.
   Solovay, in unpublished work in the 1970s [94], introduced a new
reducibility for left-c.e. reals that is now known as Solovay reducibility.
Given left-c.e. reals α and β, α is Solovay reducible to β, written α ≤S
β, if there is a c ∈ ω and a partial computable function f : Q → Q
such that for every q ∈ Q such that q < β, f (q) is defined, f (q) < α,
and α − f (q) < c(β − q). That is, from any rational less than β
that is sufficiently close to β, we can compute a rational less than α
that is sufficiently close to α. One consequence of this definition, the
formal details of which we do not consider here, is that any computable
sequence of rationals converging to β from below can be effectively
          KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                       25

transformed into a computable sequence of rationals converging to α
from below at the same rate (up to a multiplicative constant).
   Solovay proved that for every left-c.e. real α, α ≤S Ω. Calude,
Hertling, Khoussainov, and Wang [13] later studied Ω-like left-c.e. reals,
where a left-c.e. real β is Ω-like if for every left-c.e. real α, α ≤S β. The
main result in [13] is that if β is Ω-like, then there is some universal,
prefix-free machine U such that β = ΩU . Thus, the collection of Ω-
numbers and the collection of Ω-like reals coincide.
   The final piece in understanding the relationship between left-c.e.
reals and Solovay reducibility was provided by Kučera and Slaman,
who proved the following:
Theorem 4.4 (Kučera and Slaman [54]). If α is left-c.e. and Martin-
Löf random, then α is Ω-like.
  Summing up, we have:
Corollary 4.5. For a left-c.e. real α, the following are equivalent:
    (i) α = ΩU for some universal, prefix-free machine U.
   (ii) β ≤S α for every left-c.e. real β, that is, α is Ω-like.
  (iii) α is Martin-Löf random.
  For a survey on more recent work on Ω, see Barmpalias’s article in
this volume.

4.3. Randomness-theoretic reducibilities. In addition to Solovay
reducibility, a number of other reducibilities defined in terms of algo-
rithmic randomness were introduced in the period under consideration.
We briefly survey four of them.
   First, two reducibilities originally introduced by Solovay [94], given
in terms of the comparison of the initial segment complexities of the
sequences, are defined as follows: for some constant c, for every n
                   A ≤K B ⇔ K(A↾n) ≤ K(B↾n) + c
and
                   A ≤C B ⇔ C(A↾n) ≤ C(B↾n) + c.
Thus, for each of these reducibilities, the more random a sequence is,
the higher it will be with respect to the orderings ≤K and ≤C . The
resulting degree structures defined in terms of these reducibilities, the
K-degrees and the C-degrees, respectively, have been studied in, for
instance, [23], [72], [76], and [74].
  Some key results on the structures of both the K-degrees and the
C-degrees follow:
26                      FRANKLIN AND PORTER

     • For α, β ∈ 2ω , α ≤C β implies α ≤T β, but α ≤K β does
       not imply α ≤T β (the former is attributed to Stephan in [26,
       Theorem 9.7.1]).
     • Both the C-degrees and the K-degrees of left-c.e. reals form
       upper semilattices with the join operation given by addition
       [23].
     • There is an uncountable K-degree (attributed to J. Miller in
       [4]).
     • There is a minimal pair in the K-degrees [19], [72], [7].
     • There is a minimal C-degree [72].
     • There is a pair of K-degrees with no upper bound [76].
   Two additional reducibilities, which are comparisons of the sequences’
strengths as oracles, are:
                      A ≤LR B ⇔ MLRB ⊆ MLRA
where, for X ∈ 2ω , MLRX stands for the collection of Martin-Löf ran-
dom sequences relative to X, and
               A ≤LK B ⇔ ∃c∀σ(K B (σ) ≤ K A (σ) + c).
Both ≤LR and ≤LK were introduced by Nies in [80]. Informally, the
idea behind these reducibilities is that if A is sufficiently powerful to
detect that some object (a sequence A ∈ 2ω in the case of ≤LR and a
string σ ∈ 2<ω in the case of ≤LK ) is not random, then B also detects
that this object is not random.
   Although ≤LR and ≤LK concern the relative power of oracles for
determining the randomness of different kinds of objects (sequences
and strings), remarkably, these reducibilities coincide.
Theorem 4.6 (Kjos-Hanssen, J. Miller, and Solomon [45]). For A, B ∈
2ω ,
               A ≤LR B if and only if A ≤LK B.
  Other significant results on the LR-degrees are:
      • The set {A | A ≤LR ∅′ } is uncountable [6].
      • The set {A | A ≤LR B} is countable if and only if Ω is Martin-
        Löf random with respect to B [5].
      • There is some A <T ∅′ such that ∅′ ≤LR A [17] (see also [90,
        Theorem 6.7]).
  These reducibilities allow us, as we will see in the next section, to
calibrate sequences in terms of how far they are from being random.
For a thorough discussion of the above-discussed reducibilities, as well
as others, see [4].
          KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                       27

4.4. Other randomness notions and lowness for randomness.
As the Turing degrees of Martin-Löf random sequences became better
understood, there were newfound emphases on sequences that have
properties that are antithetical to properties that Martin-Löf random
sequences have and on understanding other randomness notions more
completely. The first property is based on the reducibility ≤K discussed
above and states that a sequence is far from random if it has low prefix-
free Kolmogorov complexity:
Definition 4.7. A sequence A is K-trivial if there is a constant c such
that for all n ∈ ω,
                       K(A↾n) ≤ K(0n ) + c.
In other words, the K-trivials are the elements of the least K-degree.
   The second property states that a sequence is far from random if it
is not capable of signficantly reducing the Kolmogorov complexity of
any string, making it a lowness notion:
Definition 4.8. (Muchnik, unpublished) A sequence A is low for K if
there is a constant c such that for all strings σ,
                            K(σ) ≤ K A (σ) + c.
  We observe that A is low for K exactly when A ≤LK ∅. Lowness
was also defined in two other ways that are more generalizable to other
randomness notions.
Definition 4.9. Let R be a randomness notion; in the second part of
this definition, we assume that R has a test definition.
    (1) A sequence A is low for R-randomness if every R-random set
        is still R-random relative to A (in other words, if A ≤LR ∅).
    (2) A sequence A is low for R-tests if, for every R-test relative to
               A
        A hViT   ii∈ω , thereTis an unrelativized R-test hUi i that covers it;
        e.g., i∈ω ViA ⊆ i∈ω Ui .
   We note that, since there is a universal prefix-free machine and a uni-
versal Martin-Löf test, we automatically have that lowness for Martin-
Löf randomness is equivalent to lowness for Martin-Löf tests.
   The last standard way in which a sequence is considered weak with
respect to a randomness notion is that of being a base. This definition
of Kučera, which first appeared in [52], is also easily stated in a general
way. It is based on Sacks’ Theorem [87], which, as mentioned in Section
3.1, states that if A is not computable, then µ({X | X ≥T A}) = 0.
Here, instead, Kučera states that a set should be far from random if
something that computes it can be random relative to it.
28                       FRANKLIN AND PORTER

Definition 4.10. Let R be a randomness notion. A sequence A is
a base for R-randomness if there is some X ≥T A such that X is
R-random relative to A.

   Most of these lowness notions were proven to coincide by Nies in the
case of Martin-Löf randomness in [80], when he proved that a sequence
is low for Martin-Löf randomness exactly when it is low for K. In the
same paper, Nies proved that K-triviality and lowness for Martin-Löf
are equivalent; the proof that K-triviality implies lowness for K is joint
with Hirschfeldt. Kučera showed in [52] that every sequence that is low
for Martin-Löf randomness is a base for Martin-Löf randomness; the
characterization was completed by Hirschfeldt, Nies, and Stephan in
[41]. We summarize these results here:

Theorem 4.11 ([41, 52, 80]). The following are equivalent for a se-
quence A.
     (1) A is low for Martin-Löf randomness.
     (2) A is low for Martin-Löf tests.
     (3) A is low for K.
     (4) A is K-trivial.
     (5) A is a base for Martin-Löf randomness.

   The Turing degrees of these sequences have also been studied in great
depth, beginning with Solovay’s construction of a noncomputable K-
trivial set in the 1970s [94]. Chaitin [16] and then Zambella [107]
had shown that all K-trivial sequences are ∆02 ; in fact, Zambella used
techniques based on Solovay’s to show that there is a noncomputable
K-trivial c.e. set. In 1999, Kučera and Terwijn proved that there is a
noncomputable c.e. set that is low for Martin-Löf randomness [56], and
Muchnik proved that there is a noncomputable c.e. set that is low for
K (unpublished). Later, Nies showed that when we consider only the
c.e. K-trivial Turing degrees, we get a Σ03 ideal in the Turing degrees
and that the K-trivial degrees form a Turing ideal that is generated
by the c.e. K-trivial degrees, in other words, that the smallest ideal
containing the c.e. K-trivial degrees consists of precisely the K-trivial
degrees [80]. In fact, he also showed that the K-trivial sets form a
proper subclass of the superlow sets [80].
   Of course, these definitions can be discussed in the context of other
randomness notions. Work on Schnorr lowness was contemporary with
the earliest work on lowness for Martin-Löf randomness. In [1], Ambos-
Spies and Kučera asked whether lowness for Schnorr randomness and
lowness for Schnorr tests coincided; since there is no universal Schnorr
          KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                     29

test, the answer is not obviously yes. The first step in solving this ques-
tion was taken by Terwijn and Zambella in [98], who characterized the
Turing degrees that are low for Schnorr tests in terms of a concept they
defined, computable traceability. This concept requires us to define a
standard way to list the finite sets computably. While there are several
ways to fix a computable list of the finite sets, here we will say that
the nth canonical finite set Dn contains precisely the natural numbers
i such that there is a 1 in the 2i ’s place in the binary representation of
n.
Definition 4.12. A Turing degree d is computably traceable if there
is some order function p such that for each function f ≤T d, there is
a computable function r such that for all n,
    (1) f (n) ∈ Dr(n) and
    (2) |Dr(n) | ≤ p(n),
where Dn is the nth canonical finite set.
   If we replace Dr(n) with Wr(n) , we have a c.e. traceable degree.
  Now we can state Terwijn and Zambella’s result:
Theorem 4.13 (Terwijn and Zambella, [98]). A Turing degree is low
for Schnorr tests if and only if it is computably traceable.
   The corresponding result on lowness for Schnorr randomness was
proven via contributions from a large number of people. We note here
that every sequence that is low for Schnorr tests must be low for Schnorr
randomness as well. Bedregal and Nies showed that any degree that
is low for Schnorr randomness or for computable randomness must be
hyperimmune-free [8]; Kjos-Hanssen, Nies, and Stephan showed that a
sequence A is c.e. traceable exactly when every Schnorr null set relative
to A is Martin-Löf null as well and then that any hyperimmune-free c.e.
traceable degree must be computably traceable [46]. We can combine
these results and see the following:
Theorem 4.14 (Kjos-Hanssen, Nies, and Stephan [46]). The following
are equivalent for a sequence A.
    (1) A is low for Schnorr randomness.
    (2) A is low for Schnorr tests.
    (3) A is computably traceable.
  Before Schnorr triviality could be considered, it was necessary to
characterize Schnorr randomness in terms of Kolmogorov complexity.
This required a new type of machine that was first defined by Downey
and Griffiths in [24].
30                       FRANKLIN AND PORTER

Definition 4.15. A computable measure machine is a prefix-free ma-
chine M such that the measure of [dom(M)] is a computable real.
   Downey and Griffiths then used computable measure machines to
characterize Schnorr randomness; the characterization is directly par-
allel to that for Martin-Löf randomness. However, we note that it
is inherently more complicated since there is no universal computable
measure machine.
Theorem 4.16 (Downey and Griffiths [24]). A sequence A is Schnorr
random if and only if for every computable measure machine M, there
is a constant c such that for all n,
                           KM (A↾n) ≥ n − c.
   Now we can discuss Schnorr triviality. In [24], Downey and Griffiths
also defined a reducibility parallel to ≤K that is based on computable
measure machines:
Definition 4.17. Let A and B be sequences. A is Schnorr reducible
to B (written A ≤Sch B) if for every computable measure machine M,
there is a computable measure machine N and a constant c such that
for all n,
                      KN (A↾n) ≤ KM (B↾n) + c.
   In a parallel with K-triviality, Downey and Griffiths defined a se-
quence A to be Schnorr trivial if A ≤Sch 0ω . Schnorr triviality and
lowness for Schnorr were soon seen not to coincide: almost imme-
diately after Schnorr triviality was defined, Downey, Griffiths, and
LaForte proved that there is a Turing complete Schnorr trivial sequence
[20]. Later, Franklin proved that, in fact, every high degree contains
a Schnorr trivial sequence [30]. This lets us see immediately that the
Schnorr trivial sequences and the Schnorr low sequences do not co-
incide; however, Franklin showed that the hyperimmune-free Schnorr
trivial degrees are precisely the degrees that are low for Schnorr [29].
   We may also remark that the Schnorr trivial degrees do not form
an ideal in the Turing degrees: Downey, Griffiths, and LaForte also
showed that there is a c.e. degree that contains no Schnorr trivial (or
K-trivial) sets [20], so the Schnorr trivial Turing degrees are not closed
downward. However, they did show that their truth-table degrees are
closed downward, and since Franklin and Stephan showed that Schnorr
trivial sequences are closed under join [33], we can at least say that they
form an ideal in the truth-table degrees. For a more detailed discussion
of the necessity of choosing the proper reducibility in randomness, see
Franklin’s survey.
          KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                    31

  The bases for Schnorr randomness form a different class yet again:
Franklin, Stephan, and Yu proved that a sequence is a base for Schnorr
randomness exactly when it cannot compute ∅′ [34].
  Just as Schnorr randomness was newly characterized in terms of
Kolmogorov complexity in this period, computable randomness was
newly characterized in terms of tests in two different ways. Downey,
Griffiths, and LaForte developed the concept of a computably graded
test [20]:
Definition 4.18. A computably graded test is a pair (hVi ii∈ω , f ) where
hVi ii∈ω is a Martin-Löf test and f : 2<ω × ω → R is a computable
function such that the following three conditions hold for all n ∈ ω,
            <ω
S σ ∈ 2 , and any finite prefix-free set of strings {σi } such that
all
  [σi ] ⊆ [σ]:
         P n ∩ [σ]) ≤ f (σ, n),
     (1) µ(V
     (2) P f (σi , n) ≤ 2−n , and
     (3)    f (σi , n) ≤ f (σ, n).
A sequence passes a computably graded test if it passes the Martin-Löf
test component.
  Merkle, Mihailović, and Slaman developed another test notion they
used to characterize computable randomness, a bounded Martin-Löf
test [70]. They began by defining a computable rational probability
distribution: a computable function ν : 2<ω → Q such that ν(hi) = 1
and ν(σ) = ν(σ0) + ν(σ1) for every σ ∈ 2<ω .
Definition 4.19. A bounded Martin-Löf test is a Martin-Löf test
hVi ii∈ω such that there is a computable rational probability distribution
such that for all n and σ,
                         µ(Vn ∩ [σ]) ≤ 2−n ν(σ).
Theorem 4.20 (Downey, Griffiths, and LaForte [20], Merkle, Mi-
hailović, and Slaman [70]). The following are equivalent for a sequence
A.
    (1) A is computably random.
    (2) A passes all computably graded tests.
    (3) A passes all bounded Martin-Löf tests.
   There is also a machine characterization of computable randomness
due to Mihailović; while his work is unpublished, the following defini-
tion and theorem appear in Section 7.1.5 of [26].
Definition 4.21. A bounded machine is a prefix-free machine such
that there is a computable rational probability distribution ν such that
32                      FRANKLIN AND PORTER

for all n and all σ,
                µ([{σ | KM (σ) ≤ |σ| − n}]) ≤ 2−n ν(σ).
Theorem 4.22. A sequence A is computably random if and only if for
every bounded machine M, there is a constant c such that for all n,
                          KM (A↾n) ≥ n − c.
  Now we can turn our attention to weakness with respect to com-
putable randomness. The first concept to be addressed was that of
lowness, and Nies proved that, once again, we get a different class of
sequences.
Theorem 4.23 (Nies, [80]). The sets that are low for computable ran-
domness are precisely the computable sets.
   Lowness for tests for computable randomness has not been stud-
ied, nor has any notion of “computable triviality.” However, there is
a partial characterization of the bases for computable randomness.
Hirschfeldt, Nies, and Stephan have shown that every ∆02 sequence
of non-DNC degree is a base for computable randomness but that no
sequence of PA degree is [41].
   Now we turn our attention to randomness notions that are either
stronger than Martin-Löf randomness or weaker than Schnorr random-
ness. In Wang’s 1996 dissertation, he developed a Martin-Löf test-like
characterization and a martingale characterization for Kurtz random-
ness [104]; this was followed almost a decade later by a similar char-
acterization in terms of Kolmogorov complexity by Downey, Griffiths
and Reid [22].
Definition 4.24. [104] A Kurtz null test is a Martin-Löf test hVi ii∈ω
such that for some computable function f : ω → (2<ω )<ω , Vn = [f (n)]
for all n.
Definition 4.25. [25] A prefix-free machine M is a computably lay-
ered machine if there is a computable function f : ω → (2<ω )<ω such
that the following three conditions hold:
        S
   (1) i∈ω f (i) = dom(M),
   (2) if σ ∈ f (i + 1), then there is some τ ∈ f (i) such that M(τ ) 
        M(σ), and
   (3) if σ ∈ f (i), then |M(σ)| = |σ| + i + 1.
   The equivalence of (1) and (2) in the following theorem is inherent
in Kautz’s thesis [44] but explicitly stated in [104]; the equivalence of
(4) to the others appears in [25].
         KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                   33

Theorem 4.26 (Wang [104], Downey, Griffiths, and Reid [25]). Let A
be a sequence. The following are equivalent.
    (1) A is Kurtz random.
    (2) A passes all Kurtz null tests.
    (3) For every computable martingale d and every order function h,
        there is some n such that d(A↾n) ≤ h(n).
    (4) For every computably layered machine M, there is a constant c
        such that for all n,
                          KM (A↾n) ≥ n − c.
   A comment must be made about lowness for Kurtz tests. Downey,
Griffiths, and Reid proved that the degrees that are low for Kurtz tests
form a superset of the computably traceable degrees and a subset of the
hyperimmune-free degrees [25]; the final characterization would come
later [97, 39].
   Now we turn our attention to weak 2-randomness. While weak 2-
randomness had been briefly studied in the early 1980s by Gaifman
and Snir [38] and even earlier by Solovay, who proved that no weakly
2-random sequence is ∆02 [94], it was placed into the randomness hierar-
chies we know today by Kurtz [55], who defined weak n-randomness for
all n ≥ 2. Later, weak 2-randomness was considered by Kautz [44] and
Wang [104], who independently developed another characterization of
it using a test definition similar to that of Martin-Löf randomness.
Definition 4.27. A generalized Martin-Löf test is a sequence hVi ii∈ω
of uniformly c.e. subsets of 2ω such that limn→∞ µ(Vn ) = 0.
Theorem 4.28 (Kautz [44], Wang [104]). A sequence is weakly 2-
random if it passes all generalized Martin-Löf tests.
   However, a further study of the properties of weakly random se-
quences was not conducted until 2006, when Downey, Nies, Weber,
and Yu [22] undertook a systematic study of them. Their main result
is the following:
Theorem 4.29 (Downey, Nies, Weber, and Yu [22]). The following
are equivalent for a Martin-Löf random sequence A.
    (1) A is weakly 2-random.
    (2) The degree of A and ∅′ form a minimal pair.
    (3) A does not compute any noncomputable c.e. set.
  This gives us a characterization of the subclass of Martin-Löf random
sequences that do not compute a noncomputable c.e. set in terms of
a randomness notion just as difference randomness characterizes the
34                       FRANKLIN AND PORTER

subclass of Martin-Löf random sequences that do not compute a PA
degree [32].
  Downey, Nies, Weber, and Yu also began the study of lowness for
weak 2-randomness by proving that every sequence that is low for weak
2-randomness is K-trivial [22]; Kjos-Hanssen, J. Miller, and Solomon
proved the converse in [45].
  Now that we have discussed the Turing degrees of all of the main ran-
domness notions, we can make an observation about randomness in the
hyperimmune-free Turing degrees: all the main notions of randomness
that we have seen thus far coincide in this setting.

Theorem 4.30 (Nies, Stephan, and Terwijn [82], Yu (unpublished)).
If A has hyperimmune-free degree, then A is Kurtz random if and only
if A is weakly 2-random.

   One additional result, also due to Nies, Stephan, and Terwijn [82],
and independently, Miller [73], is a characterization of 2-randomness
in terms of plain Kolmogorov complexity. As stated in Section 2.2,
one cannot provide a definition of randomness by requiring all initial
segments to be incompressible with respect to plain Kolmogorov com-
plexity. Martin-Löf observed that almost every sequence A satisfies
the condition that there is some c such that C(A↾n) ≥ n − c for in-
finitely many n; let us say that such a sequence A is infinitely often
C-incompressible. The following result identifies precisely the notion
of randomness that corresponds to this condition:

Theorem 4.31 (Nies, Stephan, and Terwijn [82], Miller [73]). For
A ∈ 2ω , A is 2-random if and only if there A is infinitely often C-
incompressible.

   Miller [73] further characterizes 2-randomness in terms of the prop-
erty of being infinitely often K-incompressible, which is satisfied by a
sequence A if there is some c such that K(A↾n) ≥ n + K(n) − c for
infinitely many n.
   In this period, a randomness notion that was introduced in the late
1990s in [79], and which is still not entirely understood, began to receive
interest: Kolmogorov-Loveland randomness. This notion is defined us-
ing a martingale characterization, and the key feature of this charac-
terization is that the bits of the sequence do not need to be bet on in
order. This idea has its roots in the notion of Kolmogorov-Loveland
stochasticity [47, 50, 60] and was studied by Muchnik, Semenov, and
Uspensky [79] and Merkle, J. Miller, Nies, Reimann, and Stephan [71];
as in Downey and Hirschfeldt [26], we use the latter group’s notation.
          KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                     35

   Let us say that a finite assignment is a sequence of elements (ri , ai )
from ω × {0, 1} such that the ri ’s are all distinct: the ri ’s are the
places on which bets have been made, and the ai ’s are the bets made
at those places, so this gives a “history” of how much has been bet and
at which places. If we then define a scan rule, which is a function that
determines the next place to bet on given this “history,” and a stake
function that tells us how much to bet there, we have a nonmonotonic
betting strategy. We can say that a nonmonotonic betting strategy
succeeds on a sequence A if the limsup of the amount one has after
betting on A following the strategy defined by the scan rule and stake
function is infinite.
Definition 4.32. [79] A sequence is Kolmogorov-Loveland random if
no partial computable nonmonotonic betting strategy succeeds on it.
   Merkle would later prove that one could get the same class of random
sequences using total computable nonmonotonic betting strategies [69],
so it is clear that every Kolmogorov-Loveland random is computably
random; Muchnik, Semenov, and Uspensky showed that every Martin-
Löf random sequence is Kolmogorov-Loveland random [79]. It has been
conjectured that the Kolmogorov-Loveland random sequences are pre-
cisely the Martin-Löf random sequences. While quite some time and
energy has been put into this question [43], it remains open.
4.5. Effective notions of dimension. Another significant strand of
research in algorithmic randomness that emerged in the early 2000s
involved effective notions of dimension. Lutz first provided a definition
of effective Hausdorff dimension in [61], given in terms of certain betting
strategies called s-gales. First, Lutz gave a betting characterization of
classical Hausdorff dimension in terms of these strategies. Derived
from the definition of a martingale given above, an s-gale is a function
d : 2<ω → R≥0 satisfying d(σ) = 2−s (d(σ0) + d(σ1)) for all σ ∈ 2<ω .
The set of all sequences on which an s-gale d succeeds (that is, those
sequences A such that d(A↾n) is unbounded in n) is written S[d] as it
is for a standard martingale. Then Lutz proved the following:
Theorem 4.33 (Lutz [61]). For A ⊆ 2ω ,
         dimH (A) = inf{s ∈ Q | A ⊆ S[d] for some s-gale d}.
  For additional characterizations of dimension in terms of s-gales, see
[61]. To obtain effective Hausdorff dimension, we simply restrict our
attention to c.e. s-gales, that is, those s-gales that take on values that
are uniformly computable approximable from below. We thus define
        dim(A) = inf{s ∈ Q | A ⊆ S[d] for some c.e. s-gale d}
36                       FRANKLIN AND PORTER

to be the effective Hausdorff dimension of A ⊆ 2ω . One can equivalently
define the effective Hausdorff dimension in terms of covers; see, for
instance, the treatment in [26, Section 13.5] for details.
   One key difference between classical Hausdorff dimension and effec-
tive Hausdorff dimension is that individual sequences can have positive
effective dimension, while sequences always have classical dimension
zero. Perhaps the most useful characterization of effective Hausdorff
dimension for individual sequences was provided by Mayordomo, who
proved the following:
Theorem 4.34 (Mayordomo [68]). For A ∈ 2ω ,
                                K(A↾n)             C(A↾n)
              dim(A) = lim inf           = lim inf         .
                           n       n          n       n
   Another fundamental early result about effective Hausdorff dimen-
sion is that for every computable real number r ∈ [0, 1], there is some
A ∈ 2ω such that dim(A) = r, a fact established by Lutz in [61].
   A similar characterization of an effective version of the classical no-
tion of packing dimension can be given in terms of c.e. s-gales and initial
segment complexity [2]. For the sake of brevity, we only highlight the
latter. As shown by Athreya, Hitchcock, Lutz, and Mayordomo [2], the
effective packing dimension of a sequence A ∈ 2ω , written Dim(A), can
be characterized as
                                K(A↾n)              C(A↾n)
             Dim(A) = lim sup            = lim sup           .
                           n       n           n       n
   A number of computability theoretic questions about the notions of
effective dimension have been investigated since these definitions first
appeared, particularly in the context of the Turing degrees. The most
significant work in this respect has been on the broken dimension prob-
lem: Given α ∈ (0, 1), is there some sequence A such that dim(A) = α
and for every B ≤T A, dim(B) ≤ α? This question was answered in the
affirmative by J. Miller, who showed that such a sequence A exists and
that it can even be chosen to be ∆02 [75]. Another important result due
to Staiger [95] and, independently, Hitchcock [42], the correspondence
principle for effective dimension, establishes conditions under which ef-
fective Hausdorff dimension and classical Hausdorff dimension agree:
For any countable union U of Π01 classes, dimH (U) = dim(U).
   Lastly, we mention several recent uses of effective dimension in estab-
lishing new results on classical Hausdorff dimension. These applications
make use of the so-called point-to-set principle due to J. Lutz and N.
Lutz [62], which allows one to calculate the classical Hausdorff dimen-
sion of a subset E of Euclidean space in terms of the relativizations of
          KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                      37

the effective dimensions of members of E. That is, for E ⊆ Rn ,
                      dimH (E) = minω sup dimA (x),
                                   A∈2 x∈E


where, for A ∈ 2ω and x ∈ Rn , dimA (x) is the effective dimension of x
relative to the oracle A (which can be defined in terms of K A , prefix-free
Kolmogorov complexity relative to A). Using the point-to-set principle,
N. Lutz and Stull [64] provided a new lower bound for the classical
dimension of generalized Furstenberg sets, and N. Lutz [63] used the
principle to extend an inequality bounding the dimension of certain
intersections of sets, known to hold for Borel subsets of Euclidean space,
to all subsets of Euclidean space.
   For more results on effective notions of dimension, see [26, Chapter
13].

                      5. Recent developments
   Since the publication of the two monographs due to Nies [81] and
Downey and Hirschfeldt [26], a majority of research in algorithmic
randomness (at least outside of the setting of resource-bounded ran-
domness) has involved notions of randomness that fall between Kurtz
randomness and 2-randomness when measured in terms of strength.
One exception is UD-randomness, introduced by Avigad [3] and fur-
ther developed by Calvert and Franklin [14]. Based on the concept of
uniform distribution studied by Weyl [106], UD-randomness is implied
by Schnorr randomness but incomparable with Kurtz randomness, as
shown by Avigad.
   In particular, there has been a great deal of interest in notions even
stronger than Martin-Löf randomness. Demuth randomness and weak
Demuth randomness have already been discussed. As mentioned in
Section 4.1, in 2011, Franklin and Ng introduced the notion of difference
randomness and showed that the sequences that are difference random
are precisely the Turing incomplete Martin-Löf random sequences [32].
Combined with Theorem 4.2 due to Stephan, it follows that a Martin-
Löf random sequence is difference random if and only if it does not
compute a completion of Peano arithmetic. Since then, a multitude of
notions, including balanced randomness [28], Oberwolfach randomness
[11], and density randomness [78], has been studied. Some of them
have been used to characterize subclasses of the Martin-Löf random
sequences in terms of computational strength, while others have proven
useful for researchers who wish to relate algorithmic randomness to
computable analysis [78].
38                             FRANKLIN AND PORTER

   One of the primary achievements of recent work on the interaction
between algorithmic randomness and computable analysis has been to
provide characterizations of various notions of randomness in terms
of almost everywhere behavior from classical mathematics, a research
project that began in the work of Demuth but was only recently in-
dependently rediscovered. Given a theorem of the form “For almost
every x, x has property P ,” we can often replace the property P with
a computably defined analogue P ∗ and prove a theorem of the form “x
is R-random if and only if x has the property P ∗ ”, where R is some
notion of effective randomness. This has been done for theorems such
as the Lebesgue differentiation theorem [12, 78] and Birkhoff’s ergodic
theorem and the Poincaré recurrence theorem [103, 37, 31, 10, 35].
Many of the most significant recent results involving computable ran-
domness and Schnorr randomness have been achieved in this area. The
survey by Hoyrup on layerwise computability, the survey by Rute on
the relationship between algorithmic randomness and analysis, and the
survey by Towsner on ergodic theory and randomness in this volume
address the ongoing research in these areas.


                             6. Acknowledgments
  The authors would like to thank the referees who provided extraor-
dinarily perceptive and useful comments on this survey.


                                    References
     [1] Klaus Ambos-Spies and Antonı́n Kučera. Randomness in computability the-
         ory. In Computability theory and its applications (Boulder, CO, 1999), volume
         257 of Contemp. Math., pages 1–14. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2000.
     [2] Krishna B. Athreya, John M. Hitchcock, Jack H. Lutz, and Elvira Mayor-
         domo. Effective strong dimension in algorithmic information and computa-
         tional complexity. SIAM Journal on Computing, 37(3):671–705, 2007.
     [3] Jeremy Avigad. Uniform distribution and algorithmic randomness. J. Sym-
         bolic Logic, 78(1):334–344, 2013.
     [4] George Barmpalias. Algorithmic randomness and measures of complexity.
         Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 19(3):318–350, 2013.
     [5] George Barmpalias and Andrew E. M. Lewis. Chaitin’s halting probability
         and the compression of strings using oracles. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. A Math.
         Phys. Eng. Sci., 467(2134):2912–2926, 2011.
     [6] George Barmpalias, Andrew E. M. Lewis, and Mariya Soskova. Randomness,
         lowness and degrees. J. Symbolic Logic, 73(2):559–577, 2008.
     [7] George Barmpalias and Charlotte S. Vlek. Kolmogorov complexity of initial
         segments of sequences and arithmetical definability. Theoretical Computer
         Science, 412(41):5656–5667, 2011.
          KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                            39

 [8] Benjamı́n René Callejas Bedregal and André Nies. Lowness properties of re-
     als and hyper-immunity. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science,
     84:73–79, 2003.
 [9] Laurent Bienvenu, Adam Day, Ilya Mezhirov, and Alexander Shen. Ergodic-
     type characterizations of Martin-Löf randomness. In 6th Conference on Com-
     putability in Europe (CiE 2010), volume 6158 of Lecture Notes in Comput.
     Sci., pages 49–58. Springer, Berlin, 2010.
[10] Laurent Bienvenu, Adam R. Day, Mathieu Hoyrup, Ilya Mezhirov, and
     Alexander Shen. A constructive version of Birkhoff’s ergodic theorem for
     Martin-Löf random points. Inform. and Comput., 210:21–30, 2012.
[11] Laurent Bienvenu, Noam Greenberg, Antonı́n Kučera, André Nies, and Dan
     Turetsky. Coherent randomness tests and computing the K-trivial sets. J.
     Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS), 18(4):773–812, 2016.
[12] Vasco Brattka, Joseph S. Miller, and André Nies. Randomness and differen-
     tiability. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 368(1):581–605, 2016.
[13] Cristian S. Calude, Peter H. Hertling, Bakhadyr Khoussainov, and Yongge
     Wang. Recursively enumerable reals and chaitin ω numbers. Theoretical Com-
     puter Science, 255(1-2):125–149, 2001.
[14] Wesley Calvert and Johanna N. Y. Franklin. Genericity and UD-random reals.
     J. Log. Anal., 7:Paper 4, 10, 2015.
[15] Gregory J. Chaitin. A theory of program size formally identical to information
     theory. J. Assoc. Comput. Mach., 22:329–340, 1975.
[16] Gregory J. Chaitin. Algorithmic information theory. IBM J. Res. Develop.,
     21(4):350–359, 1977.
[17] Peter Cholak, Noam Greenberg, and Joseph S. Miller. Uniform almost every-
     where domination. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 71(3):1057–1072, 2006.
[18] S. Barry Cooper. Computability theory. Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton,
     FL, 2004.
[19] Barbara Csima and Antonio Montalbán. A minimal pair of k-degrees. Pro-
     ceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 134(5):1499–1502, 2006.
[20] Rod Downey, Evan Griffiths, and Geoffrey LaForte. On Schnorr and com-
     putable randomness, martingales, and machines. Math. Log. Q., 50(6):613–
     627, 2004.
[21] Rod Downey, Denis R. Hirschfeldt, André Nies, and Sebastiaan A. Terwijn.
     Calibrating randomness. Bull. Symbolic Logic, 12(3):411–491, 2006.
[22] Rod Downey, André Nies, Rebecca Weber, and Liang Yu. Lowness and Π02
     nullsets. J. Symbolic Logic, 71(3):1044–1052, 2006.
[23] Rod G. Downey, Denis R. Hirschfeldt, André Nies, and Frank Stephan. Trivial
     reals. In Proceedings of the 7th and 8th Asian Logic Conferences, pages 103–
     131, Singapore, 2003. Singapore Univ. Press.
[24] Rodney G. Downey and Evan J. Griffiths. Schnorr randomness. J. Symbolic
     Logic, 69(2):533–554, 2004.
[25] Rodney G. Downey, Evan J. Griffiths, and Stephanie Reid. On Kurtz ran-
     domness. Theoret. Comput. Sci., 321(2-3):249–270, 2004.
[26] Rodney G. Downey and Denis R. Hirschfeldt. Algorithmic Randomness and
     Complexity. Springer, 2010.
[27] Kenneth Falconer. Fractal geometry. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Chichester,
     third edition, 2014. Mathematical foundations and applications.
40                          FRANKLIN AND PORTER

 [28] Santiago Figueira, Denis Hirschfeldt, Joseph S. Miller, Keng Meng Ng, and
      André Nies. Counting the changes of random ∆02 sets. In Programs, proofs,
      processes, volume 6158 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 162–171.
      Springer, Berlin, 2010.
 [29] Johanna N.Y. Franklin. Hyperimmune-free degrees and Schnorr triviality. J.
      Symbolic Logic, 73(3):999–1008, 2008.
 [30] Johanna N.Y. Franklin. Schnorr trivial reals: A construction. Arch. Math.
      Logic, 46(7–8):665–678, 2008.
 [31] Johanna N.Y. Franklin, Noam Greenberg, Joseph S. Miller, and Keng Meng
      Ng. Martin-Löf random points satisfy Birkhoff’s ergodic theorem for effec-
      tively closed sets. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 140(10):3623–3628, 2012.
 [32] Johanna N.Y. Franklin and Keng Meng Ng. Difference randomness. Proc.
      Amer. Math. Soc., 139(1):345–360, 2011.
 [33] Johanna N.Y. Franklin and Frank Stephan. Schnorr trivial sets and truth-
      table reducibility. J. Symbolic Logic, 75(2):501–521, 2010.
 [34] Johanna N.Y. Franklin, Frank Stephan, and Liang Yu. Relativizations of
      randomness and genericity notions. Bull. Lond. Math. Soc., 43(4):721–733,
      2011.
 [35] Johanna N.Y. Franklin and Henry Towsner. Randomness and non-ergodic
      systems. Mosc. Math. J., 14(4):711–744, 2014.
 [36] Péter Gács. Every sequence is reducible to a random one. Inform. and Control,
      70(2-3):186–192, 1986.
 [37] Peter Gács, Mathieu Hoyrup, and Cristóbal Rojas. Randomness on com-
      putable probability spaces—a dynamical point of view. Theory Comput. Syst.,
      48(3):465–485, 2011.
 [38] Haim Gaifman and Marc Snir. Probabilities over rich languages, testing and
      randomness. J. Symbolic Logic, 47(3):495–548, 1982.
 [39] Noam Greenberg and Joseph S. Miller. Lowness for Kurtz randomness. J.
      Symbolic Logic, 74(2):665–678, 2009.
 [40] Felix Hausdorff. Dimension und äußeres Maß. Math. Ann., 79(1-2):157–179,
      1918.
 [41] Denis R. Hirschfeldt, André Nies, and Frank Stephan. Using random sets as
      oracles. J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2), 75(3):610–622, 2007.
 [42] John M. Hitchcock. Correspondence principles for effective dimensions. The-
      ory of Computing Systems, 38(5):559–571, 2005.
 [43] Bart Kastermans and Steffen Lempp. Comparing notions of randomness. The-
      oret. Comput. Sci., 411(3):602–616, 2010.
 [44] Steven M. Kautz. Degrees of random sets. PhD thesis, Cornell University,
      1991.
 [45] Bjørn Kjos-Hanssen, Joseph S. Miller, and Reed Solomon. Lowness notions,
      measure and domination. J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2), 85(3):869–888, 2012.
 [46] Bjørn Kjos-Hanssen, André Nies, and Frank Stephan. Lowness for the class
      of Schnorr random reals. SIAM J. Comput., 35(3):647–657, 2005.
 [47] A. N. Kolmogorov. On tables of random numbers. Sankhyā Ser. A, 25:369–
      376, 1963.
 [48] A. N. Kolmogorov. Three approaches to the quantitative definition of infor-
      mation. Internat. J. Comput. Math., 2:157–168, 1968.
          KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                            41

[49] A. N. Kolmogorov. To the logical foundations of the theory of information
     and probability theory. In A.N. Shiryayev, editor, Selected Works of A.N.
     Kolmogorov, Vol. III, volume 27 of Mathematics and Its Application (Soviet
     Series). Springer, 1993.
[50] A. N. Kolmogorov. On tables of random numbers. Theoret. Comput. Sci.,
     207(2):387–395, 1998. Reprinted from Sankhyā Ser. A 25 (1963), 369–376;
     MR0178484 (31 #2741).
[51] Antonı́n Kučera. Measure, Π01 -classes and complete extensions of PA. In Re-
     cursion theory week (Oberwolfach, 1984), volume 1141 of Lecture Notes in
     Math., pages 245–259. Springer, Berlin, 1985.
[52] Antonı́n Kučera. On relative randomness. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 63(1):61–
     67, 1993. 9th International Congress of Logic, Methodology and Philosophy
     of Science (Uppsala, 1991).
[53] Antonı́n Kučera, André Nies, and Christopher P. Porter. Demuth’s path to
     randomness. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 21(3):270–305, 2015.
[54] Antonin Kucera and Theodore Slaman. Randomness and recursive enumer-
     ability. SIAM Journal on Computing, 31(1):199–211, 2001.
[55] Stuart Alan Kurtz. Randomness and genericity in the degrees of unsolvability.
     PhD thesis, University of Illinois, 1981.
[56] Antonı́n Kučera and Sebastiaan A. Terwijn. Lowness for the class of random
     sets. J. Symbolic Logic, 64(4):1396–1402, 1999.
[57] Henri Lebesgue. Intégrale, longueur, aire. PhD thesis, Université de Paris,
     1902.
[58] L. A. Levin. The concept of a random sequence. Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR,
     212:548–550, 1973.
[59] Paul Lévy. Téorie de l’Addition des Variables Aléatoires. Gauthier-Villars,
     Paris, 1937.
[60] Donald Loveland. A new interpretation of the von Mises’ concept of random
     sequence. Z. Math. Logik Grundlagen Math., 12:279–294, 1966.
[61] Jack H. Lutz. The dimensions of individual strings and sequences. Inform.
     and Comput., 187(1):49–79, 2003.
[62] Jack H. Lutz and Neil Lutz. Algorithmic information, plane kakeya sets, and
     conditional dimension. ACM Transactions on Computation Theory (TOCT),
     10(2):7, 2018.
[63] Neil Lutz. Fractal intersections and products via algorithmic dimension. In
     42nd International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer
     Science (MFCS 2017). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik,
     2017.
[64] Neil Lutz and Donald M. Stull. Bounding the dimension of points on a line.
     In International Conference on Theory and Applications of Models of Com-
     putation, pages 425–439. Springer, 2017.
[65] Donald A. Martin. Classes of recursively enumerable sets and degrees of un-
     solvability. Z. Math. Logik Grundlagen Math., 12:295–310, 1966.
[66] Per Martin-Löf. The definition of random sequences. Information and Control,
     9:602–619, 1966.
[67] Per Martin-Löf. Complexity oscillations in infinite binary sequences. Proba-
     bility Theory and Related Fields, 19(3):225–230, 1971.
42                         FRANKLIN AND PORTER

 [68] Elvira Mayordomo. A Kolmogorov complexity characterization of construc-
      tive hausdorff dimension. Information Processing Letters, 84(1):1–3, 2002.
 [69] Wolfgang Merkle. The Kolmogorov-Loveland stochastic sequences are not
      closed under selecting subsequences. J. Symbolic Logic, 68(4):1362–1376,
      2003.
 [70] Wolfgang Merkle, Nenad Mihailović, and Theodore A. Slaman. Some results
      on effective randomness. Theory Comput. Syst., 39(5):707–721, 2006.
 [71] Wolfgang Merkle, Joseph S. Miller, André Nies, Jan Reimann, and Frank
      Stephan. Kolmogorov-Loveland randomness and stochasticity. Ann. Pure
      Appl. Logic, 138(1-3):183–210, 2006.
 [72] Wolfgang Merkle and Frank Stephan. On C-degrees, H-degrees and T-degrees.
      In Computational Complexity, 2007. CCC’07. Twenty-Second Annual IEEE
      Conference on, pages 60–69. IEEE, 2007.
 [73] Joseph S. Miller. Every 2-random real is Kolmogorov random. J. Symbolic
      Logic, 69(3):907–913, 2004.
 [74] Joseph S. Miller. The K-degrees, low for K-degrees, and weakly low for K
      sets. Notre Dame J. Form. Log., 50(4):381–391 (2010), 2009.
 [75] Joseph S. Miller. Extracting information is hard: a Turing degree of non-
      integral effective Hausdorff dimension. Advances in Mathematics, 226(1):373–
      384, 2011.
 [76] Joseph S. Miller and Liang Yu. On initial segment complexity and degrees of
      randomness. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 360(6):3193–3210, 2008.
 [77] Webb Miller and D. A. Martin. The degrees of hyperimmune sets. Z. Math.
      Logik Grundlagen Math., 14:159–166, 1968.
 [78] Kenshi Miyabe, André Nies, and Jing Zhang. Using almost-everywhere the-
      orems from analysis to study randomness. Bull. Symb. Log., 22(3):305–331,
      2016.
 [79] Andrei A. Muchnik, Alexei L. Semenov, and Vladimir A. Uspensky. Mathe-
      matical metaphysics of randomness. Theoret. Comput. Sci., 207(2):263–317,
      1998.
 [80] André Nies. Lowness properties and randomness. Adv. Math., 197(1):274–305,
      2005.
 [81] André Nies. Computability and Randomness. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2009.
 [82] André Nies, Frank Stephan, and Sebastiaan A. Terwijn. Randomness, rela-
      tivization and Turing degrees. J. Symbolic Logic, 70(2):515–535, 2005.
 [83] Piergiorgio Odifreddi. Classical Recursion Theory. Number 125 in Studies in
      Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics. North-Holland, 1989.
 [84] Piergiorgio Odifreddi. Classical Recursion Theory, Volume II. Number 143 in
      Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics. North-Holland, 1999.
 [85] Christopher P. Porter. Kolmogorov on the role of randomness in probability
      theory. Math. Structures Comput. Sci., 24(3):e240302, 17, 2014.
 [86] C. A. Rogers. Hausdorff measures. Cambridge University Press, London-New
      York, 1970.
 [87] Gerald E. Sacks. Degrees of Unsolvability. Princeton University Press, 1963.
 [88] C.P. Schnorr. A unified approach to the definition of random sequences. Math.
      Systems Theory, 5:246–258, 1971.
 [89] C.P. Schnorr. Zufälligkeit und Wahrscheinlichkeit, volume 218 of Lecture
      Notes in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1971.
           KEY DEVELOPMENTS IN ALGORITHMIC RANDOMNESS                               43

 [90] Stephen G. Simpson. Almost everywhere domination and superhighness.
      MLQ Math. Log. Q., 53(4-5):462–482, 2007.
 [91] Robert I. Soare. Turing Computability: Theory and Applications. Theory and
      Applications of Computability. Springer, 2016.
 [92] Ray J. Solomonoff. A formal theory of inductive inference. part i. Information
      and control, 7(1):1–22, 1964.
 [93] Ray J. Solomonoff. A formal theory of inductive inference. part ii. Information
      and control, 7(2):224–254, 1964.
 [94] Robert M. Solovay. Draft of a paper (or series of papers) on Chaitin’s work.
      Unpublished manuscript, May 1975.
 [95] Ludwig Staiger. A tight upper bound on Kolmogorov complexity and uni-
      formly optimal prediction. Theory of Computing Systems, 31(3):215–229,
      1998.
 [96] Frank Stephan. Martin-Löf Random and PA-complete Sets. Technical Re-
      port 58, Matematisches Institut, Universität Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 2002.
 [97] Frank Stephan and Liang Yu. Lowness for weakly 1-generic and Kurtz-
      random. In Theory and applications of models of computation, volume 3959
      of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 756–764. Springer, Berlin, 2006.
 [98] Sebastiaan A. Terwijn and Domenico Zambella. Computational randomness
      and lowness. J. Symbolic Logic, 66(3):1199–1205, 2001.
 [99] A. M. Turing. On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entschei-
      dungsproblem. Proc. London Math. Soc., S2-42(1):230, 1937.
[100] A. M. Turing. On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entschei-
      dungsproblem. A Correction. Proc. London Math. Soc., S2-43(6):544, 1937.
[101] Michiel van Lambalgen. The axiomatization of randomness. J. Symbolic Logic,
      55(3):1143–1167, 1990.
[102] Jean Ville. Étude critique de la notion de collectif. Monographies des Prob-
      abilités. Calcul des Probabilités es ses Applications. Gauthier-Villars, Paris,
      1939.
[103] V. V. V′ yugin. Effective convergence in probability, and an ergodic theorem
      for individual random sequences. Teor. Veroyatnost. i Primenen., 42(1):35–
      50, 1997.
[104] Yongge Wang. Randomness and complexity. PhD thesis, University of Hei-
      delberg, 1996.
[105] Yongge Wang. A separation of two randomness concepts. Inf. Process. Lett.,
      69(3):115–118, 1999.
[106] Hermann Weyl. Über die Gleichverteilung von Zahlen mod. Eins. Math. Ann.,
      77(3):313–352, 1916.
[107] Domenico Zambella. On sequences with simple initial segments. Technical
      Report ILLC ML-1990-05, University of Amsterdam, 1990.
