                                                                          Beyond Worst-Case Analysis
                                                                                       Tim Roughgarden∗

                                                                                          June 27, 2018
arXiv:1806.09817v1 [cs.DS] 26 Jun 2018




                                         1       Introduction
                                         Comparing different algorithms is hard. For almost any pair of algorithms and measure of algorithm
                                         performance—like running time or solution quality—each algorithm will perform better than the
                                         other on some inputs.1 For example, the insertion sort algorithm is faster than merge sort on
                                         already-sorted arrays but slower on many other inputs. When two algorithms have incomparable
                                         performance, how can we deem one of them “better than” the other?
                                             Worst-case analysis is a specific modeling choice in the analysis of algorithms, where the overall
                                         performance of an algorithm is summarized by its worst performance on any input of a given size.
                                         The “better” algorithm is then the one with superior worst-case performance. Merge sort, with its
                                         worst-case asymptotic running time of Θ(n log n) for arrays of length n, is better in this sense than
                                         insertion sort, which has a worst-case running time of Θ(n2 ).
                                             While crude, worst-case analysis can be tremendously useful, and it is the dominant paradigm
                                         for algorithm analysis in theoretical computer science. A good worst-case guarantee is the best-
                                         case scenario for an algorithm, certifying its general-purpose utility and absolving its users from
                                         understanding which inputs are relevant to their applications. Remarkably, for many fundamental
                                         computational problems, there are algorithms with excellent worst-case performance guarantees.
                                         The lion’s share of an undergraduate algorithms course comprises algorithms that run in linear or
                                         near-linear time in the worst case.
                                             For many problems a bit beyond the scope of an undergraduate course, however, the downside
                                         of worst-case analysis rears its ugly head. We next review three classical examples where worst-
                                         case analysis gives misleading or useless advice about how to solve a problem; further examples in
                                         modern machine learning are described later. These examples motivate the alternatives to worst-
                                         case analysis described in the rest of the article.2

                                         The simplex method for linear programming. Perhaps the most famous failure of worst-
                                         case analysis concerns linear programming, the problem of optimizing a linear function subject
                                         to linear constraints (Figure 1). Dantzig’s simplex method is an algorithm from the 1940s that
                                             ∗
                                              Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, 474 Gates Building, 353 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305.
                                         Email: tim@cs.stanford.edu.
                                            1
                                              In rare cases a problem admits an instance-optimal algorithm, which is as good as every other algorithm on
                                         every input, up to a constant factor [23]. For most problems, there is no instance-optimal algorithm, and there is no
                                         escaping the incomparability of different algorithms.
                                            2
                                              For many more examples, analysis frameworks, and applications, see the author’s lecture notes [36].



                                                                                                  1
                      Figure 1: A two-dimensional linear programming problem.


solves linear programs using greedy local search on the vertices on the solution set boundary, and
variants of it remain in wide use to this day. The enduring appeal of the simplex method stems
from its consistently superb performance in practice. Its running time typically scales modestly
with the input size, and it routinely solves linear programs with millions of decision variables and
constraints. This robust empirical performance suggested that the simplex method might well solve
every linear program in a polynomial amount of time.
    In 1972, Klee and Minty showed by example that there are contrived linear programs that
force the simplex method to run in time exponential in the number of decision variables (for all of
the common “pivot rules” for choosing the next vertex). This illustrates the first potential pitfall
of worst-case analysis: overly pessimistic performance predictions that cannot be taken at face
value. The running time of the simplex method is polynomial for all practical purposes, despite
the exponential prediction of worst-case analysis.
    To add insult to injury, the first worst-case polynomial-time algorithm for linear programming,
the ellipsoid method, is not competitive with the simplex method in practice.3 Taken at face
value, worst-case analysis recommends the ellipsoid method over the empirically superior simplex
method. One framework for narrowing the gap between these theoretical predictions and empirical
observations is smoothed analysis, discussed later in this article.

Clustering and N P -hard optimization problems. Clustering is a form of unsupervised learn-
ing (finding patterns in unlabeled data), where the informal goal is to partition a set of points into
“coherent groups” (Figure 2). One popular way to coax this goal into a well-defined computational
problem is to posit a numerical objective function over clusterings of the point set, and then seek
the clustering with the best objective function value. For example, the goal could be to choose k
cluster centers to minimize the sum of the distances between points and their nearest centers (the
k-median objective) or the sum of the squared such distances (the k-means objective). Almost all
natural optimization problems that are defined over clusterings are N P -hard.
    In practice, clustering is not viewed as a particularly difficult problem. Lightweight clustering
algorithms, like Lloyd’s algorithm for k-means and its variants, regularly return the intuitively
“correct” clusterings of real-world point sets. How can we reconcile the worst-case intractability of
clustering problems with the empirical success of relatively simple algorithms?4
   3
     Interior-point methods, developed five years later, lead to algorithms that both run in worst-case polynomial
time and are competitive with the simplex method in practice.
   4
     More generally, optimization problems are more likely to be N P -hard than not. In many cases, even computing


                                                        2
                 Figure 2: One possible way to group data points into three clusters.


     One possible explanation is that clustering is hard only when it doesn’t matter [18]. For example,
if the difficult instances of an N P -hard clustering problem look like a bunch of random unstructured
points, who cares? The common use case for a clustering algorithm is for points that represent
images, or documents, or proteins, or some other objects where a “meaningful clustering” is likely
to exist. Could instances with a meaningful clustering be easier than worst-case instances? This
article surveys recent theoretical developments that support an affirmative answer.

Cache replacement policies. Consider a system with a small fast memory (the cache) and a
big slow memory. Data is organized into blocks called pages, with up to k different pages fitting
in the cache at once. A page request results in either a cache hit (if the page is already in the
cache) or a cache miss (if not). On a cache miss, the requested page must be brought into the
cache. If the cache is already full, then some page in it must be evicted. A cache policy is an
algorithm for making these eviction decisions. Any systems textbook will recommend aspiring to
the least recently used (LRU) policy, which evicts the page whose most recent reference is furthest
in the past. The same textbook will explain why: real-world page request sequences tend to exhibit
locality of reference, meaning that recently requested pages are likely to be requested again soon.
The LRU policy uses the recent past as a prediction for the near future. Empirically, it typically
suffers fewer cache misses than competing policies like first-in first-out (FIFO).
    Sleator and Tarjan [37] founded the area of online algorithms, which are algorithms that must
process their input as it arrives over time (like cache policies). One of their first observations was
that worst-case analysis, straightforwardly applied, provides no useful insights about the perfor-
mance of different cache replacement policies. For every deterministic policy and cache size k, there
is a pathological page request sequence that triggers a page fault rate of 100%, even though the
optimal clairvoyant replacement policy (known as Bélády’s algorithm) would have a page fault rate
of at most (1/k)%. This observation is troublesome both for its absurdly pessimistic performance
prediction and for its failure to differentiate between competing replacement policies (like LRU
vs. FIFO). One solution, described in the next section, is to choose an appropriately fine-grained
parameterization of the input space and to assess and compare algorithms using parameterized
an approximately optimal solution is an N P -hard problem (see Trevisan [39], for example). Whenever an efficient
algorithm for such a problem performs better on real-world instances than (worst-case) complexity theory would
suggest, there’s an opportunity for a refined and more accurate theoretical analysis.



                                                       3
guarantees.


2       Models of Typical Instances
Maybe we shouldn’t be surprised that worst-case analysis fails to advocate LRU over FIFO. The
empirical superiority of LRU is due to the special structure in real-world page request sequences—
locality of reference—and traditional worst-case analysis provides no vocabulary to speak about
this structure.5 This is what work on “beyond worst-case analysis” is all about:
        articulating properties of “real-world” inputs, and proving rigorous and meaningful algorithmic
        guarantees for inputs with these properties.
Research in the area has both a scientific dimension, where the goal is to develop transparent
mathematical models that explain empirically observed phenomena about algorithm performance,
and an engineering dimension, where the goals are to provide accurate guidance about which
algorithm to use for a problem and to design new algorithms that perform particularly well on the
relevant inputs.
    One exemplary result in beyond worst-case analysis is due to Albers et al. [2], for the online pag-
ing problem described in the introduction. The key idea is to parameterize page request sequences
according to how much locality of reference they exhibit, and then prove parameterized worst-
case guarantees. Refining worst-case analysis in this way leads to dramatically more informative
results.6
    Locality of reference is quantified via the size of the working set of a page request sequence.
Formally, for a function f : N → N, we say that a request sequence conforms to f if, in every
window of w consecutive page requests, at most f (w) distinct pages are requested. For example,
the identity function f (w) = w imposes no restrictions on the page request sequence. A sequence
                                                           √
can only conform to a sublinear function like f (w) = d we or f (w) = d1 + log2 we if it exhibits
locality of reference.7
    The following worst-case guarantee is parameterized by a number αf (k), between 0 and 1, that
we discuss shortly; recall that k denotes the cache size. It assumes that the function f is “concave”
in the sense that the number of inputs with value x under f (that is, |f −1 (x)|) is nondecreasing
in x.

Theorem 1 (Albers et al. [2])
 (a) For every f and k and every deterministic cache replacement policy, the worst-case page fault
     rate (over sequences that conform to f ) is at least αf (k).

  (b) For every f and k and every sequence that conforms to f , the page fault rate of the LRU
      policy is at most αf (k).
    5
      If worst-case analysis has an implicit model of data, then it’s the “Murphy’s Law” data model, where the instance
to be solved is an adversarially selected function of the chosen algorithm. Outside of cryptographic applications, this
is a rather paranoid and incoherent way to think about a computational problem.
    6
      Parameterized guarantees are common in the analysis of algorithms. For example, the field of parameterized
algorithms and complexity has developed a rich theory around parameterized running time bounds (see the book
by Cygan et al. [16]). Theorem 1 employs an unusually fine-grained and problem-specific parameterization, and in
exchange obtains unusually accurate and meaningful results.
    7
      The notation dxe means the number x, rounded up to the nearest integer.


                                                          4
 (c) There exists a choice of f and k, and a page request sequence that conforms to f , such that
     the page fault rate of the FIFO policy is strictly larger than αf (k).
Parts (a) and (b) prove the worst-case optimality of the LRU policy in a strong sense, f -by-f and
k-by-k. Part (c) differentiates LRU from FIFO, as the latter is suboptimal for some (in fact, many)
choices of f and k.
    The guarantees in Theorem 1 are so good that they are meaningful even when taken at face
                                                                                                √
value—for sublinear f ’s, α√f (k) goes to 0 reasonably quickly with k. For example, if f (w) = d we,
then αf (k) scales with 1/ k. Thus with a cache size of 10,000, the page fault rate is always at
most 1%. If f (w) = d1 + log2 we, then αf (k) goes to 0 even faster with k, roughly as k/2k .8


3        Stable Instances
Are point sets with meaningful clusterings easier to cluster than worst-case point sets? We next
describe one way to define a “meaningful clustering,” due to Bilu and Linial [12]; for others, see
Ackerman and Ben-David [1], Balcan et al. [9], Daniely et al. [18], Kumar and Kannan [29], and
Ostrovsky et al. [34].

The maximum cut problem. Suppose you have a bunch of data points representing images of
cats and images of dogs, and you’d like to automatically discover these two groups. One approach
is to reduce this task to the maximum cut problem, where the goal is to partition the vertices V
of a graph G with edges E and nonnegative edge weights into two groups, while maximizing the
total weight of the edges that have one endpoint in each group. The reduction forms a complete
graph G, with vertices corresponding to the data points, and assigns a weight we to each edge e
indicating how dissimilar its endpoints are. The maximum cut of G is a 2-clustering that tends to
put dissimilar pairs of points in different clusters.
    There are many ways to quantify “dissimilarity” between images, and different definitions might
give different optimal 2-clusterings of the data points. One would hope that, for a range of reason-
able measures of dissimilarity, the maximum cut in the example above would have all cats on one
side and all dogs on the other. In other words, the maximum cut should be invariant under minor
changes to the specification of the edge weights (Figure 3).

Definition 2 (Bilu and Linial [12]) An instance G = (V, E, w) of the maximum cut problem
is γ-perturbation stable if, for all ways of multiplying the weight we of each edge e by a factor
αe ∈ [1, γ], the optimal solution remains the same.
A perturbation-stable instance has a “clearly optimal” solution—a uniqueness assumption on
steroids—thus formalizing the idea of a “meaningful clustering.” In machine learning parlance,
perturbation stability can be viewed as a type of “large margin” assumption.
    The maximum cut problem is N P -hard in general. But what about the special case of γ-
perturbation-stable instances? As γ increases, fewer and fewer instances qualify as γ-perturbation
stable. Is there a sharp stability threshold—a value of γ where the maximum cut problem switches
from N P -hard to polynomial-time solvable?
    Makarychev et al. [30] largely resolved this question. On the positive side, they showed that if γ
is at least a slowly growing function of the number of vertices n, then the maximum cut problem
    8
        See Albers et al. [2] for the precise closed-form formula for αf (k) in general.


                                                               5
                        (a) The maximum cut                          (b) Still the maximum cut

Figure 3: In a perturbation-stable maximum cut instance, the optimal solution is invariant under
small perturbations to the edges’ weights.


can be solved in polynomial time for all γ-perturbation stable instances.9 Makarychev et al. [30] use
techniques from the field of metric embeddings to show that, in such instances, the unique optimal
solution of a certain semidefinite programming relaxation corresponds precisely to the maximum
cut.10 Semidefinite programs are convex programs, and can be solved to arbitrary precision in
polynomial time. There is also evidence that the maximum cut cannot be recovered in polynomial
time in γ-perturbation-stable instances for much smaller values of γ [30].

Other clustering problems. Bilu and Linial [12] defined γ-perturbation-stable instances specif-
ically for the maximum cut problem, but the definition makes sense more generally for any opti-
mization problem with a linear objective function. The study of γ-perturbation-stable instances has
been particularly fruitful for N P -hard clustering problems in metric spaces, where interpoint dis-
tances are required to satisfy the triangle inequality. Many such problems, including the k-means,
k-median, and k-center problems, are polynomial-time solvable already in 2-perturbation-stable
instances [5, 10]. The algorithm in Angelidakis et al. [5], like its precursor in Awasthi et al. [8], is
inspired by the widely-used single-linkage clustering algorithm. It computes a minimum spanning
tree (where edge weights are the interpoint distances) and uses dynamic programming to optimally
remove k − 1 edges to define k clusters. To the extent that we’re comfortable identifying “instances
with a meaningful clustering” with 2-perturbation-stable instances, these results give a precise sense
in which clustering is hard only when it doesn’t matter.11

Overcoming N P -hardness. Polynomial-time algorithms for γ-perturbation-stable instances con-
tinue the age-old tradition of identifying “islands of tractability,” meaning polynomial-time solvable
special cases of N P -hard problems. Two aspects of these results diverge from a majority of 20th-
   9                     √
     Specifically, γ = Ω( log n log log n).
  10
     In general, the optimal solution of a linear or semidefinite programming relaxation of an N P -hard problem is a
“fractional solution” that does not correspond to a feasible solution to the original problem.
  11
     A relaxed and more realistic version of perturbation-stability allows small perturbations to make small changes to
the optimal solution. Many of the results mentioned in this section can be extended to instances meeting this relaxed
condition, with a polynomial-time algorithm guaranteed to recover a solution that closely resembles the optimal
one [5, 9, 30].


                                                          6
century research on tractable special cases. First, perturbation-stability is not an easy condition to
check, in contrast to a restriction like graph planarity or Horn-satisfiability. Instead, the assump-
tion is justified with a plausible narrative about why “real-world instances” might satisfy it, at
least approximately. Second, in most work going beyond worst-case analysis, the goal is to study
general-purpose algorithms, which are well defined on all inputs, and use the assumed instance
structure only in the algorithm analysis (and not explicitly in its design). The hope is that the
algorithm continues to perform well on many instances not covered by its formal guarantee. The
results above for mathematical programming relaxations and single-linkage-based algorithms are
good examples of this paradigm.

Analogy with sparse recovery. There are compelling parallels between the recent research on
clustering in stable instances and slightly older results in a field of applied mathematics known
as sparse recovery, where the goal is to reverse engineer a “sparse” object from a small number
of clues about it. A common theme in both areas is identifying relatively weak conditions under
which a tractable mathematical programming relaxation of an N P -hard problem is guaranteed to
be exact, meaning that the original problem and its relaxation have the same optimal solution.
    For example, a canonical problem in sparse recovery is compressive sensing, where the goal
is to recover an unknown sparse signal (a vector of length n) from a small number m of linear
measurements of it. Equivalently, given an m × n measurement matrix A with m  n and the
measurement results b = Az, the problem is to figure out the signal z. This problem has several
important applications, for example in medical imaging. If z can be arbitrary, then the problem is
hopeless: since m < n, the linear system Ax = b is underdetermined and has an infinite number of
solutions (of which z is only one). But many real-world signals are (approximately) k-sparse in a
suitable basis for small k, meaning that (almost) all of the mass is concentrated on k coordinates.12
The main results in compressive sensing show that, under appropriate assumptions on A, the
problem can be solved efficiently even when m is only modestly bigger than k (and much smaller
than n) [15, 20]. One way to prove these results is to formulate a linear programming relaxation
of the (N P -hard) problem of computing the sparsest solution to Ax = b, and then show that this
relaxation is exact.


4         Planted and Semi-Random Models
Our next genre of models is also inspired by the idea that interesting instances of a problem should
have “clearly optimal” solutions, but differs from the above stability conditions in assuming a
generative model—a specific distribution over inputs. The goal is to design an algorithm that, with
high probability over the assumed input distribution, computes an optimal solution in polynomial
time.

The planted clique problem. In the maximum clique problem, the input is an undirected graph
G = (V, E), and the goal is to identify the largest subset of vertices that are mutually adjacent.
This problem is N P -hard, even to approximate by any reasonable factor. Is it easy when there is
a particularly prominent clique to be found?
   Jerrum [27] suggested the following generative model. There is a fixed set V of n vertices. First,
each possible edge (u, v) is included independently with 50% probability. This is also known as an
    12
         For example, audio signals are typically approximately sparse in the Fourier basis, images in the wavelet basis.


                                                              7
                                 an Erdös-Renyi random graph with edge density 12 , before planting
Figure 4: Degree distribution of √
the k-clique clique Q. If k = Ω( n lg n), then the planted clique will consist of the k vertices with
the highest degrees.



Erdös-Renyi random graph with edge density 21 . Second, for a parameter k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}, a subset
Q ⊆ V of k vertices is chosen uniformly at random, and all remaining edges with both endpoints
in Q are added to the graph (thus making Q a k-clique).
    How big does k need to be before Q becomes visible to a polynomial-time algorithm? The
state-of-the-art is a spectral algorithm of Alon et al. [3], which recovers the planted clique Q with
                                                             √
high probability provided k is at least a constant times n. Recent work suggests that efficient
algorithms cannot recover Q for significantly smaller values of k [11].

An unsatisfying algorithm. The algorithm of Alon et al. [3] is theoretically interesting√         and
plausibly useful. But if we take k to be just a bit bigger, at least a constant times n log n, then
there is an uninteresting and useless algorithm that recovers the planted clique with high probability:
return the k vertices with the largest degrees. To see why this algorithm works, think first about
the sampled Erdös-Renyi random graph, before the clique Q is planted. The expected degree of
                                                   √
each vertex is ≈ n/2, with standard deviation ≈ n/2. Textbook large   √ deviation inequalities show
that, with high probability, the degree of every vertex √ is within ≈ ln n standard deviations of its
expectation (Figure 4). Planting a clique Q of size a n log n, for a sufficiently large constant a,
then boosts the degrees of all of the clique vertices enough that they catapult past the degrees of
all of the non-clique vertices.
    What went wrong? The same thing that often goes wrong with pure average-case analysis—the
solution is brittle and overly tailored to a specific distributional assumption. How can we change
the input model to encourage the design of algorithms with more robust guarantees? Can we find
a sweet spot between average-case and worst-case analysis?

Semi-random models. Blum and Spencer [13] proposed studying semi-random models, where
nature and an adversary collaborate to produce an input. In many such models, nature first
samples an input from a specific distribution (like the probabilistic planted clique model above),
which is then modified by the adversary before being presented as an input to an algorithm. It is
important to restrict the adversary’s power, so that it cannot simply throw out nature’s starting
point and replace it with a worst-case instance. Feige and Killian [24] suggested studying monotone
adversaries, which can only modify the input by making the optimal solution “more obviously
optimal.” For example, in the semi-random version of the planted clique problem, a monotone


                                                   8
adversary is only allowed to remove edges that are not in the planted clique Q—it cannot remove
edges from Q or add edges outside Q.
    Semi-random models with a monotone adversary may initially seem no harder than the    √ planted
models that they generalize. But let’s return to the planted clique model with k = Ω( n log n),
where the “top-k degrees” algorithm succeeds with high probability when there is no adversary.
A monotone adversary can easily foil this algorithm in the semi-random planted clique model,
by removing edges between clique and non-clique vertices to decrease the degrees of the former
back down to ≈ n/2. Thus the semi-random model forces us to develop smarter, more robust
algorithms.13
    For the semi-random planted clique model, Feige and Krauthgamer [24] gave a polynomial-
                                                                                 √
time algorithm that recovers the clique with high probability provided k = Ω( n). The spectral
algorithm by Alon et al. [3] achieved this guarantee only in the standard planted clique model, and
it does not provide any strong guarantees for the semi-random model. The algorithm of Feige and
Krauthgamer [24] instead uses a semidefinite programming relaxation of the problem. Their analysis
shows that this relaxation is exact with high probability in the standard planted clique model
                 √
(provided k = Ω( n)), and uses the monotonicity properties of optimal mathematical programming
solutions to argue that this exactness cannot be sabotaged by any monotone adversary.


5        Smoothed Analysis
Smoothed analysis is another example of a semi-random model, now with the order of operations
reversed: an adversary goes first and chooses an arbitrary input, which is then perturbed slightly by
nature. Smoothed analysis can be applied to any problem where “small perturbations” make sense,
including most problems with real-valued inputs. It can be applied to any measure of algorithm
performance, but has proven most effective for running time analyses.
    Like other semi-random models, smoothed analysis has the benefit of potentially escaping worst-
case inputs (especially if they are “isolated”), while avoiding overfitting a solution to a specific
distributional assumption. There is also a plausible narrative about why “real-world” inputs are
captured by this framework: whatever problem you’d like to solve, there are inevitable inaccuracies
in its formulation (from measurement error, uncertainty, and so on).

The simplex method. Spielman and Teng [38] developed the smoothed analysis framework with
the specific goal of proving that bad inputs for the simplex method are exceedingly rare. Average-
case analyses of the simplex method from the 1980s (e.g., Borgwardt [14]) provide evidence for this
thesis, but smoothed analysis provides more robust support for it.
    The perturbation model in Spielman and Teng [38] is: independently for each entry of the
constraint matrix and right-hand side of the linear program, add a Gaussian (i.e., normal) random
variable with mean 0 and standard deviation σ.14 The parameter σ interpolates between worst-
    13
      The extensively studied “stochastic block model”generalizes the planted clique model (see e.g. Moore [32]), and
is another fruitful playground for semi-random models. Here, the vertices of a graph are partitioned into groups, and
the probability that an edge is present is a function of the groups that contain its endpoints. The responsibility of
an algorithm in this model is to recover the (unknown) vertex partition. This goal becomes provably strictly harder
in the presence of a monotone adversary [31].
   14
      This perturbation results in a dense constraint matrix even if the original one was sparse, and for this reason
Theorem 3 is not fully satisfactory. Extending this result to sparsity-preserving perturbations is an important open
question.


                                                         9
case analysis (when σ = 0) and pure average-case analysis (as σ → ∞, the perturbation drowns
out the original linear program). The main result states that the expected running time of the
simplex method is polynomial as long as typical perturbations have magnitude at least an inverse
polynomial function of the input size (which is small!).

Theorem 3 (Spielman and Teng [38]) For every initial linear program, in expectation over the
perturbation to the program, the running time of the simplex method is polynomial in the input size
and in σ1 .
The running time blow-up as σ → 0 is necessary because the worst-case running time of the simplex
method is exponential. Several researchers have devised simpler analyses and better polynomial
running times, most recently Dadush and Huiberts [17]. All of these analyses are for a specific
pivot rule, the “shadow pivot rule.” The idea is to project the high-dimensional feasible region
of a linear program onto a plane (the “shadow”) and run the simplex method there. The hard
part of proving Theorem 3 is showing that, with high probability over nature’s perturbations, the
perturbed instance is “well-conditioned” in the sense that each step of the simplex method makes
significant progress traversing the boundary of the shadow.

Local search. A local search algorithm for an optimization problem maintains a feasible solution,
and iteratively improves that solution via “local moves” for as long as possible, terminating with
a locally optimal solution. Local search heuristics are ubiquitous in practice, in many different
application domains. Many such heuristics have an exponential worst-case running time, despite
always terminating quickly in practice (typically within a sub-quadratic number of iterations).
Resolving this disparity is right in the wheelhouse of smoothed analysis. For example, Lloyd’s
algorithm for the k-means problem can require an exponential number of iterations to converge in
the worst case, but needs only an expected polynomial number of iterations in the smoothed case
(see Arthur et al. [7] and the references therein).15
    Much remains to be done, however. For a concrete challenge problem, let’s revisit the maximum
cut problem. The input is an undirected graph G = (V, E) with edge weights, and the goal is to
partition V into two groups to maximize the total weight of the edges with one endpoint in each
group. Consider a local search algorithm that modifies the current solution by moving a single
vertex from one side to the other (known as the “flip neighborhood”), and performs such moves
as long as they increase the sum of the weights of the edges crossing the cut. In the worst case,
this local search algorithm can require an exponential number of iterations to converge. What
about in the smoothed analysis model, where a small random perturbation is added to each edge’s
weight? The natural conjecture is that local search should terminate in a polynomial number
of iterations, with high probability over the perturbation. This conjecture has been proved for
graphs with maximum degree O(log n) [21] and for the complete graph [4]; for general graphs, the
state-of-the-art is a quasi-polynomial-time guarantee (meaning nO(log n) iterations) [22].
    More ambitiously, it is tempting to speculate that for every natural local search problem, local
search terminates in a polynomial number of iterations in the smoothed analysis model (with high
  15
     An orthogonal issue with local search heuristics is the possibility of outputting a locally optimal solution that is
much worse than a globally optimal one. Here, the gap between theory and practice is not as embarrassing—for many
problems, local search algorithms really can produce pretty lousy solutions. For this reason, one generally invokes
a local search algorithm many times with different starting points and returns the best of all of the locally optimal
solutions found.



                                                           10
probability). Such a result would be a huge success story for smoothed analysis and beyond worst-
case analysis more generally.


6        On Machine Learning
Much of the present and future of research going beyond worst-case analysis is motivated by ad-
vances in machine learning.16 The unreasonable effectiveness of modern machine learning algo-
rithms has thrown the gauntlet down to algorithms researchers, and there is perhaps no other
problem domain with a more urgent need for the beyond worst-case approach.
    To illustrate some of the challenges, consider a canonical supervised learning problem, where a
learning algorithm is given a data set of object-label pairs and the goal is to produce a classifier
that accurately predicts the label of as-yet-unseen objects (e.g., whether or not an image contains
a cat). Over the past decade, aided by massive data sets and computational power, deep neural
networks have achieved impressive levels of performance across a range of prediction tasks [25].
Their empirical success flies in the face of conventional wisdom in multiple ways. First, most neural
network training algorithms use first-order methods (i.e., variants of gradient descent) to solve
nonconvex optimization problems that had been written off as computationally intractable. Why
do these algorithms so often converge quickly to a local optimum, or even to a global optimum?17
Second, modern neural networks are typically over-parameterized, meaning that the number of
free parameters (weights and biases) is considerably larger than the size of the training data set.
Over-parameterized models are vulnerable to large generalization error (i.e., overfitting), but state-
of-the-art neural networks generalize shockingly well [40]. How can we explain this? The answer
likely hinges on special properties of both real-world data sets and the optimization algorithms
used for neural network training (principally stochastic gradient descent).18
    Another interesting case study, this time in unsupervised learning, concerns topic modeling.
The goal here is to process a large unlabeled corpus of documents and produce a list of meaningful
topics and an assignment of each document to a mixture of topics. One computationally efficient
approach to the problem is to use a singular value decomposition subroutine to factor the term-
document matrix into two matrices, one that describes which words belong to which topics, and one
indicating the topic mixture of each document [35]. This approach can lead to negative entries in
the matrix factors, which hinders interpretability. Restricting the matrix factors to be nonnegative
yields a problem that is N P -hard in the worst case, but Arora et al. [6] gave a practical factorization
algorithm for topic modeling that runs in polynomial time under a reasonable assumption about
the data. Their assumption states that each topic has at least one “anchor word,” the presence of
which strongly indicates that the document is at least partly about that topic (such as the word
“Durant” for the topic “basketball”). Formally articulating this property of data was an essential
step in the development of their algorithm.
    The beyond worst-case viewpoint can also contribute to machine learning by “stress-testing”
the existing theory and providing a road map for more robust guarantees. While work in beyond
worst-case analysis makes strong assumptions relative to the norm in theoretical computer science,
these assumptions are usually weaker than the norm in statistical machine learning. Research in
    16
     Arguably, even the overarching goal of research in beyond worst-case analysis—determining the best algorithm
for an application-specific special case of a problem—is fundamentally a machine learning problem [26].
  17
     See Jin et al. [28] and the references therein for recent progress on this question.
  18
     See Neyshabur [33] and the references therein for the latest developments in this direction.



                                                       11
the latter field often resembles average-case analysis, for example when data points are modeled
as independent and identically distributed samples from some (possibly parametric) distribution.
The semi-random models described earlier in this article are role models in blending adversarial
and average-case modeling to encourage the design of algorithms with robustly good performance.
Recent progress in computationally efficient robust statistics shares much of the same spirit [19].


7    Conclusions
With algorithms, silver bullets are few and far between. No one design technique leads to good
algorithms for all computational problems. Nor is any single analysis framework—worst-case anal-
ysis or otherwise—suitable for all occasions. A typical algorithms course teaches several paradigms
for algorithm design, along with guidance about when to use each of them; the field of beyond
worst-case analysis holds the promise of a comparably diverse toolbox for algorithm analysis.
    Even at the level of a specific problem, there is generally no magical, always-optimal algorithm—
the best algorithm for the job depends on the instances of the problem most relevant to the specific
application. Research in beyond worst-case analysis acknowledges this fact while retaining the
emphasis on robust guarantees that is central to worst-case analysis. The goal of work in this area
is to develop novel methods for articulating the relevant instances of a problem, thereby enabling
rigorous explanations of the empirical performance of known algorithms, and also guiding the design
of new algorithms optimized for the instances that matter.
    With algorithms increasingly dominating our world, the need to understand when and why they
work has never been greater. The field of beyond worst-case analysis has already produced several
striking results, but there remain many unexplained gaps between the theoretical and empirical
performance of widely-used algorithms. With so many opportunities for consequential research, I
suspect that the best work in the area is yet to come.


8    Acknowledgments
I thank Sanjeev Arora, Ankur Moitra, Aravindan Vijayaraghavan, and four anonymous reviewers
for several helpful suggestions. This work was supported in part by NSF award CCF-1524062, a
Google Faculty Research Award, and a Guggenheim Fellowship.


References
 [1] M. Ackerman and S. Ben-David. Clusterability: A theoretical study. In Proceedings of the Twelfth
     International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), pages 1–8, 2009.
 [2] S. Albers, L. M. Favrholdt, and O. Giel. On paging with locality of reference. Journal of Computer and
     System Sciences, 70(2):145–175, 2005.
 [3] N. Alon, M. Krivelevich, and B. Sudakov. Finding a large hidden clique in a random graph. Random
     Structures & Algorithms, 13(3-4):457–466, 1998.
 [4] O. Angel, S. Bubeck, Y. Peres, and F. Wai. Local MAX-CUT in smoothed polynomial time. In
     Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 429–437,
     2017.




                                                    12
 [5] H. Angelidakis, K. Makarychev, and Y. Makarychev. Algorithms for stable and perturbation-resilient
     problems. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages
     438–451, 2017.
 [6] S. Arora, R. Ge, Y. Halpern, D. M. Mimno, A. Moitra, D. Sontag, Y. Wu, and M. Zhu. A practical algo-
     rithm for topic modeling with provable guarantees. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference
     on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 280–288, 2013.
 [7] D. Arthur, B. Manthey, and H. Röglin. Smoothed analysis of the k-means method. Journal of the
     ACM, 58(5):Article No. 18, 2011.
 [8] P. Awasthi, A. Blum, and O. Sheffet. Center-based clustering under perturbation stability. Information
     Processing Letters, 112(1-2):49–54, 2012.
 [9] M.-F. Balcan, A. Blum, and A. Gupta. Clustering under approximation stability. Journal of the ACM,
     60(2):Article No. 8, 2013.
[10] M.-F. Balcan, N. Haghtalab, and C. White. k-center clustering under perturbation resilience. In
     Proceedings of the 43rd Annual International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming
     (ICALP), page Article No. 68, 2016.
[11] B. Barak, S. B. Hopkins, J. A. Kelner, P. Kothari, A. Moitra, and A. Potechin. A nearly tight sum-of-
     squares lower bound for the planted clique problem. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual IEEE Symposium
     on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 428–437, 2016.
[12] Y. Bilu and N. Linial. Are stable instances easy? Combinatorics, Probability & Computing, 21(5):643–
     660, 2012.
[13] A. Blum and J. H. Spencer. Coloring random and semi-random k-colorable graphs. Journal of Algo-
     rithms, 19(2):204–234, 1995.
[14] K. H. Borgwardt. The Simplex Method: a probabilistic analysis. Springer-Verlag, 1980.
[15] E. J. Candes, J. K. Romberg, and T. Tao. Robust uncertainty principles: Exact signal reconstruction
     from highly incomplete fourier information. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 52(2):489–509,
     2006.
[16] M. Cygan, F. V. Fomin, L. Kowalik, D. Lokshtanov, D. Marx, M. Pilipczuk, M. Pilipczuk, and
     S. Saurabh. Parameterized Algorithms. Springer, 2015.
[17] D. Dadush and S. Huiberts. A friendly smoothed analysis of the simplex method. In Proceedings of the
     50th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), 2018. To appear.
[18] A. Daniely, N. Linial, and M. Saks. Clustering is difficult only when it does not matter. arXiv:1205.4891,
     2012.
[19] I. Diakonikolas, G. Kamath, D. M. Kane, J. Li, A. Moitra, and A. Stewart. Being robust (in high
     dimensions) can be practical. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning
     (ICML), pages 999–1008, 2017.
[20] D. L. Donoho. Compressed sensing. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 52(4):1289–1306, 2006.
[21] R. Elsässer and T. Tscheuschner. Settling the complexity of local max-cut (almost) completely. In
     Proceedings of the 38th Annual International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming
     (ICALP), pages 171–182, 2011.
[22] M. Etscheid and H. Röglin. Smoothed analysis of local search for the maximum-cut problem. ACM
     Transactions on Algorithms, 13(2):Article No. 12, 2017.
[23] R. Fagin, A. Lotem, and M. Naor. Optimal aggregation algorithms for middleware. Journal of Computer
     and System Sciences, 66(4):614–656, 2003.


                                                      13
[24] U. Feige and J. Kilian. Heuristics for semirandom graph problems. Journal of Computer and System
     Sciences, 63(4):639–671, 2001.
[25] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016.
[26] R. Gupta and T. Roughgarden. Application-specific algorithm selection. SIAM Journal on Computing,
     46(3):992–1017, 2017.
[27] M. Jerrum. Large cliques elude the Metropolis process. Random Structures and Algorithms, 3(4):347–
     359, 1992.
[28] C. Jin, R. Ge, P. Netrapalli, S. M. Kakade, and M. I. Jordan. How to escape saddle points efficiently.
     In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 1724–1732,
     2017.
[29] A. Kumar and R. Kannan. Clustering with spectral norm and the k-means algorithm. In Proceedings of
     the 51st Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 299–308, 2010.
[30] K. Makarychev, Y. Makarychev, and A. Vijayaraghavan. Bilu-Linial stable instances of max cut and
     minimum multiway cut. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algo-
     rithms (SODA), pages 890–906, 2014.
[31] A. Moitra, W. Perry, and A. S. Wein. How robust are reconstruction thresholds for community detection?
     In Proceedings of the 48th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 828–841,
     2016.
[32] C. Moore. The computer science and physics of community detection: Landscapes, phase transitions,
     and hardness. Bulletin of EATCS, 121:1–37, 2017.
[33] B. Neyshabur. Implicit Regularization in Deep Learning. PhD thesis, Toyota Technological Institute at
     Chicago, 2017.
[34] R. Ostrovsky, Y. Rabani, L. J. Schulman, and C. Swamy. The effectiveness of Lloyd-type methods for
     the k-means problem. Journal of the ACM, 59(6):Article No. 22, 2012.
[35] C. H. Papadimitriou, P. Raghgavan, H. Tamaki, and S. Vemapala. Latent semantic indexing: A prob-
     abilistic analysis. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 61(2):217–235, 2000.
[36] T. Roughgarden. CS264 lecture notes on beyond worst-case analysis. Stanford University, 2009–2017.
     Available at http://www.timroughgarden.org/notes.html.
[37] D. D. Sleator and R. E. Tarjan. Amortized efficiency of list update and paging rules. Commincations
     of the ACM, 28(2):202–208, 1985.
[38] D. A. Spielman and S.-H. Teng. Smoothed analysis: Why the simplex algorithm usually takes polynomial
     time. Journal of the ACM, 51(3):385–463, 2004.
[39] L. Trevisan. Inapproximability of combinatorial optimization problems. In V. T. Paschos, editor,
     Paradigms of Combinatorial Optimization: Problems and New Approaches. Wiley, 2014.
[40] C. Zhang, S. Bengio, M. Hardt, B. Recht, and O. Vinyals. Understanding deep learning requires re-
     thinking generalization. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Learning Representations
     (ICLR), 2017.




                                                    14
