                                          UNIVERSITE DE VERSAILLES SAINT-QUENTIN-EN-YVELINES

                                                Laboratoire Données et Algorithmes pour une Ville
                                                             Intelligente et Durable David – UR 7431
arXiv:2309.17042v1 [cs.CC] 29 Sep 2023




                                                  HABILITATION A DIRIGER DES RECHERCHES

                                                   DISCIPLINE / SPECIALITE : INFORMATIQUE / ALGORITHMIQUE


                                                                            Présentée par :
                                                                        Yann STROZECKI


                                          Enumeration Complexity: Incremental Time, Delay and
                                                                                Space

                                                                     Soutenue le 23 Novembre 2021


                                         JURY
                                         Mme Nadia Creignou, Professeure, Université d’Aix Marseille (Rapporteuse)
                                         Mr Reinhard Pichler, Professeur, Technische Universität Wien (Rapporteur)
                                         Mr Takeaki Uno, Professeur, National Institute of Informatics (Rapporteur)
                                         Mr Louhari Nourine, Professeur, Université de Clermont Auvergne (Examinateur)
                                         Mme Marie-France Sagot, Directrice de Recherche, INRIA Rhône-Alpes (Examinatrice)
                                         Mr Jean-Michel Fourneau, Professeur, Université de Versailles Saint-Quentin-en-
                                         Yvelines (Tuteur)
                                                                                               i


Acknowledgments
Merci à mes enfants de m’avoir permis de ne pas trop me précipiter pour écrire mon habili-
tation. Merci au confinement pour m’avoir permis de prendre encore plus de recul et moins
de RER. Merci à ma compagne de m’avoir épousé pendant que je rédigeais ce manuscrit,
j’espère pouvoir encore continuer longtemps à équilibrer ma vie familiale et professionelle
ainsi. Merci à ma mère, mon frère et tout ma famille d’être toujours présents et de m’aider
pour le pot :)
    Je suis très reconnaissant à tous les collègues qui m’ont proposé des problèmes, invité
à des séminaires et des conférences et m’ont posé de nombreuses questions: c’est grâce à
vous j’ai continué à travailler sur l’énumération. Je suis également reconnaissant à tous mes
coauteurs, avec qui j’ai eu beaucoup de plaisir à travailler sur les résultats présentés dans ce
manuscrit. Je suis prêt pour des nouvelles questions Arnaud et Florent, il va falloir trouver
une garde pour vos enfants ! Thanks to Olivier Commowick for distributing a nice thesis
template (at http://olivier.commowick.org/thesis_template.php).
    I heartily thank the reviewers of this manuscript, Nadia Creignou, Reinhard Pichler and
Takeaki Uno to have accepted to take my manuscript as a holiday reading and for their
excellent and quick work. I also thank the whole jury, to have found the time to be present
for the defense. I want to especially thank Jean-Michel, my tutor, that I have so frequently
bothered with administrative questions about this HDR.
                                                                          Contents

1 Introduction                                                                                  1
  1.1 Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      1
  1.2 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2

2 Enumeration Framework                                                                         7
  2.1 Enumeration Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         7
  2.2 Model of Computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        8
  2.3 Parsimonious Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       10

3 Time Complexity: Total Time, Incremental Time and Delay                                      13
  3.1 Output Polynomial Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         13
  3.2 Incremental Polynomial Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        14
  3.3 Polynomial Delay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
  3.4 Separation of Enumeration Classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        20
  3.5 Stability under Operations and Reductions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        21

4 Space Complexity                                                                             25
  4.1 Polynomial Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     25
  4.2 Memoryless Polynomial Delay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        26
  4.3 Sources of Exponential Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       27
  4.4 Amortization in Polynomial Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         27
      4.4.1 Gaps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     28
      4.4.2 Geometric Amortization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         28
      4.4.3 Amortizing without Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           30

5 Below Polynomial Delay                                                                       33
  5.1 Strong Polynomial Delay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      33
  5.2 Constant Delay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     37
  5.3 Random Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        40

6 Ordered Enumeration                                                                          43
  6.1 Specified Order . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    43
  6.2 Ranked Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      44

7 Restricted Formalisms and Classification                                                     47
  7.1 Hardness and Lower Bound Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         47
  7.2 Hardness for Specific Algorithms or Computation model . . . . . . . . . . . .            49
  7.3 Restricted Classes of Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       52
      7.3.1 Constraint Satisfaction Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         52
      7.3.2 Saturation by Set Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        53
      7.3.3 Query Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        56
iv                                                                                CONTENTS


         7.3.4   Polynomial Interpolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   58

8 Solving a Practical Enumeration Problem                                                       63
  8.1 Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     63
  8.2 Heuristic Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       64
  8.3 Implementing a Tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       65

9 New Horizons for Enumeration                                                                  69
  9.1 Succinct Representation of the Solution Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         70
  9.2 Approximate Representation of the Solution Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            72

Bibliography                                                                                    75
                                                                               Chapter 1

                                                                Introduction



1.1    Foreword

During the past ten years, I have worked in several areas related to algorithms and complex-
ity. I was first interested in algebraic complexity and computer algebra during a post-doc
in Toronto, working with Bruno Grenet, Pascal Koiran and Natacha Portier. Then, I began
to study algorithmic game theory with David Auger, Pierre Coucheney and our PhD stu-
dent Xavier Badin de Montjoye, working on algorithms to find optimal strategies for simple
stochastic games. More recently, I have studied periodic scheduling problems with my PhD
student Maël Guiraud, both from a theoretical and practical point of view, to optimize the
latency of telecommunication networks.
    In this habilitation thesis, I focus on a fourth topic I have studied since the beginning of
my PhD: the structural complexity of enumeration, in particular the relationships between
different notions of tractability. This thesis tries to be a survey on the complexity of enumer-
ation, with an emphasis on my contributions to the area. A good part of this thesis is taken
from my recent survey [Strozecki 2019] and some of my articles on the complexity of enumer-
ation [Capelli & Strozecki 2019, Mary & Strozecki 2019, Capelli & Strozecki 2021a]. I found
inspiration and a broad view on enumeration in several theses [Bagan 2009, Strozecki 2010b,
Brault-Baron 2013, Mary 2013, Marino 2015, Vigny 2018]. I was also motivated to write
a survey on enumeration complexity and this thesis by the ever increasing community of
researchers interested in enumeration coming from many different backgrounds: graph al-
gorithms, parametrized complexity, exact exponential algorithms, logic, databases, enumer-
ative combinatorics, applied algorithms in bioinformatics, cheminformatics, networks . . . In
the last ten years, the topic has attracted much attention and these different communi-
ties began to share their ideas and problems, as exemplified by the creation of WEPA, the
International Workshop on Enumeration Problems and Applications, two recent Dagstuhl
worskhops “Algorithmic Enumeration: Output-sensitive, Input-Sensitive, Parameterized, Ap-
proximative” and “Enumeration in Data Management”, and the creation of wikipedia pages
for enumeration complexity and algorithms. The results I present have been obtained with
my co-authors, in particular Florent Capelli, Arnaud Mary, Arnaud Durand, Sandrine Vial
and Franck Quessette but they also originate from helpful discussions with my colleagues Na-
dia Creignou, Frédéric Olive, Étienne Grandjean, Stefan Mengel, Mamadou Kanté, Lhouari
Nourine, Alexandre Vigny, Florent Madelaine and many others.
2                                                        CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION


1.2     Introduction
Modern enumeration algorithms date back to the 70’s with graph algorithms [Tiernan 1970],
while fundamental complexity notions for enumeration have been proposed 30 years ago by
Johnson, Yannakakis and Papadimitriou [Johnson et al. 1988]. However, much older prob-
lems can be reinterpreted as enumeration: the baguenaudier game [Lucas 1882] from the 19th
century can be seen as the problem of enumerating integers in Gray code order. There are
even thousand years old examples of methods to list simple combinatorial structures, the
subsets or the partitions of a finite set, as reported by Ruskey [Ruskey 2003] in his book on
combinatorial generation. Algorithms to list all integers, tuples, permutations, combinations,
partitions, set partitions, trees of a given size are also called combinatorial algorithms and are
particular enumeration problems. Combinatorial algorithms are the subject of a whole vol-
ume of the Art of Computer Programming [Knuth 2011] and Knuth even confessed that these
are his favorite algorithms; while I agree I would extend that appreciation to all enumeration
algorithms.
    Hundreds of different enumeration problems have now been studied, see the actively main-
tained list Enumeration of Enumeration Algorithms and Its Complexity [Wasa 2016]. Some
enumeration problems have important practical applications: A database query is the enu-
meration of assignments of a formula, data mining relies on generating all frequent objects in a
large database (frequent itemsets [Agrawal et al. 1994] and frequent subgraphs [Jiang et al. 2013]),
finding the minimal transversals of a hypergraph has applications in many fields [Hagen 2008]
such as biology, machine learning, cryptography . . .
    A classical approach to enumeration is to see it as a variation on decision or search
problems where one tries to get more information. As an example, consider the matchings of
a graph, we may want to solve the following tasks.

    • (decision problem) Decide whether there is a matching.

    • (search problem) Produce a (maximal) matching.

    • (optimization problem) Produce a matching of largest cardinality.

    • (counting problem) Count all matchings.

    • (enumeration problem) List all (maximal) matchings.

    Usually, to analyze the complexity of a problem, we relate the time to produce the output
to the size of the input. The originality of enumeration problems is that the output is usually
very large with regard to the input. Hence, interpreting the total time to produce the whole
set of solutions as a function of the input size is not informative, since it is almost always
exponential. To make enumeration complexity relevant, we need to consider other parameters
of the problem out of the instance size: the size of the output (or its cardinal since it is a set of
solutions) and the size of a single solution in the output. We must also study finer complexity
measures than total time, since it does not allow to differentiate most enumeration problems.
    The simplest way to improve on the analysis of enumeration algorithms is to evaluate
how the total time to compute all solutions relates to the size of the input and of the output.
1.2. INTRODUCTION                                                                              3


Algorithms whose complexity is given in this fashion are often called output sensitive, by
contrast to input sensitive algorithms [Fomin & Kratsch 2010]. Note that output sensitivity
is relevant even when the number of objects to produce is small. In computational geometry, it
allows to give better complexity bounds, for instance on the convex hull problem [Chan 1996].
When the total time is polynomial in the size of the input and the output, the algorithm is
said to be output polynomial (or sometimes in total polynomial time). Output polynomial is
a good measure of tractability when all elements of a set must be generated, for instance to
count the number of solutions or to compute some statistics on the set of solutions.
     Often, output polynomial is not restrictive enough given the outstanding number of so-
lutions and we must ask for a total time linear in the number of solutions. In that case,
the relevant complexity measure is the total time divided by the number of solutions called
amortized time or average delay. Many enumeration algorithms generating combinatorial
objects are in constant amortized time or CAT, such as the generation of unrooted trees of
a given size [Wright et al. 1986], linear extensions of a partial order [Pruesse & Ruskey 1994]
or integers given in Gray code order [Knuth 1997]. Uno also proposed in [Uno 2015] a general
method to obtain constant amortized time algorithms, which can be applied, for instance, to
find the matchings or the spanning trees of a graph.
     Enumeration algorithms are also often used to compute an optimal solution by generating
all admissible solutions. For instance, finding maximum common subgraphs up to isomor-
phism, a very important problem in cheminformatics, is NP-hard and is solved by listing all
maximal cliques [Ehrlich & Rarey 2011]. The notion of best solution is not always clear and
enumeration is then used to build libraries of interesting objects to be analyzed by experts, as
it is done in biology, chemistry or network analytics [Andrade et al. 2016, Barth et al. 2015,
Böhmová et al. 2018]. In particular, when confronted to a multicriteria optimisation problem,
a natural approach is to enumerate the Pareto’s frontier [Papadimitriou & Yannakakis 2000,
Vassilvitskii & Yannakakis 2005, Bazgan et al. 2015]. In all these applications, if the set of
solutions is too large, we are interested in generating the largest possible subset of solutions.
Hence, a good enumeration algorithm should guarantee that it will find as many solutions
as possible in a predictable amount of time. In this case, polynomial incremental time algo-
rithms are more suitable: an algorithm is in polynomial incremental time if the time needed
to enumerate the first k solutions is polynomial in k and in the size of the input. Such algo-
rithms naturally appear when the enumeration task is of the following form: given a set of
elements and a polynomial time function acting on tuples of elements, produce the closure of
the set by the function. One can generate such closure by iteratively applying the function
until no new element is found. As the set grows, finding new elements becomes harder. For
instance, the best algorithm to generate all circuits of a matroid uses a closure property of
the circuits [Khachiyan et al. 2005] and is thus in polynomial incremental time. The funda-
mental problem of generating the minimal transversals of a hypergraph can also be solved in
quasi-polynomial incremental time [Fredman & Khachiyan 1996] and some of its restrictions
in polynomial incremental time [Eiter et al. 2003].
     However, when one wants to process a set in a streaming fashion such as the answers of a
database query, incremental polynomial time is not enough and we need a good delay between
the output of two consecutive solutions, usually bounded by a polynomial in the input size.
We refer to such algorithms as polynomial delay algorithms. Many problems admit such
4                                                     CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION


algorithms, e.g. enumeration of the cycles of a graph [Read & Tarjan 1975], the satisfying
assignments of some tractable variants of SAT [Creignou & Hébrard 1997] or the spanning
trees and connected induced subgraphs of a graph [Avis & Fukuda 1996]. All polynomial
delay algorithms are based on few methods such as backtrack search (also called flashlight
search or binary partition) or reverse search, see [Mary 2013] for a survey.
    When the size of the input is much larger than the size of one solution, think of generating
subsets of vertices of a hypergraph or a small query over a large database, polynomial delay is
an unsatisfactory measure of efficiency. The good notion of tractability is strong polynomial
delay, i.e. the delay is polynomial in the size of the last solution. A folklore example is the
enumeration of the paths in a DAG, which is in delay linear in the size of the last generated
path. More complex problems can then be reduced to generating paths in a DAG, such as enu-
merating the minimal dominating sets in restricted classes of graphs [Golovach et al. 2018].
    Unlike classical complexity classes, none of the classes introduced in this thesis but
EnumP, the equivalent of NP, have complete problems. Because of that, no notion of
reduction for enumeration seems better than the others, and for many proof of hardness,
ad hoc reductions are used. To overcome the lack of completness result, several works re-
strict themselves to smaller families of enumeration problems in the hope of better classi-
fying their complexity: assignments of SAT formula [Creignou & Hébrard 1997], homomor-
phisms [Bulatov et al. 2012], subsets given by saturation operators [Mary & Strozecki 2019],
FO queries over various structures [Segoufin 2015], maximal subgraphs [Cohen et al. 2008,
Conte & Uno 2019, Conte et al. 2019]. . .


Organization In Chapter 2, enumeration problems and the related computation model
are defined, with an emphasis on the consequences of several definitional choices. Then, in
Chapter 3, we introduce complexity classes related to three time complexity measures, total
time, incremental time and delay. For each of these classes, we provide a separation theorem
and a characterization when possible. In Chapter 4, we study several restrictions on space in
enumeration. In particular, we show that incremental linear time is in fact equal to polynomial
delay, even with polynomial space. Chapter 5 is devoted to the presentation of low complexity
classes, with strong contraints on the delay, to capture tractability in different contexts. In
particular, we present several methods to show that a problem has a strong polynomial delay,
applied to the problem of generating the models of a DNF formula. We also investigate the
restricted class of problems which admits a uniform random generator of solutions, as a way
to avoid using space in addition of time, and show that it can be related to polynomial delay.
Instead of generating solutions in a random order or an unspecified one, it is often relevant
to generate them in a specified order, to get more “interesting” solutions first. We review how
an additional constraint on the order of generated solutions may increase the complexity in
Chapter 6. In Chapter 7, we review the few lower bound results for enumeration problems. To
obtain more lower bounds and classification results, we present several restricted frameworks
from logic and algebra. In addition to lower bounds, we provide many algorithms for tractable
classes of saturation problems, interpolation problems and generalized first order queries. In
Chapter 8, we briefly present an algorithm developped to enumerate a certain kind of planar
map useful in cheminformatic, underlying the differences between the design of a theoretical
1.2. INTRODUCTION                                                                        5


algorithm and the implementation of an algorithm used in practice. To deal with a huge
solution space, even constant delay algorithm are not satisfactory, hence, in Chapter 9, we
present several alternative approaches to the task of listing solutions exhaustively.
                                                                               Chapter 2

                                 Enumeration Framework


Contents
      2.1   Enumeration Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7
      2.2   Model of Computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    8
      2.3   Parsimonious Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    10




2.1    Enumeration Problem
Let Σ be a finite alphabet and Σ∗ be the set of finite words built on Σ. We denote by |x|
the length of x ∈ Σ∗ . Let A ⊆ Σ∗ × Σ∗ be a binary predicate, we write A(x) for the set of y
such that A(x, y) holds. The enumeration problem Enum·A is the function which associates
A(x) to x. The element x is often called the instance or the input, while an element of A(x)
is called a solution. We denote the cardinality of a set S by |S|.

Example 1. Let H = (X, E) be an hypergraph, with X the set of vertices and E the set of
hyperedges. A transversal or hitting set is a subset T of X, such that all hyperedges e ∈ E
have a non-empty intersection with T . In other words, T is a cover of the hypergraph H. The
problem of generating all transversals minimal for inclusion is a fundamental enumeration
problem, with many applications [Hagen 2008].
    The binary predicate Min-Transversals(H, T ) is true if and only if T is a minimal
transversal of H. The problem of listing minimal transversals is denoted by Enum·Min-Transversals.
Hypergraph H is an input of the problem, Min-Transversals(H) denotes the set of
all minimal transversals of H and T ∈ Min-Transversals(H) is called a solution of
Enum·Min-Transversals (for input H).

     In this thesis, we only consider predicates A such that |A(x)| is finite for all x. This
assumption could be lifted and the definitions on the complexity of enumeration adapted
to the infinite case. This is not done here because infinite sets of solutions behave quite
differently when studying the complexity of their enumeration. However, there are many
natural infinite enumeration problems such as listing all primes or all words of a context-free
language [Florêncio et al. 2015].
     We can further reduce the set of enumeration problems by adding constraints on their
solutions. First, the size of each solution can be bounded by a function of the instance size.
It is reasonable since in many problems the size of a solution is fixed, known beforehand and
not too large, otherwise we would not even try to produce them.
8                                       CHAPTER 2. ENUMERATION FRAMEWORK


Definition 1. A binary predicate A is polynomially balanced if there is a polynomial p, such
that, for all y ∈ A(x), |y| ≤ p(|x|).
   Let Check·A be the problem of deciding, given x and y, whether y ∈ A(x). In almost all
practical enumeration problems, one can check efficiently whether a string is a solution. This
can be captured by the constraint Check·A ∈ P From a polynomially balanced predicate A
with Check·A in polynomial time, we can define an NP problem by asking whether A(x) is
empty or a #P problem by asking for |A(x)|. It is then natural to define a class of enumeration
problems from these predicates, analogous to NP.
Definition 2. The class EnumP is the set of all problems Enum·A where A is polynomially
balanced and Check·A ∈ P.
Example 2. Any transversal T of an hypergraph H = (X, E) satisfies T ⊆ X, hence |T | ≤
|H| and Min-Transversals is polynomially balanced. Moreover, Check·Min-Transversals
can be solved in polynomial time in H. First we test whether T covers all edges of E and
then we verify it is minimal for this property, that is T \ {v} is not a transversal for all v
vertices of H. Hence, Enum·Min-Transversals ∈ EnumP.
    The problems in EnumP can be seen as the task of listing the solutions (or witnesses)
of NP problems. One good property of EnumP is to have some complete problems for the
simple parsimonious reduction. However, there is no standard notion of reduction which
makes EnumP-complete all seemingly hard problems of EnumP, and this difficulty is already
apparent in the definition of the polynomial hierarchy for enumeration. This hierarchy is
built in [Creignou et al. 2017a] by adding oracles in the polynomial hierarchy to polynomial
delay or incremental polynomial time machine. This gives a strict hierarchy of hard problems,
with some natural complete examples in its first levels. Note that, in contrast to counting
complexity, defining a hierarchy through the complexity of Check·A does not seem relevant,
since it is easy to define a ”simple” enumeration problem with a hard Check·A problem by
adding many trivial solutions to the problem.
    Finally, note that in the definition of EnumP nothing specific about enumeration is taken
into account. We are able to define it before even specifying the computation model or
complexity measures specific to enumeration, as it only relies on the complexity of deciding
the auxiliary problem Check·A.


2.2      Model of Computation
The model of computation is the random access machine (RAM) with comparison, addition,
subtraction and multiplication as its basic arithmetic operations and an operation Output(i, j)
which outputs the concatenation of the values of registers Ri , Ri+1 , . . . , Rj . RAM machines
have been introduced by Cook and Reckhow to better model the storage of existing ma-
chines [Cook & Reckhow 1973, Aho & Hopcroft 1974]; for variants designed for enumeration
see [Bagan 2009, Strozecki 2010b]. All instructions are in constant time except the arithmetic
instructions which are in time logarithmic in the sum of the integers they are called on.
     A RAM machine solves Enum·A if, on every input x ∈ Σ∗ , it produces a sequence
(y1 , . . . , ys ) such that A(x) = {y1 , . . . , ys } and for all i ̸= j, yi ̸= yj , that is no solution must
2.2. MODEL OF COMPUTATION                                                                           9


be repeated ! We may assume that all registers are initialized to zero. The space used by the
machine at some point of its computation is the sum of the length of the integers up to the last
registers it has accessed. We define by TM (x, i) the time taken by the machine M on input
x up to point when the ith Output instruction is executed. Usually we drop the subscript M
and write T (x, i) when the machine is clear from the context. The delay of a RAM machine
which outputs the sequence (y1 , . . . , ys ) is the maximum over all i ≤ s of the time the machine
uses between the generation of yi and yi+1 , that is max1≤i<s T (x, i + 1) − T (x, i). In some
works, preprocessing and postprocessing times are considered separately from the delay. It is
extremely rare to need more time for deciding if the enumeration is finished than to output
a solution, hence we consider in this thesis that there is no postprocessing: enumeration
stops as soon as the last solution is output. To make low complexity classes interesting, it is
important to allow preprocessing, that is TM (x, 1), to be larger than the delay and we will
mention it when appropriate. The average delay or amortized time of a RAM machine is the
average time needed by the machine to produce a solution, that is T (x, s)/s. The delay is an
upper bound to the average delay.


Why a RAM instead of a Turing Machine? While the RAM machine better maps
to real computers and is thus better to measure precisely the complexity of algorithms,
it can be simulated with cubic slowdown by a Turing Machine [Cook & Reckhow 1973,
Papadimitriou 2003]. A polynomial time Church’s Thesis states that all realistic compu-
tational models are equivalent up to polynomial slowdown1 , which makes the computation
model irrelevant for classical complexity. However, we can isolate a sequence of operations
during the execution of a RAM which takes exponentially more time on a Turing Machine
which simulates it. The RAM has the power of indirection: it can access any address in
constant time, while the Turing machine should traverse all its tape to read some cell.
This allows to use dictionary data structures essential in enumeration such as AVL trees
or tries [Cormen et al. 2009] which gives linear time access to elements inside an exponential
set.


Why such a constant time OUTPUT instruction? The choice of the OUTPUT in-
struction and of its complexity is only relevant for algorithms with a sublinear delay in the
size of the solution output, in particular a constant delay. In all definitions of RAM machine
for enumeration [Bagan 2009, Strozecki 2010b, Mary 2013, Brault-Baron 2013] the OUTPUT
instruction can be issued in constant time. This is required to make constant delay interest-
ing by capturing problems like Gray code enumeration or query answering, otherwise only a
constant number of constant size solutions can be generated in constant delay. This is similar
to the definition of logarithmic space, where machine can write an output in a special tape
which is not taken into account in the space used [Papadimitriou 2003]. Constant time out-
put is meaningful, when only the deltas between solutions are output rather than solutions
themselves. It is also relevant, if we just do a constant time operation on each solution such
as counting them or evaluating some measure which depends only on the constant amount
  1
    the thesis is not true for quantum computers, but we still do not know whether they are physically
implementable
10                                 CHAPTER 2. ENUMERATION FRAMEWORK


of changes between two consecutive solutions.
    The originality of the RAM model proposed in this thesis is to allow outputing solutions
at different positions of the memory, to really take advantage of indirection. In previous
models the size of the solution was implicit, here we make it explicit and also maintain its
position in memory. This choice does not seem a big stretch from reality since in a computer,
the memory zone in which solutions are stored is not always the same. In fact, a programmer
does not even control (but rather the system and the cpu) where information is physically
stored in memory. Our model enables us to list, with constant delay, consecutive solutions
which may differ by an unbounded number of elements, which is not possible in the traditional
model with fixed registers for the output.


Why this cost model ? The cost model used to take into account the different operations
of the RAM has no impact on complexity classes defined by a polynomial bound, so the choice
is mostly arbitrary. We choose to count addition and multiplication as a linear number of
operations in the size of their arguments. We could choose to count the addition as a unit
time operation, but not the multiplication otherwise we can generate doubly exponential
numbers in linear time. Note that we allow unbounded integers in registers to deal with large
data structures.
    For small complexity classes, such as linear delay or constant delay, the choice of the cost
model becomes extremely relevant. In such situations, sometimes implicitly, the uniform cost
model (see [Cook & Reckhow 1973, Aho & Hopcroft 1974]) is chosen: addition, multiplica-
tion and comparison are in constant time. However, if the input is of size n, the machine has
log(n) word-size, i.e. integers in registers are bounded by n. This model is robust enough
to define linear time computation [Grandjean & Schwentick 2002] and constant delay in enu-
meration [Durand & Grandjean 2007, Bagan 2009]. It is similar to the word RAM model,
a transdichotomous model [Fredman & Willard 1993], used to give finer and more realistic
bounds for data structures. In some enumeration algorithms, all solutions must be stored
and there can be 2n of them. Hence, restricting integers in registers to be of size log(n)
or even k log(n) for a fixed k is not sufficient to address all the memory needed to store the
solutions. Hence, rather than bounding the register size, a good compromise is to take as cost
of an instruction the logarithm of the sum of its arguments divided by n. Alternatively, some
constant time operations on unbounded integers such as comparison and incrementation can
be allowed.


2.3    Parsimonious Reduction
In this section we introduce a first notion of reduction for enumeration problems. A reduction
is a binary relation over enumeration problems (or equivalently over the relations which define
the problems). A reduction, denoted by ≺, must be transitive, that is if Enum·A ≺ Enum·B
and Enum·B ≺ Enum·C then Enum·A ≺ Enum·C. A class of enumeration problems C is
closed under the reduction ≺ if Enum·B ∈ C and Enum·A ≺ Enum·B imply Enum·A ∈ C.
This property guarantees that reductions can be used to provide algorithms and not just
hardness results. Note that if a reduction allows for too much computation with regard to a
2.3. PARSIMONIOUS REDUCTION                                                                    11


class, the class is not closed under the reduction, for instance P is not closed under exponential
time reductions.
    The parsimonious reduction for counting problems enforces equality of numbers of solu-
tions, by requiring a bijection between sets of solutions in addition to the bijection between
inputs. If this bijection is explicit and tractable, then such a reduction is adapted to enumer-
ation complexity.

Definition 3 (Parsimonious Reduction). Let Enum·A and Enum·B be two enumeration
problems. A parsimonious reduction from Enum·A to Enum·B is a pair of polynomial time
computable functions f, g such that for all x, g(x, ·) restricted to B(f (x)) is a bijection with
A(x) and g(x, ·)−1 is polynomial time computable.

Example 3. Let Clique(G, S) be the predicate which is true when S is a clique in the graph
G. Let Independent-Set(G, S) be the predicate which is true when S is an independent
set in the graph G. Let f be the function which maps the graph G to its complement graph
H, that is two vertices are adjacent in G if and only if they are not adjacent in H. Let
g(G, S) be the function which maps S a set of vertices in G to the same set of vertices S in
f (G). Using these two functions computable in polynomial time, we have Enum·Clique ≺
Enum·Independent-Set (and also Enum·Independent-Set ≺ Enum·Clique).

     Let us denote by gx (y) the bijection beetween B(f (x)) and A(x) in the definition of
parsimonious reduction. The condition that gx−1 is polynomial time computable is in the
definition only to ensure that EnumP is stable under parsimonious reduction as we now
prove. Recall that Enum·B ∈ EnumP means that B is polynomially balanced and Check·B
is in polynomial time. To prove that EnumP is closed under parsimonious reductions, we must
prove that if Enum·A ≺ Enum·B and Enum·B ∈ EnumP, then Enum·A ∈ EnumP. The
predicate A(x, y) holds if and only if B(f (x), gx−1 (y)), hence it can be decided in polynomial
time because we have assumed that B, f and gx−1 are polynomial time computable. Second,
since f and g are polynomial time computable, the elements of A(x) = g(x, B(f (x))) are
polynomial in the size of x.
     An EnumP-complete problem is defined as a problem in EnumP to which any problem
in EnumP reduces by parsimonious reduction. The problem Enum·3SAT , the task of listing
all solutions of a 3-CNF formula is EnumP-complete, since the reduction used in the proof
that 3SAT is NP-complete [Cook 1971] is parsimonious.
     Let us consider the predicate 3SAT0 (ϕ, x) which is true if and only if x is a satisfying
assignment of the 3-CNF formula ϕ or x is the all zero assignment. Then 3SAT0 (ϕ) is
never empty and therefore many problems of EnumP cannot be reduced to Enum·3SAT0
by parsimonious reduction. However, the problem intuitively feels like a complete problem
and it can be made so by relaxing the reduction. Indeed, from an enumeration perspec-
tive, Enum·3SAT0 is exactly as hard as Enum·3SAT : given an algorithm to enumerate
Enum·3SAT0 , we can enumerate Enum·3SAT by discarding if necessary the all zero solu-
tion (or adding it when doing the inverse reduction). This reduction requires an additional
polynomial time computation only. This shows that parsimonious reductions are not sufficient
to classify the complexity of enumeration problems, and we present several other reductions
in the next chapter.
                                                                                Chapter 3

                  Time Complexity: Total Time,
                    Incremental Time and Delay


Contents
      3.1   Output Polynomial Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     13
      3.2   Incremental Polynomial Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      14
      3.3   Polynomial Delay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17
      3.4   Separation of Enumeration Classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      20
      3.5   Stability under Operations and Reductions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        21




3.1    Output Polynomial Time
To measure the complexity of an enumeration problem, we consider the total time taken to
compute all solutions. If the total time of an algorithm depends on the size of the input only,
we speak of input sensitive algorithm. The Bron-Kerbosch algorithm [Bron & Kerbosch 1973]
finds all maximal cliques in a graph in time O(2n/3 ), with n the number of vertices of the
graph. Since there can be as many as 2n/3 maximal cliques in a graph of n/3 disjoint triangles,
Bron-Kerbosch algorithm is optimal with regard to the input size. However, its complexity
does not decrease with the number of solutions, or at least there is no proof of such result.
Since the number of solutions is much smaller than 2n/3 for most instances, it is more precise
and relevant to bound the total time as a function of the size of the input and of the output.
By contrast to input sensitive algorithms, such algorithms are called output sensitive. Note
that bounding the total time by a polynomial in the input size only is not relevant, since it
forces the number of solutions to be polynomial. Then, to define efficient algorithms, it is
natural to bound the total time by a polynomial in the number of solutions and in the size
of the input. Algorithms with this complexity are said to be in output polynomial time
or sometimes in polynomial total time.
Definition 4 (Output polynomial time). A problem Enum·A ∈ EnumP is in OutputP if
there is a polynomial p(x, y) and a machine M which solves Enum·A and such that for all
x, T (x, |A(x)|) < p(|x|, |A(x)|).
    For instance, if we represent a polynomial by its set of monomials, then classical al-
gorithms for interpolating multivariate polynomials from their values are output polyno-
mial [Zippel 1990, Strozecki 2010a] as they produce the polynomial in time proportional to
the number of its monomials, see Chapter 7 for more details.
CHAPTER 3. TIME COMPLEXITY: TOTAL TIME, INCREMENTAL TIME
14                                            AND DELAY

                        |A(x)| solutions in time T (x, |A(x)|) ≤ p(|x|, |A(x)|)




                                                                                           time
0


Figure 3.1: An enumeration in output polynomial time. A red bar represents the output of
a solution at some point in time of the enumeration.


    The classes EnumP and OutputP may be seen as analog of NP and P for enumeration.
It turns out that their separation is equivalent to the P = NP question, since an algorithm
in OutputP allows to decide whether there is at least one solution in polynomial time.

Proposition 3.1 (Folklore, see [Capelli & Strozecki 2019]). OutputP = EnumP if and only
if P = NP.

    Output polynomial algorithms are useful when all solutions need to be generated, for
a proof of optimality or to build an exhaustive library of objects. However, if we want to
generate only a few solutions, because the whole process is too long, an output polynomial
algorithm does not offer any guarantee, since all solutions can be produced at the end of the
computation, see Figure 3.1.


3.2     Incremental Polynomial Time
When generating all solutions is too long, we want to be able to generate at least some. To do
so, we can fix an arbitrary parameter k and ask to enumerate only k solutions. Sometimes,
an order is fixed on the solutions and the problem is to find the k-best ones. The k-shortest
path and the k-minimum spanning tree problems are typical k-best problems with many
applications as explained in the survey [Eppstein et al. 2015]. In the enumeration paradigm,
we are slightly more general: we do not require a parameter k (either fixed or given as
input), but want to measure and bound the time used by an algorithm to produce any given
number of solutions. This dynamic version of the total time is called incremental time. Given
an enumeration problem A, we say that a machine M solves Enum·A in incremental time
f (k)g(n) and preprocessing h(n) if on every input x of size n, we have:

    • T (x, 1) ≤ h(n) (preprocessing)

    • for all k ≤ |A(x)|, T (x, k) − T (x, 1) ≤ f (k)g(n) (incremental time)

   Separating the preprocessing from the rest of the computation allows to set up expensive
data structures or to simplify the input at the beginning of an enumeration. In that way,
3.2. INCREMENTAL POLYNOMIAL TIME                                                                15


classes with small incremental time contain more interesting problems and we better represent
the time to enumerate many solutions, which otherwise may be artificially hidden by the
preprocessing time. When the preprocessing is dominated by the incremental time, that is
h(n) ≤ f (1)g(n), we omit it.
Definition 5 (Incremental polynomial time). Let a ≥ 1. A problem Enum·A ∈ EnumP is
in IncPa if there is a constant b, a polynomial p and a machine M which solves Enum·A on
instances of size n in incremental time O(k a nb ) and preprocessing time O(p(n)). Moreover,
we define IncP = a≥1 IncPa .
                   S

    Note that allowing or not arbitrary polynomial time preprocessing does not modify the
class IncP, since this preprocessing can always be interpreted as a polynomial time before
outputing the first solution. We require that Enum·A ∈ EnumP so that Enum·A ∈ IncP,
however there are a few examples of problems, whose solutions cannot be tested in polyno-
mial time, but with an algorithm in incremental polynomial time. A clause sequence is the
set of clauses satisfied by some assignment of a CNF formula, hence deciding whether a for-
mula admits the clause sequence with all clauses is NP-complete. However, there is a clever
incremental time algorithm to generate all clause sequences for k-CNFs [Bérczi et al. 2021].
It relies on finding enough simple to enumerate solutions, to have the time to divide the
problem into many simpler subformulas with few sequences in common.
    Let A be a binary predicate, AnotherSolA is the search problem defined as, given x and a set
S, find y ∈ A(x) \ S or answer that A(x) ⊆ S (see [Strozecki 2010b, Creignou et al. 2017a]).
The problems in IncP are the ones with a polynomial time search problem, as stated in the
following proposition.
Proposition 3.2 (Folklore, see [Capelli & Strozecki 2019]). Let A be a predicate such that
Enum·A ∈ EnumP. AnotherSolA is in FP if and only if Enum·A is in IncP.
    Recall that the delay of producing the ith solution by some algorithm, is the time between
the production of two consecutive solutions, that is, for 1 ≤ k < |A(x)|, |T (x, k +1)−T (x, k)|.
The class IncP is usually defined as the class of problems solvable by an algorithm with a
delay polynomial in the number of already generated solutions and the size of the input.
Definition 6 (Usual definition of incremental polynomial time). Let a ≥ 0. A problem
Enum·A ∈ EnumP is in UsualIncPa if there is a constant b, a polynomial p and a machine
M which solves Enum·A on instances of size n, with preprocessing time O(p(n)) and such
that |T (x, k + 1) − T (x, k)| ∈ O(k a nb ).
    This alternative definition is motivated by saturation algorithms, which produce solu-
tions by applying some polynomial time rules to enrich a set of solutions until saturation.
There are many saturation algorithms, for instance computing the accessible vertices from
a source in a graph by flooding, computing a finite group from its generators, enumerat-
ing the circuits of matroids [Khachiyan et al. 2005] or computing a closure by set opera-
tions [Mary & Strozecki 2016a].
Example 4. Let Union be the binary predicate such that Union(x, y) is true if and only if
x is a set {s1 , . . . , sm } of subsets of [n] and if y ⊆ [n] can be obtained by union of elements
in x, i.e. there is I ⊆ [m], such that y = ∪i∈I si .
CHAPTER 3. TIME COMPLEXITY: TOTAL TIME, INCREMENTAL TIME
16                                            AND DELAY

    Enum·Union can be easily solved by a saturation algorithm, where the production rule is
the union of two solutions and the set of solutions is initialized by x. As an example, consider
x = {{1, 2}, {2, 3}, {1, 4}, {1, 3, 4}}. The production rule successively adds {1, 2} ∪ {2, 3},
{1, 2} ∪ {1, 4}, {1, 2} ∪ {1, 3, 4} then the algorithm stops since no union of the obtained
solutions gives a new solution. This algorithm proves that Enum·Union ∈ IncP2 , since for
each new solution output we need to check its union with all other solutions.
     With our definition of incremental polynomial time, we better capture the fact that
investing more time guarantees more solutions to be output, which is a bit more general at
first sight than bounding the delay because the time between two solutions is not necessarily
regular. It turns out that these classes are the same by amortization, that is storing the
output solutions in a queue and outputing them regularly from the queue.
Proposition 3.3 (Folklore, see [Capelli & Strozecki 2019]). For all a ≥ 0, IncPa+1 =
UsualIncPa .
    The amortization method plus a data structure to detect duplicates such as a trie, allow to
deal with bounded repetitions of solutions and is often used to simplify the design of enumer-
ation algorithms, see for instance the well-named Cheater’s Lemma [Carmeli & Kröll 2019].
    Since IncP is characterized by the search problem AnotherSolA , it can be related to the
class TFNP introduced in [Megiddo & Papadimitriou 1991]. A problem in TFNP is a poly-
nomially balanced polynomial time predicate A such that for all x, A(x) is not empty. An
algorithm solving a problem A of TFNP on input x outputs one element of A(x). The class
TFNP can also be seen as the functional version of NP ∩ coNP. It turns out that the sepa-
ration of IncP and OutputP is equivalent to the separation of TFNP and FP. The proof is
based on modifying AnotherSolA into a problem of TFNP, so that, assuming TFNP = FP, a
solution to this problem is found which can then be used to solve AnotherSolA . Conversely,
a TFNP problem can be turned into an enumeration problem in OutputP, by padding.
Proposition 3.4 ([Capelli & Strozecki 2019]). TFNP = FP if and only if IncP = OutputP.
   The class OutputP is conditionally different from EnumP as shown in Proposition 3.1
and it is also strictly larger than IncP by Proposition 3.4. However, no natural problem is
known to be inside OutputP but not in IncP.
Open problem 3.1. Find a natural problem in OutputP but not in IncP. It should be
a problem for which AnotherSol is TFNP-hard because of Proposition 3.4, but the decision
version of AnotherSol, which asks whether another solution exists, should be in P. One can-
didate problem is the enumeration of minimal dominating sets in Kt -free graphs, which is in
OutputP [Bonamy et al. 2020] but is not known to be in IncP.
     We can get a finer separation of classes than in Proposition 3.4: (IncPa )a∈R+ form a strict
hierarchy inside IncP. We need to assume some complexity hypothesis since P = NP implies
IncP = IncP1 . Because we need to distinguish between different polynomial complexities as
in fine grained complexity [Williams 2018], we also rely on the Exponential Time Hypothesis
(ETH). It states that there exists ε > 0 such that there is no algorithm for 3-SAT in time
Õ(2εn ) where n is the number of variables of the formula and Õ means that factors in nO(1)
are hidden.
3.3. POLYNOMIAL DELAY                                                                        17


k solutions in time O(k a nb )




                                                                                             time
0



                                    delay in O(k a−1 nb )


Figure 3.2: An enumeration in incremental polynomial time. Delay guaranteed when Propo-
sition 3.3 is used.

Theorem 3.1 ([Capelli & Strozecki 2019]). If ETH holds, then IncPa ⊊ IncPb for all a < b.
    The theorem is proved by considering a modified version of SAT with a carefully chosen
number of trivial solutions and an exponential repetition of the real ones. Then, if IncPa =
IncPb we can find a solution of any SAT formula slightly faster than brute force by using the
incremental algorithm, which in turn proves a larger collapse of the IncPa classes. Applying
this trick repeatedly proves the theorem. With a similar but simpler proof, the same strict
hierarchy for OutputP can be obtained.
Open problem 3.2. Prove the converse of Theorem 3.1 or weaken the ETH hypothesis.
    In several applications, in particular when enumerating the result of a query over a
database, it is asked to output the solutions regularly, so to process those solutions on the
fly without storing them nor pausing the enumeration process. Incremental polynomial time
guarantes only a limited form of regularity as illustrated in Figure 3.2, which does not seem
sufficient.


3.3    Polynomial Delay
If we want to have a regular enumeration process, then the delay between solutions should
not change along the enumeration. The delay of a machine, on input x, is the maximum
of the delay between two solutions it produces, that is max1≤k<|A(x)| |T (x, k + 1) − T (x, k)|.
In this section, we bound the delay by a polynomial in the input size, but we could require
a stronger bound, a theme which is explored in Chapter 5.
Definition 7 (Polynomial delay). A problem Enum·A ∈ EnumP is in DelayP if it is solved
by a machine M with preprocessing and delay polynomial in its input size.
    Observe that, by definition, DelayP = UsualIncP0 and is thus equal to IncP1 and included
in IncP by Proposition 3.3. Polynomial delay is the most usual notion of tractability in enu-
meration, both because it is a strong property (regularity and linear total time) and because
CHAPTER 3. TIME COMPLEXITY: TOTAL TIME, INCREMENTAL TIME
18                                            AND DELAY

    preprocessing
                                                     delay in O(na )




                                                                                               time
0


                       Figure 3.3: An enumeration in polynomial delay.


it is relatively easy to obtain. Indeed, most methods used to design enumeration algorithms
such as backtrack search with an easy extension problem [Mary & Strozecki 2019], or effi-
cient traversal of a supergraph of solutions [Lawler et al. 1980, Avis & Fukuda 1996], yield
polynomial delay algorithms when they are applicable. Algorithms in DelayP have the same
total time and the same incremental time as algorithms in IncP1 , but they enumerate solu-
tions more regularly as shown in Figure 3.3. We further study in Chapter 4 the relationship
between DelayP and IncP1 , when the space is polynomially bounded.
     Contrarily to IncP, there is no characterization of DelayP related to the complexity of
some search or decision problem, but there are some interesting implications. Let ExtSol·A
be the problem of deciding, given x and y, whether there is y ′ such that yy ′ ∈ A(x). Assuming
the alphabet is {0, 1}, then the set A(x) can be divided into solutions beginning by 0 and
solutions beginning by 1. Then, ExtSol·A can be used to decide whether any of these
subsets of solutions is empty. If ExtSol·A ∈ P, then this method of partitionning the set of
solutions, applied recursively on non-empty sets of solutions is an efficient version of backtrack
search, often called binary partition (see e.g. [Mary & Strozecki 2019]). In this manuscript
we call this method the flashlight search, the flashlight stands for the use of ExtSol·A which
”illuminates” a whole subtree of the search tree to discard it if it contains no solution.

Proposition 3.5. If ExtSol·A ∈ P, then Enum·A ∈ DelayP.

Example 5. As an illustration of the flashlight search, we use it to solve Enum·Union.
Let us assume that a set over n element is given by its characteristic vector. Let y be a
partial characteristic vector, which can be represented by A the set of positions of 1 in y
(elements in the set represented by y) and B the set of positions of 0. Extending y such
that yy ′ ∈ Union(x) can be recast as finding a set S ∈ Union(x) such that A ⊆ S and
S ∩ B = ∅. Let xB = ∪s∈x, s∩B=∅ s, by construction it is the largest set of Union(x) which
has an empty intersection with B. Hence, ExtSol·Union(x, y) is true if and only if A ⊆ xB ,
and ExtSol·Union can thus be solved in time O(mn), when x is a set of m subsets of [n].
The enumeration algorithm is a recursive algorithm, which does a depth first traversal of the
implicit tree of partial solutions, as represented in Figure 3.4. The delay of the algorithm is
the depth of the tree times the complexity of solving ExtSol·Union, that is O(mn2 ) but it
can be improved to O(mn) by amortizing the cost of solving ExtSol·Union on a branch,
see [Mary & Strozecki 2019].
3.3. POLYNOMIAL DELAY                                                                       19




                                            A=B=∅



                    A = {1}                                                    B = {1}


                                           A = {1}
      A = {1, 2}                                                              A = {2}, B = {1}
                                           B = {2}


                       A = {1, 2}
A = {123}              B = {3}                   A = {1}, B = {2, 3}          A = {2, 3}, B = {1}
                                    A = {1, 3}
                                    B = {2}




{1234}      {123}   {124}     {12} {134}     {14}                      {23}


Figure 3.4:        The tree of partial solutions of Enum·Union, on the input
{{1, 2}, {2, 3}, {1, 4}, {1, 3, 4}}. The branches containing no solution are not explored
by the algorithm nor represented in the figure.
CHAPTER 3. TIME COMPLEXITY: TOTAL TIME, INCREMENTAL TIME
20                                            AND DELAY

   The second method to solve an enumeration problem Enum·A in polynomial delay is
to define a graph with set of vertices A(x), often called the supergraph. Assume that the
supergraph satisfies the following properties:

   • The supergraph is connected.

   • The neighborhood of a vertex can be produced in polynomial time.

    Then, a depth first traversal of the graph allows to find all solutions with polynomial
delay. Often, the supegraph is oriented, then to obtain a polynomial delay traversal, either
it should be strongly connected or we must be able to efficiently compute a set of vertices
from which all other vertices can be reached. Several methods have been proposed to define
strongly connected supergraphs, such as proximity search [Conte & Uno 2019] or retaliation-
free paths [Cao 2020].
    Contrarily to the flashlight method, the supergraph method requires as much space as
there are solutions, since all elements of A(x) must be marked (and thus kept in memory) to
realize the traversal. To get rid of the space, one can try to define a spanning tree or a spanning
forest over the supergraph. If the children and the parent of any vertex in the spanning tree
can be found in polynomial time, then a traversal of the spanning tree is an enumeration
algorithm and it does not need to store all solutions but only a single one. This method,
called the reverse search, has been introduced by Avis and Fukuda [Avis & Fukuda 1996] to
solve problems like enumerating triangulations of points in the plane, spanning trees of a
graph or topological orderings of an acyclic graph.

Example 6. The supergraph method can be used to solve Enum·Union. Let x = {s1 , . . . , sm }
an instance of Enum·Union, with for all i, si ⊆ [n]. We define a directed graph Gx with for
vertices, the elements of Union(x) and ∅. There is an arc (y1 , y2 ) in Gx if there exists i such
that y2 = y1 ∪ si . Clearly, any element in Union(x) can be reached from ∅, hence traversing
Gx solves Enum·Union with polynomial delay. See Figure 3.5 for an example.
    An implicit spaning tree of the supergraph can be defined as follows: y1 is the parent of
y2 if it is the smallest lexicographic element such that (y1 , y2 ) is an arc of the supergraph.
When traversing Gx , it is possible to skip all arcs which are not in the parent relation, by
computing the smallest set in A(x) which can yield some y by union with an element of x.
This can be done in polynomial time, but with higher complexity than the binary partition
method presented in the previous example.



3.4     Separation of Enumeration Classes
In the previous sections, we have provided several separations, under various complexity
hypotheses, which can be summarized by the following chain of inclusions:

             DelayP = IncP1 ⊊ · · · ⊊ IncPi ⊊ · · · ⊂ IncP ⊊ OutputP ⊊ EnumP.

   As explained in [Capelli & Strozecki 2019], these separations are unconditional if we re-
move the constraints that problems are in EnumP, i.e. that the solutions can be verified in
3.5. STABILITY UNDER OPERATIONS AND REDUCTIONS                                                 21



                                                1234




                                 123            124            134




                                 12             14             23




                                                ∅



Figure 3.5:         The supergraph of solutions of Enum·Union,                    on   the   input
{{1, 2}, {2, 3}, {1, 4}, {1, 3, 4}}. Arcs of the implicit spanning tree in red.


polynomial time, by using the time hierarchy Theorem [Hartmanis & Stearns 1965]. How-
ever, several properties do not hold in that case, such as the closure of DelayP under union
presented in the next section or the equivalences between separation of enumeration com-
plexity classes and P ̸= NP or FP ̸= TFNP.
    Consider the SAT problem, then ExtSol·SAT is equivalent to SAT, that is SAT is
autoreducible. Hence, if P = NP, then ExtSol·SAT ∈ P and using the binary partition
method, Enum·SAT ∈ DelayP, which yields the following proposition.

Proposition 3.6. P = NP ⇔ EnumP = DelayP.

   The last proposition is somehow surprising, since it implies that separating EnumP from
DelayP is as hard as separating it from OutputP.


3.5     Stability under Operations and Reductions
Since an enumeration problem asks for a set of solutions, we can build new problems by acting
on this set: the predicate A ∪ B is defined as (A ∪ B)(x) = A(x) ∪ B(x) and it defines the
new problem Enum·(A ∪ B). This definition can easily be adapted to any set operation such
as the complement or the intersection. We can also define the deletion or subtraction of B
from A as (A \ B)(x) = A(x) \ B(x), with the additional constraint that B(x) ⊆ A(x). This
is inspired by the subtractive reduction, defined for counting problems [Durand et al. 2005].
If B(x) is polynomial in |x|, then we say that (A \ B) is a polynomial size deletion.
CHAPTER 3. TIME COMPLEXITY: TOTAL TIME, INCREMENTAL TIME
22                                            AND DELAY

    We say that a complexity class C is stable under some operation, say the union, when
Enum·A ∈ C and Enum·B ∈ C implies Enum·A ∪ B ∈ C. It turns out that DelayP is stable
for several operations.

Theorem 3.2 ([Bagan 2009],[Strozecki 2010b]). The classes OutputP, IncP, DelayP are
stable under union, Cartesian product and polynomial size deletion.

    The proof for cartesian product or polynomial size deletion are straightforward. The
method for solving A ∪ B relies on a simple priority scheme: compute the next solution of
A, if it is not a solution of B then output it. If it is a solution of B, then output the next
solution of B. This allows to deal with repetition of solutions and only multiply the delay by
two, hence polynomial delay is ensured for a union of a polynomial number of problems in
DelayP. If the solutions of A and B are generated in the same order, then it is not necessary
to test whether a solution of A is also a solution of B, by dynamically merging the two
ordered streams of solutions.
    As a consequence, these operations can be used to decompose enumerations problems into
simpler problems and thus may simplify the design of good algorithms.
    Several other operations do not leave any enumeration classes stable but EnumP because
they allow to build an EnumP-hard problem from simpler ones. For instance, deciding
whether there is a model to the conjunction of a Horn Formula and an affine formula is NP-
complete [Creignou et al. 2001], while enumerating the models of a Horn or an affine formula
can be done with polynomial delay [Creignou & Hébrard 1997].

Theorem 3.3 ([Strozecki 2010b]). If P ̸= NP then DelayP, IncP, OutputP are not stable
under deletion, intersection or complement.

    Inspired by these operations, we would like to design the most general parsimonious
reduction, so that DelayP is stable under its action. As explained in the previous chapter, to
make Enum·3SAT0 complete, it is enough to generalize parsimonious reduction by allowing
addition or deletion of a polynomial number of solutions themselves produced in polynomial
time. DelayP is stable under such reductions because of Proposition 3.2. Several reductions
for OutputP, IncP and DelayP have been given by Mary in [Mary 2013]. We give here a
polynomial delay reduction, which associates to each solution of some problem a subset of
solutions of another problem such that all these subsets partition the desired set of solutions.

Definition 8 (Polynomial delay reduction [Mary 2013]). Let Enum·A, Enum·B ∈ EnumP
and f, g two polynomial time computable functions. The function f maps instances of Enum·A
to instances of Enum·B, while g maps a solution of Enum·B to a set of solutions of Enum·A.
The pair (f, g) is a polynomial delay reduction from Enum·A to Enum·B if there is a poly-
nomial p such that:

    • s∈B(f (x)) g(s) = A(x) (all solutions of A are obtained)
      S

   • |{s ∈ B(f (x)) | g(s) = ∅}| ≤ p(|x|) (all but a polynomial number of solutions of B give
     solutions of A)

   • ∀s1 , s2 ∈ B(f (x)), g(s1 ) ∩ g(s2 ) = ∅ (no repetition of solutions)
3.5. STABILITY UNDER OPERATIONS AND REDUCTIONS                                             23


    Using this reduction, it has been proven that listing minimal transversals of a hypergraph
is equivalent to listing the minimal dominating sets of a graph [Kanté et al. 2014], a result
which has motivated the study of enumeration of minimal dominating sets over various graph
classes [Kanté et al. 2015, Bonamy et al. 2019].
    We can relax polynomial delay reductions by allowing a polynomial number of repeti-
tions, such reductions are called e-reduction in [Creignou et al. 2017a]. Instead of mapping
a solution of B to a polynomial number of solutions of A, we could even allow a polynomial
delay algorithm to generate any number of solutions of A from a solution of B.
    To define a Turing reduction for enumeration, we give access to an oracle solving an enu-
meration problem using two additional instructions, one to begin an enumeration, the other
to get the next solution. A reduction from A to B is a machine which solves Enum·A using an
oracle to the problem Enum·B. When the machine has a polynomial delay or an incremental
polynomial time, the reductions are called D or I reductions [Creignou et al. 2017a].
    No complete problems are known for the complexity classes we have introduced but
EnumP, whatever the reduction considered. In fact, artificial constructions using padding,
as presented for 3SAT and parsimonious reduction, are often enough to build a hard but not
complete problem. Moreover, when IncPi is stable under a reduction, which is the case for
all mentioned reductions but the Turing reductions, there is no complete problem in IncP
because it implies a collapse of the strict hierarchy given in Theorem 3.1.

Corollary 3.1. Let ≺ be a reduction for enumeration problems such that, for all a ≥ 1,
IncPa is stable under ≺. If ETH holds, there is no complete problem in IncP for ≺.

   This lack of complete problems underlines the need to find other methods to prove hard-
ness of enumeration problems.
                                                                                          Chapter 4

                                                         Space Complexity


Contents
      4.1    Polynomial Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              25
      4.2    Memoryless Polynomial Delay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 26
      4.3    Sources of Exponential Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                27
      4.4    Amortization in Polynomial Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                  27
            4.4.1   Gaps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28
            4.4.2   Geometric Amortization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       28
            4.4.3   Amortizing without Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         30



    In the previous Chapter, only time restrictions have been considered, but space plays a
major role in practical enumeration algorithms and is often a bottleneck, for instance when
generating maximal cliques [Conte et al. 2016]. We present several complexity classes, de-
signed to capture the idea of bounded space and study their relations with their counterparts
with unbounded space.


4.1    Polynomial Space
We could define an equivalent of PSPACE by considering all enumeration problems which can
be solved by a machine which uses a space polynomial in the input size. Such a class contains
EnumP, and all the polynomial hierarchy defined in [Creignou et al. 2017a].
    As a tractability measure, it is more relevant to ask for algorithms with polynomial
space and polynomial delay. In fact, several algorithmic methods have been designed, to
realize the traversal of a supergraph of solutions with polynomial delay and polynomial
space [Lawler et al. 1980, Avis & Fukuda 1996, Conte et al. 2019]. We denote by DelayPpoly
the class of problems solvable in polynomial delay and polynomial space, and by IncPpoly
the class of problems solvable in incremental polynomial time and polynomial space. When
trying to prove lower bounds, it could be helpful to add the constraint of polynomial space.
For instance, we could try to prove that Enum·Min-Transversals ∈           / DelayPpoly , which
should be easier than proving it is not in DelayP.
    Several properties of IncP do not hold for IncPpoly . The amortization method which allows
to trade space for regularity as in Proposition 3.3 does not work when requiring polynomial
space. Hence, with polynomial space IncPpoly1    may not be equal to DelayPpoly . We deal with
this problem at the end of the chapter. Moreover, it does not seem possible to characterize
26                                              CHAPTER 4. SPACE COMPLEXITY


the class IncPpoly by a variant of the problem AnotherSol, which makes it quite different from
IncP.
    A natural question is to understand whether the use of exponential space is useful for
DelayP or IncP. If we relax the constraint that the problems must be in EnumP, then
we can define a problem with an exponential number of trivial polynomial size solutions
and one which is the solution to an EXP-complete problem. Such a problem is in DelayP,
since outputting the trivial solutions gives enough time to solve the EXP-complete problem.
However, if this problem is in DelayPpoly , then the enumeration algorithm is also a polyno-
mial space algorithm solving an EXP-complete problem, which implies the unlikely collapse
PSPACE = EXP.

Open problem 4.1. Prove that DelayP ̸= DelayPpoly and IncP ̸= IncPpoly assuming some
complexity hypothesis.


4.2      Memoryless Polynomial Delay
A notion of memoryless polynomial delay algorithm is proposed in [Strozecki 2010b], under
the name of strong polynomial delay, which is used in this thesis for another concept. A
memoryless algorithm can use only the last solution and the input to produce the next
solution.
    We say that a problem Enum·A is in NextP if for every instance x there is a total order
<x such that the following problems are in FP:

     1. given x, output the first element of A(x) for <x

     2. given x and y ∈ A(x) output the next element of A(x) for <x or a special value if there
        is none

    The enumeration of the minimal spanning trees or of the maximal matchings of a weighted
graph are in NextP (see [Avis & Fukuda 1996, Uno 1997]). Many problems of queries over
databases are solved by implementing a Next function, which given a solution produces the
next one (often in constant time), and a Start function which gives the first solution, see for
instance [Schweikardt et al. 2018]. In fact, any problem which can be solved by traversal of an
implicit tree of solutions, without storing global information, is in NextP. As a consequence,
reverse search algorithms or flashlight algorithms are often memoryless.
    Several results proved for DelayP also hold for NextP. If P = NP, then EnumP =
DelayPpoly = NextP, since Enum·SAT can be solved using a flashlight search. Moreover,
NextP is stable under cartesian product, disjoint union and polynomial size deletion, using
the same methods as for DelayP, but the method for proving stability under union is not
memoryless.

Open problem 4.2. Can we separate NextP from DelayP modulo some complexity hypotesis
? If so, can we separate NextP from DelayPpoly , by taking advantage that a DelayPpoly
algorithm can store an information computed during the whole enumeration process, while a
NextP algorithm uses a "local" information to find the next solution.
4.3. SOURCES OF EXPONENTIAL SPACE                                                            27


4.3    Sources of Exponential Space
There are three common sources of exponential space in enumeration.
    The most common is that many algorithms generate each solution several times, a typical
example is the algorithm used to generate maximal independent sets in lexicographic order
given in [Johnson et al. 1988]. Any algorithm can be turned into an enumeration algorithm
without repetition by storing all output solutions in a trie to detect and avoid repetitions. If
the number of repetitions is bounded by some function f (n), with n the size of the instance,
then the elimination of duplicates multiplies the incremental time of the algorithm with
repetition by f (n) only. However, this requires to store all output solutions, which may
exponentially increase the space used.
    When an algorithm produces some solution s at time t, to decide whether s has already
been output, we can run the enumeration from start to time t. This method requires no
additional space. If the original algorithm is in incremental time k i p(n), and the number of
repetitions of a solution is bounded by f (n), then the algorithm without repetition is in in-
cremental time O(k i+1 p(n)f (n)). Hence, a problem which is in IncPi because of an algorithm
using polynomial space and an exponential datastructure to detect duplicates in polynomial
number, is also in IncPpoly
                          i+1 using this method. There is a tradeoff between incremental time
and space using a hybrid of these two methods to avoid repetitions: store the last l produced
solutions and rerun the algorithm to test whether a solution is output only up to the point
the first of the l stored solutions is produced.
    The second source of exponential space is the use of saturation algorithms: Since they
compute new solutions from old ones, they require to store all produced solutions. There is
no known generic method to get rid of the space in that case. However, it may be possible to
design a different algorithm to solve the problem, see Chapter 7 where we show that a whole
class of saturation problems can be solved with polynomial space and polynomial delay using
a flashlight search.

Open problem 4.3. The enumeration of the circuits of a binary matroid can be done in
incremental polynomial time, using a saturation algorithm [Khachiyan et al. 2005]. Can we
achieve the same complexity with a polynomial space only?

    The third common source of exponential space is the amortization procedure of Propo-
sition 3.3. It builds a polynomial delay algorithm from one in linear incremental time, by
storing the produced solutions in a queue, which can be as large as the whole set of solutions.
We show in the next section, that this source of exponential space can be eliminated.


4.4    Amortization in Polynomial Space
Let M be a machine in linear incremental time, it produces k solutions in time kp(n). We
say that p(n) is the incremental delay of M . The aim of this section is to show how to build a
machine M ′ , which produces the same solutions as M , with a polynomial delay almost equal
to the incremental delay of M and with a small space overhead.
28                                              CHAPTER 4. SPACE COMPLEXITY


4.4.1    Gaps
In [Capelli & Strozecki 2019], we show how to amortize an incremental linear time enumer-
ation, if it is regular enough. To capture the notion of regularity, we define the notion of
gap for a machine M : i is a p-gap of M (for x) if T (x, i + 1) − T (x, i) > p(|x|). If there is
a polynomial p, such that M has no p-gap, then M has delay p. In fact, if M has only few
p-gaps, it can be turned into a polynomial delay algorithm, see [Capelli & Strozecki 2019].
    We can prove something more general, by requiring the existence of a large interval of so-
lutions without p-gaps rather than bounding the number of gaps, as stated in Proposition 4.1.
It captures more cases, for instance an algorithm which outputs an exponential number of
solutions at the beginning without gaps and then has a superpolynomial number of gaps.
The idea is to compensate for the gaps by using the dense parts of the enumeration. It is
done by running several copies of the incremental linear algorithm, and detecting intervals
of time in the eumeration with many output solutions, so that it can be used to amortize
intervals with fewer solutions. The proof is quite technical, see [Capelli & Strozecki 2019].

Proposition 4.1. Let M be an incremental linear time machine solving Enum·A using
polynomial space. Assume there are two polynomials p and q such that for all x of size n,
and for all k ≤ |A(x)| there exists a < b ≤ k such that b − a > q(n)
                                                                 k
                                                                     and there are no p-gaps
between the ath and the bth solution. Then Enum·A ∈ DelayPpoly .

4.4.2    Geometric Amortization
The method of the last section is not sufficient to prove IncPpoly
                                                                 1    = DelayPpoly . To do so,
we introduce a new amortization method, which is also based on simulating the incremental
linear algorithm at several points in time. It is simpler, more general and more efficient than
the one designed to prove Proposition 4.1. We give here the algorithm and a sketch of its
analysis; for more details and related results, see [Capelli & Strozecki 2021b].
    To simplify the presentation, we consider that the computation of the incremental linear
machine M on an input x can be represented by a list LM,x . If M outputs a solution at time
step i, then the ith element of LM,x contains this solution, otherwise it contains a special
value denoting the absence of solution. It is possible to go from an element of LM,x to the
next one by simulating one computation step of M . To store a pointer to the ith element of
LM,x , we store the state of M at time step i.
    We describe the complexity of an algorithm working on such a list as the number of
reads of elements of LM,x for the time and the number of stored pointers for the space. In
particular, for an algorithm outputting solutions of LM,x , the delay of the algorithm is the
maximal number of reads between the output of two distinct solutions or between the output
of a solution and the end of the algorithm. We ignore the cost of maintaining counters, of
switching between different contexts of computation etc. It can be shown that these costs
amount only to a constant time overhead on a RAM machine [Capelli & Strozecki 2021b].
    The pseudo code of the geometric amortization method we propose is given in Algorithm 1.
Let M be the machine we amortize, it is in incremental delay p(n) and outputs ℓ solutions
on input x. We assume that p(n) and ℓ, or a bound on their values, are known. The idea is
to maintain a list p of N := 1 + ⌈log(ℓ)⌉ pointers to elements of LM,x . At the start of the
4.4. AMORTIZATION IN POLYNOMIAL SPACE                                                            29


algorithm, we initialize each p[i] for i < N to be a pointer to the first entry of LM,x . We also
initialize a table c of N counters, whose entries are initialized to 1. Each time p[i] is moved to
the next entry of LM,x , we increment c[i] so that p[i] always points toward L[c[i]] (lines 9-10
in Algorithm 1).
    Each p[i] explores LM,x . If at some point in the algorithm, p[i] points toward a solution
of LM,x , and if 2i−1 p(n) < c[i] ≤ 2i p(n), then we output the solution (for i = 0, we take the
bounds 1 ≤ c[0] ≤ p(n)). Thus, solutions will be output at most once since the index of the
solution determines which pointer discovers it.
    We now describe the mechanism we use to move the different pointers. We move one
pointer p[j] for at most 2p(n) steps (corresponding to the loop starting at Line 7 in Algo-
rithm 1). If we find a solution in the zone corresponding to p[j], that is [1 + 2j−1 p(n); 2j p(n)],
we output it and move back to pointer p[N −1]. If we move by more than 2p(n) steps without
finding a solution in the right zone, we decrease j by 1 and continue the exploration. If j is
0 and no solution has been found in the zone of p[0], that is [1; p(n)], we stop the algorithm.

 Algorithm 1: Pseudocode for the geometric amortization method
   Data: A list L containing ℓ solutions and an incremental delay p(n)
 1 begin
 2    N ← 1 + ⌈log(ℓ)⌉;
 3    Initialize a table p of size N containing N pointers to L[1];
 4    Initialize a table c of size N containing N integers set to 1;
 5    j ← N − 1;
 6    while j > 0 do
 7        for b ← 2p(n) to 0 do
 8            s ← the value of the entry of L pointed by p[j];
 9            Move p[j] to the right;
10            c[j] ← c[j] + 1;
11            if s is a solution and 1 + 2j−1 p(n) ≤ c[j] ≤ 2j p(n) then
12                Output solution s;
13                j ← N − 1;
14                break;

15         if b = 0 then
16             j ←j−1



Theorem 4.1 ([Capelli & Strozecki 2021b]). Let M be a machine in incremental delay p(n),
space s(n). Algorithm 1 on input (LM,x , ℓ, p(|x|)) outputs all solutions of LM,x with a delay
O(log(ℓ)p(n)), space O(log(ℓ)(s(n) + log(ℓ))).

Proof. (Rough sketch) Algorithm 1 uses O(log(ℓ)) pointers in the table p. Each of them can
be stored with space in O(S) where S is the space used by the machine M . It is easy to see by
construction that the delay between two solutions is O(log(ℓ)p(n)). Indeed, the complexity
of executing the loop starting at Line 7 is O(p(n)). Now, either a solution is found before
30                                              CHAPTER 4. SPACE COMPLEXITY




Figure 4.1: The interface of Coussinet which takes an IncP1 list of outputs and does the
amortization as in Theorem 4.1.

j reaches 0, in which case, we have a delay of at most O(N p(n)) = O(log(ℓ)p(n)) since j
is decreasing and starts at N − 1. Or j reaches 0 and no solution is found and this is the
end of the algorithm, thus there is a delay of at most O(log(ℓ)p(n)) between the last output
solution and the end of the algorithm.
    As an invariant of the algorithm, we prove that c[i + 1], that is the number of steps done
by the i + 1st pointers is larger than the number of solutions produced by the first i pointers
times p(n). It can then be used to prove that Algorithm 1 does not stop before outputing all
solutions.

    Let us consider a slight variation of Algorithm 1, in which a pointer which has finished to
explore its zone is removed from the list of pointers. In that case, on average, each entry of
LM,x is read at most twice, which implies that the total time of the geometric amortization
is the same as the original enumeration, up to a constant factor.
    An implementation of the geometric amortization method called Coussinet is available on
Florent Capelli’s website, see Figure 4.1 for an illustration.
    As a corollary of Theorem 4.1, we obtain a collapse of complexity classes, which was an
open question in [Capelli & Strozecki 2019].

Corollary 4.1. IncPpoly
                   1    = DelayPpoly .

    As a consequence of this corollary, the right measure of tractability seems to be incremen-
tal linear time rather than polynomial delay. Indeed, it is not clear that polynomial delay is
really necessary in applications and we have proved that if it is, we can obtain it from a linear
incremental algorithm, with a small space overhead and no change in the total time. As an
application of Theorem 4.1, we amortize a flashlight search solving Enum·DNF to turn an
average delay into a delay in Chapter 5.

4.4.3    Amortizing without Assumptions
To amortize a machine M on an input x thanks to Algorithm 1, we must know these values
(or a bound on them):

     • the space used by the machine M on x

     • the number of solutions produced by M on x

     • the incremental delay of M on x
4.4. AMORTIZATION IN POLYNOMIAL SPACE                                                       31


    We briefly explain how we can do without knowing the first two values, while the third
one is more problematic (see [Capelli & Strozecki 2021b]).
    The space used by M is used implicitly in the algorithm to store the pointers to different
parts of the list LM,x . Indeed, a pointer represents the state of the machine at some point
of its computation, hence we need to store all used registers. If we have a bound on this
space, we reserve enough space for each pointer at the beginning of the algorithm. If we do
not know how much space is used, we can use a dynamic array, with lazy initialization and
expansion. The overhead is either logarithmic in time or nε in space, for any ε, depending
on the expansion factor of the dynamic array.
    The number of solutions in LM,x is an input of Algorithm 1, it is used to determine the
number of pointers. Note that, in Algorithm 1, all pointers which are not yet in their zone
move together, one after the other. Hence, we could just move one of them to represent them
all. In this variant, all pointers are in their zone, except the last one. When the last one
enters its zone, we can duplicate it to create a new pointer for the next zone. This algorithm
mimicks Algorithm 1, but does not require the number of pointers beforehand. If the machine
M does not use more than O(t) space after t time steps, then the copy operation to obtain
a new pointer is done lazily with a constant time overhead. If we have no guarantee on M ,
the time overhead is at most logarithmic.
    Finally, we need the incremental delay of the machine M , to move each pointer in LM,x by
twice this number of steps before going to the previous pointer. In the classical amortization
method using a queue, the incremental delay is also required, since it controls when an
element is pulled out of the queue to be output. We prove that the classical amortization
algorithm can be made to work, even when the incremental delay is unknown. The idea is to
maintain a bound on the incremental delay of a machine M , while simulating it. We use a
value larger than this bound, which depends on a fixed parameter ε, to output elements out
of the queue. This gives a polynomial delay algorithm, but the obtained delay is worse than
the incremental delay of the original algorithm.
Proposition 4.2 ([Capelli & Strozecki 2021b]). For any ε > 0, and machine M in incre-
mental delay O(p(n)), there is a machine Mε which enumerates all outputs of M in the same
order, in delay O(p(n)1+ε ).
Open problem 4.4. Can we use the method of dynamically evaluating the incremental delay
in Algorithm 1? Prove that there is a machine, which takes as input another machine in in-
cremental linear time and polynomial space and enumerates the same solutions in polynomial
delay and polynomial space.
    When amortizing without knowing the incremental delay, it seems impossible to obtain
a delay equal to the incremental delay. To prove a lower bound, we assume that the amor-
tization method can only work on LM,x and not on the machine M and input x directly.
To further simplify, in the complexity we only take into account a read in LM as an ele-
mentary operation, and we allow an unbounded memory. Since the memory is unbounded,
every solution found while exploring LM,x can be stored in a queue to be later output, hence
an amortization method only needs to go through LM,x once. In these settings, an efficient
amortization method explores the list LM,x , stores the solutions in a queue and its only free-
dom is to determine when solutions from the queue should be output. This depends only on
32                                            CHAPTER 4. SPACE COMPLEXITY


the number of elements of LM,x seen, the number of solutions encountered and the time since
the last output. When such an amortization algorithm outputs solutions from the queue too
fast, it is possible to build an adversary list and prove the following theorem.

Proposition 4.3 ([Capelli & Strozecki 2021b]). There is no RAM machine, which given
a list LM,x representing the computation of a machine M on x in incremental delay p(|x|),
enumerates all outputs of M in delay (s−2)p(|x|) where s is the number of solutions generated
by M .
                                                                                   Chapter 5

                                    Below Polynomial Delay


Contents
       5.1   Strong Polynomial Delay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      33
       5.2   Constant Delay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   37
       5.3   Random Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      40




5.1     Strong Polynomial Delay
When the input is huge with regard to a single solution, we would like a sublinear delay in
the input size, or even a delay which depends only on the size of a single generated solution.
This situation naturally appears when the input is a hypergraph and solutions are subsets of
its vertices, or when solutions are of constant size, for instance when enumerating solutions
of a first order query over a database. In the following definition, a preprocessing polynomial
in the size of the input is allowed, since the input should at least be read before outputting
solutions.
Definition 9 (Strong Polynomial delay). A problem Enum·A ∈ EnumP is in SDelayP if
there exist constants a ≥ 0 and C > 0, and there is a machine M which solves Enum·A for
all inputs x such that:
   • T (x, 1) ≤ p(|x|), with p a polynomial (polynomial preprocessing)

   • for all 1 < k ≤ |A(x)|, |T (x, k) − T (x, k − 1)| < C|yk |a , where yk is the kth solution
     output by M (strong polynomial delay).
    Presently, very few problems have strong polynomial delay algorithms: generating s − t
paths in a DAG, generating assignments of existential F O formulas with second order free
variables [Durand & Strozecki 2011] or existential M SO formulas over bounded tree width
structures [Courcelle 2009, Amarilli et al. 2017]. When solving an enumeration problem with
an infinite set of solutions [Florêncio et al. 2015], any reference to the input size or the total
time is irrelevant and strong polynomial delay is the proper notion of tractability. Moreover,
a strong polynomial delay algorithm can be applied to large inputs given implicitly: this
idea is used to give polynomial delay algorithms for generating dominating sets over several
classes of graphs [Blind et al. 2020].
    Even an extremely simple problem like Enum·DN F , the enumeration of models (or sat-
isfying assignments) of a DNF formula, has no simple algorithm in strong polynomial de-
lay. A formula in disjunctive normal form (DNF) is a disjunction of terms. Each term
34                                   CHAPTER 5. BELOW POLYNOMIAL DELAY


is a conjunction of litterals, that is variables or negation of variables. For instance D =
(X1 ∧ ¬X2 ) ∨ (X2 ∧ X3 ) is a DNF formula with two terms over the variables {X1 , X2 , X3 },
and four models {(1, 0, 0), (1, 0, 1), (0, 1, 1), (1, 1, 1)}. The structure of the assignments of a
DNF is extremely regular: it is the union of the models of its terms. A term sets the values
of some variables, and we can enumerate all possible values of the remaining variables in
constant delay using Gray Code. The main difficulty to obtain an algorithm with strong
polynomial delay for Enum·DN F is that the union is not disjoint and the simple algorithm
consisting in enumerating the solutions of each term one after the other produces redundant
solutions. Solution repetitions because of non disjoint union is a common problem in enumer-
ation and this issue appears in its simplest form when solving Enum·DN F . We hope that
understanding finely the complexity of this problem and designing better algorithms to solve
it will shed some light on other similar problems. We conjecture that Enum·DN F cannot
be solved with strong polynomial delay.
Conjecture 5.1.1 (DNF Enumeration Conjecture). Enum·DNF ∈
                                                        / SDelayP.
    We did even state a Strong DNF Enumeration Conjecture in [Capelli & Strozecki 2021a],
similar in precision to ETH, stating that no algorithm solves the problem Enum·DNF in
delay o(m), where m is the number of terms of the DNF. We show later in this section that
this conjecture does not hold.
    To solve Enum·DN F , a flashlight search can be used. Indeed, ExtSol·DN F can be
solved in time |D|, where D is the input DNF. In fact, the complexity of solving the ex-
tension problem can be amortized over a branch of the tree of partial solutions, so that the
delay of the enumeration algorithm is |D| [Capelli & Strozecki 2021a]. It turns out that the
flashlight method can be improved in several directions. First, the input DNF is stored as
a trie [Fredkin 1960], and when going down the tree of partial solutions, variables are fixed
and the size of the trie is decreased. Second, we proved that a DNF with m terms has at
least mlog3 (2) models, then we use that fact to prove a good bound on the average delay as
in Uno’s push-out method [Uno 2015].
    Let n be the number of variables of D. If the trie is shrunk very carefully when fixing
variables, a factor n can be shaved from the delay. We can further improve the algorithm and
its analysis for the case of monotone DNFs, by further compacting the represented DNF. For
k-DNF formulas, i.e. DNF formulas with terms of size at most k, we use a particular traversal
of the tree of partial solutions. It allows to find a k-term, whose solutions are disjoint from
the ones in the other branches of the tree. These solutions are output with constant delay (or
implicitly) and can be used to amortize the time of going down the tree of partial solutions
up to the point there are only 2k variables left. This yields a constant delay algorithm for
fixed k. The results of [Capelli & Strozecki 2021a] are given in Table 5.1.
    We have obtained algorithms with good average delay. To falsify the Strong DNF Enu-
meration Conjecture and the DNF Enumeration Conjecture on the class of monotone formu-
las, we need to replace the average delay by a similar delay. To do that, we use a generic
method [Capelli & Strozecki 2021b] to transform an average delay into a real delay in flash-
light algorithms, relying on the amortization method of Theorem 4.1.
    Let the path time of a flashlight search algorithm be the time needed by a flashlight
search algorithm to go from the root of the tree of partial solutions to a leaf. For most
5.1. STRONG POLYNOMIAL DELAY                                                               35


             Class                 Delay                            Space
             DNF                   O(∥D∥)                           Polynomial
             (⋆) DNF               O(nm1−log3 (2) ) average delay   Polynomial
             (⋆) k-DNF             2O(k)                            Polynomial
             (⋆) Monotone DNF      O(n2 )                           Exponential
             (⋆) Monotone DNF      O(log(nm)) average delay         Polynomial

Table 5.1: In this table, D is a DNF, n its number of variables and m its number of terms.


flashlight algorithms, path time and delay are the same. The main idea is that, at any point
of a flashlight algorithm, we are exploring some vertex of the tree of partial solutions. The
vertices which have already been explored are whole subtrees, corresponding to subproblems
of the enumeration problem being solved, plus a path from the root, as shown in Figure 5.1.
This allows to precisely bound the incremental time of flashlight search. In particular, it
is linear (up to the path time), if the average delay is polynomial, because the time spent
in subproblems is linear in the number of output solutions. If the path time is bounded by
p(n), the enumeration of solutions can be delayed by p(n), using a queue of size at most
p(n), which gives an algorithm in incremental linear time. Then we can apply Theorem 4.1
to make the delay polynomial and we obtain the following theorem.

Theorem 5.1 ([Capelli & Strozecki 2021b]). Let Enum·A be an enumeration problem, solved
by a flashlight search algorithm, in polynomial space, polynomial path time and average delay
a(n, k), where n is the size of the instance and k a bound on the size of a solution. Let N
be the number of produced solutions, then there is an algorithm solving Enum·A, with delay
a(n, k) log(N ), average delay a(n, k) and polynomial space.


Open problem 5.1. We are left with a single unsettled conjecture, the DNF Enumeration
Conjecture. Prove it assuming some complexity hypothesis like ETH. As a first step, it should
be proven that Enum·DN F cannot be solved in constant delay or logarithmic delay.

    The problem Enum·Union of computing the closure by union of a set system has a
linear delay algorithm [Mary & Strozecki 2019]. Because a solution can be obtained by many
different unions, Enum·Union does not seem to have a strong polynomial delay algorithm.
In [Capelli & Strozecki 2021a], we wrongly claim that a method similar to the one presented
for Enum·DN F on monotone formulas solves Enum·Union with average delay polynomial
in the solution size. Indeed, the problem solved when traversing the tree of partial solutions
is more complex than the original problem, because some elements are forced to be in the
solution. This more complex problem can be solved in linear time, but it is not possible to
prove a lower bound on its number of solutions with regards to the input size.

Open problem 5.2. Give an algorithm for Enum·Union with average delay in o(m), where
m is the number of sets in the input.

   Instead of focusing on specific problems to understand the difference between SDelayP
and DelayP, we could just prove a separation result using an artificial problem. However,
36                                  CHAPTER 5. BELOW POLYNOMIAL DELAY




     Enumerated subproblems


                                                          ...



                                                        Current subproblem




Figure 5.1: A traversal of the tree of partial solutions by the flashlight search. The subprob-
lems completely solved recursively in blue, the path to the current partial solution in red and
the unexplored vertices in the white triangles.
5.2. CONSTANT DELAY                                                                          37


the method to prove a hierarchy inside IncP does not seem useful to prove the same kind of
hierarchy inside DelayP.

Open problem 5.3. Prove that SDelayP ⊊ DelayP modulo a complexity hypothesis like
ETH.

    If we drop the condition that problems must be in EnumP, the previous question becomes
easy, as for the other class separations presented in Chapter 3.

Proposition 5.1. There is an enumeration problem with an algorithm in polynomial delay
and polynomial preprocessing but no algorithm in strong polynomial delay and polynomial
preprocessing.

Proof. Using the time hierarchy theorem [Hartmanis & Stearns 1965], we obtain a language
                                             2                               2
L which can be solved in time O(n2log(n) ) but not in time o(n2log(n) / log(n)2 ). We let
                                                                                2
n = |x| and we let A be the binary predicate defined as A(x) = [2log(n) ] if x ∈        / L and
               2                                                   2
A(x) = [2log(n) ] ∪ {♯} otherwise. The set A(x) consists in 2log(n) trivial solutions and ♯ when
x is in L.
    Assume now that we can enumerate the solutions of Enum·A in strong polynomial delay.
Since the solutions are of size log(n)2 , the total time to generate all solutions is less than
         2
O(2log(n) p(log(n))), with p a polynomial. The polynomial time preprocessing does not ap-
pears in the total time since it is dominated by the generation time. Solving Enum·A allows
                                                       2
to decide L, which cannot be done in time O(2log(n) p(log(n))), hence Enum·A cannot be
solved in strong polynomial delay.
    However, Enum·A can be solved in linear delay. Enumerate all trivial solutions in A(x)
                                        2
with delay n. Since there are O(2log(n) ) solutions, the total time to generate these solutions
                2
is in O(n2log(n) ), hence we can use this time to decide whether x ∈ L and to produce the
last solution.


5.2    Constant Delay
The class of problems solvable with a constant delay is very sensitive to the way the com-
putational model and the complexity measures are defined. There are at least four slightly
different notions of constant delay used in different contexts. In all cases, we recall that
operations on integers less than n are in constant time, with n the size of the input.

Gray code In several RAM models, the output registers are fixed and an output solution
is always contained in the first output registers. Hence, two consecutive solutions must only
differ by a fixed number of registers, such an ordering of solutions is often called a Gray
code. If the solution is represented by 0 and 1 in the output registers, it means that the
Hamming distance between consecutive solutions is constant. In our computation model, the
registers may contain integers less than n that can be manipulated in constant time, hence
the Hamming distance between two consecutive solutions is bounded by O(log(n)). Since the
algorithm goes from a solution to the next in constant time, it is sometimes called a loopless
algorithm in the context of Gray codes. There are many such algorithms for the generation
38                                  CHAPTER 5. BELOW POLYNOMIAL DELAY


of combinatorial objects [Walsh 2003, Ruskey 2003, Knuth 2011, Hartung et al. 2019]: the
integers less than 2n , combinations, Dyck words, . . .

Example 7. Let RBCn be the reflected binary code order on n bits words, represented as
a list. It is defined recursively as the concatenation of the words of RBCn−1 prefixed by 0
followed by the words of RBCn−1 in reverse order prefixed by one. To go from one word to
the next in RBCn , the 1 in the current word should be maintained as a list as well as the
parity of the number of ones. If the number of ones is even, the last bit is flipped, otherwise
the bit to the left of the rightmost one is flipped. Since the word is represented as an array
of size n, all these operations can be done in constant time.

Constant delay with dynamic amortization To generate very different consecutive
solutions in constant delay, we must relax the previous definition. For instance, it seems
natural when several solutions are already computed in memory, to be able to output them
in constant delay. This is why we have defined RAM machines for enumeration with a
generalized OUTPUT instruction, which can output any region of the memory. It allows
to output already computed solutions in constant delay or to amortize a slow enumeration
process with a fast one. It can be used to generate models of a k-DNF in constant de-
lay [Capelli & Strozecki 2021a]. This form of constant delay can be obtained even when the
solutions do not follow a Gray code order. Hence, it is strictly more general than the previous
definition.

Constant amortized time An algorithm is in constant amortized time (CAT) if its total
time divided by the number of solutions is constant, i.e. its average delay is constant.

Example 8. Consider the generation of the integers between 0 and 2n − 1 in the usual order,
represented as an array of bits. Adding one to an integer may change up to n bits, but on
average only two bits are changed and the time needed is proportional to the number of
changed bits. Hence, on average over the whole enumeration, at most two operations per
solution is required: it is a CAT algorithm. If we generate the integers in another order like
the Gray code order, it possible to obtain a constant delay algorithm [Knuth 2011].

    See Ruskey’s book [Ruskey 2003] for many other examples of CAT algorithms. Uno’s
push-out method helps turn backtracking algorithms into CAT algorithms, see [Uno 2015]
for the method and several of its applications.
    Several problems admitting a CAT algorithm, such as the enumeration of unrooted
trees [Wright et al. 1986], have later been proved to admit a proper constant delay algo-
rithm [Nakano & Uno 2003]. Amortization may be used to turn a CAT algorithm into a
constant delay algorithm if the generation of solutions is regular enough. Sometimes, the
solutions to be generated are organized as nodes of a tree and given by some traversal of the
tree. Then, by generating solutions of even depth when going down the tree and solutions of
odd depth when going up, one may turn a CAT algorithm into a constant delay one without
relying on amortization. This method is sometimes called Feder’s trick, as he introduced it
to generate the models of a 2CNF [Feder 1994].
5.2. CONSTANT DELAY                                                                             39


Open problem 5.4. Give a sufficient condition to turn CAT algorithms into constant de-
lay algorithms, possibly using exponential space. The method of Theorem 5.1 transforms a
flashlight search in constant average delay into a (strong) linear delay algorithm: under which
condition can it be made constant?

   Constant amortized time is stricly more general than constant delay, as shown in the next
proposition.

Proposition 5.2. There is Enum·A which can be solved in constant amortized time and
polynomial preprocessing but not in constant delay and polynomial preprocessing.

Proof. Let L be a problem, which can be solved in O(2n ) but not in o(2n /n). We define
A(x) as {0i | i ≤ |x|} if x ∈ L and {1i | i ≤ |x|} otherwise. The problem can be solved in
constant amortized time, by computing whether x ∈ L in time O(2|x| ) and then generating
all solutions using Gray code in total time O(2|x| ). If Enum·A can be solved in constant
delay and polynomial time preprocessing, then the first solution is generated in polynomial
time, which implies that L is solved in polynomial time, a contradiction.


Fixed parameter constant delay When doing query evaluation, the query is often con-
sidered to be of fixed size, we say that we consider the data complexity. Hence, the number
of free variables of the query is fixed, let us denote it by k. A solution is a k-tuple of elements
from the structure on which the query is evaluated. Let n be the size of the structure, which
is the instance of the problem, then k integers of size log(n) bits are necessary to encode a
solution. Since we have assumed a uniform cost measure, these elements can be dealt with in
constant time. Note that there are at most nk solutions, hence to make the class interesting,
it is not enough to ask the preprocessing to be in polynomial time. The choice is often to
consider a linear (or almost linear) preprocessing. Since the solutions are of a fixed constant
size, we could use for these problems the notion of strong polynomial delay, which is more
demanding than constant delay: the delay should be polynomial in k, while it can be any
function in k for (fixed parameter) constant delay.
    Durand and Grandjean have shown that F O queries over bounded degree structures can
be enumerated with constant delay and linear preprocessing [Durand & Grandjean 2007].
Following that result, many query languages have been proven to have a constant delay
algorithm, see the survey of Segoufin [Segoufin 2015] and Durand [Durand 2020].
    The class of enumeration problems solvable with constant delay is stable under cartesian
product. However, to be stable under union, either the union should be disjoint, or the
Check·A problem must be in constant time. These observations can be generalized by
considering circuits of disjoint unions and cartesian products, representing a set of solutions,
which can be enumerated with linear preprocessing and constant delay when the solutions
are sparse. This approach has been investigated in [Amarilli et al. 2017], and can be applied
to show that assignments of M SO formulas, with free variables of the first order only, can
be enumerated with constant delay over structures of constant tree-width.
40                                  CHAPTER 5. BELOW POLYNOMIAL DELAY


5.3    Random Sampling
As a way to escape the time and space required to generate all solutions, we could only
generate one. We may then ask for a solution at some position in a given order, an approach
considered in Chapter 6 on ordered enumeration problems. An approach, which does not
require to have an a priori on the generated solutions, is to generate a representative solution,
which can be achieved by uniformly sampling the set of solutions. A polynomial time
uniform generator for the problem Enum·A generates an element of A(x), with uniform
probability, in time polynomial in |x|. The existence of such generator is deeply connected
to the possibility of approximately counting the set of solutions, see [Jerrum 2003].
    The space of solutions of an enumeration problem can often be represented by some
connected supergraph. As explained in Chapter 3, a traversal of the graph produces all
solutions but often requires exponential space. If there is a random walk on the graph of
solutions, whose stationary distribution (probability of presence on each vertex in the limit) is
almost uniform, then it can be used as a random generator. When the random walk mixes in
polynomial time, i.e. approximates its stationary distribution up to a constant in polynomial
time, then we obtain a polynomial time random generator, which avoids the exponential
space use of the supergraph method.
    When the space of solutions to enumerate is infinite and even continuous, sampling is
often the only approach. In [Peyronnet et al. 2012], we try to decide when two non deter-
ministic automata or two Markov decision processes are far enough for some distance. When
they are different, we want to explain to the user why these automata or MDPs are dif-
ferent, hence we want to enumerate words or strategies which prove their separation. For
complexity reason, we use an approximate representation by the polytope of the set of ac-
cepted words or the polytope of the stationary distributions of the strategies. There are
an infinite number of points in the symmetric difference of two polytopes, hence instead
of enumerating them, we sample them uniformly, using a polynomial time random walk on
polytopes [Lovász & Simonovits 1993].
    A polynomial time uniform generator can be turned into an exhaustive enumeration
algorithm solving the enumeration problem with high probability. The algorithm is sim-
ple: draw repeatedly solutions using the uniform generator. The only difficulty is to know
when to stop drawing solutions because there is no new solution anymore. The time be-
tween the last new solution generated and the end of the algorithm can be bounded us-
ing the Coupon Collector Theorem [Erdos & Rényi 1961], so that the algorithm works with
high probability. This methods has been first presented in [Goldberg 1991] and improved
in [Capelli & Strozecki 2019].

Theorem 5.2. If Enum·A ∈ EnumP has a polytime uniform generator, then Enum·A can
be solved with high probability by an algorithm in polynomial delay.

    The algorithm used in Theorem 5.2 needs an exponential space for storing the solutions
and for the amortization of the incremental linear time. In general, we cannot get rid of
the space, since Goldberg has given a tight lower bound on the product of space and de-
lay [Goldberg 1991]. However, if repetitions of solutions are allowed, we can build an exhaus-
tive algorithm using polynomial space and incremental linear time [Capelli & Strozecki 2019].
5.3. RANDOM SAMPLING                                                                     41


To do that, we must decide when to stop drawing solutions, without being able to main-
tain explicitly the set of found solutions. There exist data structures which approximate
the cardinality of a dynamic set using only a logarithmic number of bits in the size of the
set [Flajolet & Martin 1985, Kane et al. 2010]. The idea is to apply a hash function to each
element seen and to remember an aggregated information on the bits of the hashed elements.
Such data structures can be used to design a randomized incremental linear algorithm from
a uniform generator.

Theorem 5.3. If Enum·A ∈ EnumP has a polytime uniform generator, then Enum·A can
be solved with high probability by an algorithm in incremental linear time with repetitions
and polynomial space.

    Note that Theorem 4.1 does not allow to amortize incremental linear time into a polyno-
mial delay in Theorem 5.3. Indeed, the algorithm is randomized and the different copies of
the enumeration algorithms used in the amortization would produce different solutions!

Open problem 5.5. There are several methods to obtain a uniform generator: random walk
on a reconfiguration graph [Nishimura 2018] or Boltzman samplers [Duchon et al. 2004]. Can
we get an efficient enumeration algorithm directly from these methods without building the
random generator?
                                                                                    Chapter 6

                                           Ordered Enumeration


Contents
       6.1   Specified Order . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   43
       6.2   Ranked Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     44



    In this chapter we briefly explore ordered enumeration, that is producing a set of solutions
in some order.


6.1    Specified Order
K-best solutions One way to deal with a large solution space is to reduce it arbitrarily.
We can fix a parameter k and ask to enumerate only k solutions. To make this approach more
interesting, we can fix some relevant order on the solutions and ask for the k best ones. When
k is not fixed but given as input the problem is very similar to the (ordered) enumeration of
solutions with respect to incremental time. The k-shortest path and the k-minimum spanning
tree problems are typical k-best problems with many applications as explained in a survey
by Eppstein [Eppstein et al. 2015]. In this survey, methods for generating k-best solutions
are presented, which are variations on methods also used for enumeration: binary partition
or the I ∪ {j} method [Lawler et al. 1980].

Fixed Order Enumeration problems can be further constrained by requiring the solutions
to be produced in a given order. The order can either be given in the input as a black box or
with a succinct definition, e.g. when the solutions are sequences of elements, giving an order
on the elements yields a lexicographic order on solutions. Alternatively, the order (or family
of orders) can be fixed by the problem, which is the point of view adopted here. We also
require that the order can be decided in polynomial time. Since partial orders are allowed, it
is a strict generalization of enumeration problems as defined in this thesis. The complexity
measures and complexity classes are defined for ordered enumeration problems as they have
been defined for regular enumeration problems. From a practical point of view, ordered
enumeration is a way to deal with a large number of solutions by requesting the enumeration
of the best ones first and it relates to the problem of finding the k-best solutions, presented
in the previous paragraph.
    From a structural complexity perspective, adding an order constraint has no effect on the
class OutputP since the solutions can be sorted after having been output in time polynomial
in the solution set, as remarked in [Johnson et al. 1988]. However, this method stores all
44                                      CHAPTER 6. ORDERED ENUMERATION


solutions before sorting them, which may require exponentially more space than the algorithm
which does not respect order. This space can be traded for time, by doing a selection sort.
The algorithm solving the unordered enumeration problem is run to produce all solutions
and we maintain s the smallest produced solutions during its run. At the end of the run, s
is output, and the algorithm is run again to find the smallest solution larger than s and so
on. This method multiplies the total time by the number of solutions, hence if the original
algorithm is in OutputP, the algorithm for the ordered problem is also in OutputP without
using more space.
     It is easy to enumerate solutions in lexicographic order, when there is a flashlight search
for the problem, by doing the traversal of the tree of partial solutions following the order.
However, when there is no flashlight search, as for the generation of maximal independent set,
a lexicographic order may dramatically change the complexity. Maximal independent sets
can be enumerated in lexicographic order with polynomial delay but not in reverse lexico-
graphic order [Johnson et al. 1988] if P ̸= NP! Likewise, maximal acyclic subhypergraphs of
a hypergraph can be enumerated in polynomial delay [Daigo & Hirata 2009] but finding the
first lexicographic maximal acyclic subhypergraph is coNP-hard, therefore this enumeration
problem in lexicographic order is not in IncP. It turns out that many ordered enumeration
problems are not in IncP because finding the first solution is NP-hard. In particular when the
order is the solution size, the enumeration of many kinds of subgraphs is hard: independent
sets, dominating sets, cycles . . . The Hamming weight of a solution also induces an interesting
order in the context of assignements of formulas, see [Creignou et al. 2011, Schmidt 2017]
     Hardness results with a fixed order are often directly derived from the hardness of find-
ing some largest solution and are not specific to enumeration. Indeed, even trivial enu-
meration problems become hard when paired with the appropriate order (see Section 2.4
of [Strozecki 2010b]). We design a total order <, such that a < b can be decided in poly-
nomial time, but the enumeration of 2n trivial solutions of an instance of size n is not in
incremental polynomial time in this order, while the unordered problem can be solved in
constant delay. Hence, separations of classes of ordered enumeration problems are simpler
and cleaner, as stated in the following proposition.

Proposition 6.1 ([Strozecki 2010b]). For ordered enumeration problems, P ̸= NP is equiva-
lent to any of these separations

                            DelayP ⊊ IncP ⊊ OutputP ⊊ EnumP.


6.2    Ranked Solution
To avoid to deal with the time and space needed to generate the whole solution set, the best
is to generate solutions on demand. Let A be a binary predicate, let < be some total order on
A(x), then RankedSol·(A, <) is the problem of computing y from the instance (x, j), such
that y is the jth element of A(x) according to < or a special symbol if |A(x)| ≤ j. Problem
RankedSol·(A, <) is also called the jth solution problem [Bagan 2009]. From that problem,
we define the complexity class QueryP (see [Strozecki 2010b]), which is the set of enumeration
problems Enum·A, for which there is an order < such that RankedSol·(A, <) ∈ P. Note
6.2. RANKED SOLUTION                                                                                45


that QueryP is a restriction of the class NextP: instead of accessing the solutions as in a list
by a next pointer, we access them directly as if they were stored in an array.

Example 9. We define LinearSystem((A, b), x) the predicate which is true if and only if
Ax = b, with A a n ∗ m matrix over some finite field F and x and b vectors. We show that
Enum·LinearSystem ∈ QueryP. To solve Enum·LinearSystem, one should output all
solutions of a linear system, that is a vector space. A basis (y1 , . . . , yk ) of the vector space
can be computed in polynomial time, for instance using Gaussian elimination. The set of
solutions is the set of vectors equal to λ1 y1 + · · · + λk yk for all (λ1 , . . . , λk ) ∈ Fk . We fix
an arbitrary order on F, and consider the associated lexicographic order < on the solutions
seen as sequences (λ1 , . . . , λk ). The problem RankedSol·(LinearSystem, <) can be solved
in polynomial time since the jth element of < is easy to compute in polynomial time and
from that, the solution is obtained by a linear number of scalar multiplications and vector
additions.

    If RankedSol·(A, <) ∈ P, the problem of counting the solutions is also in polynomial
time. Reciprocally, if an enumeration problem is solved by a flashlight search, and if counting
its solutions is in polynomial time, then the problem is in QueryP, using the lexicographic
order yielded by the traversal of the tree of partial solutions. Only very simple problems
are in QueryP, for instance listing the solutions of a first-order query over a bounded degree
structure [Bagan et al. 2008], or monadic second-order query over trees or graphs of bounded
branch-width [Courcelle 2009]. The order used for the case of second-order queries is not
natural and is a byproduct of the algorithm. For first-order queries and lexicographic ordering,
the class of problems for which RankedSol·(A, <) can be solved in logarithmic time is
characterized using standard complexity assumptions [Carmeli et al. 2021].
    Counting the perfect matchings of a graph is a classical ♯P-complete problem [Valiant 1979],
but their enumeration can be done in polynomial delay [Uno 1997], hence if FP ̸= ♯P then
QueryP ̸= DelayP. The same reasonning holds for Enum·DN F , which is in NextP because
of the flashlight search solving it in lexicographic order, but counting the solutions of a DN F
is ♯P-complete.
    In [Carmeli et al. 2020] the problem of generating solutions of conjunctive queries is stud-
ied in details under three different constraints: without order, in a random order and with
random access, that is QueryP (unspecified order). By turning a uniform generator into
an exhaustive enumeration algorithm by repeated sampling as in Theorem 5.2, it is easy
to generate solutions in random order. However, designing a specific algorithm to generate
solutions in random order seems more efficient in practice than randomly sampling solu-
tions [Carmeli et al. 2020]. Since any problem in QueryP has a random uniform generator
in polynomial time, generating in random order is easier than random access. The sets of
free-connex acyclic conjunctive queries, which can be enumerated/sampled in polylogarith-
mic delay/time after linear preprocessing form a strict hierarchy, showing that these notions
are different even for a very restricted problem.
                                                                                        Chapter 7

                                Restricted Formalisms and
                                             Classification


Contents
       7.1    Hardness and Lower Bound Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 47
       7.2    Hardness for Specific Algorithms or Computation model . . . . . .                      49
       7.3    Restricted Classes of Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             52
             7.3.1   Constraint Satisfaction Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    52
             7.3.2   Saturation by Set Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   53
             7.3.3   Query Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   56
             7.3.4   Polynomial Interpolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    58



    We want to precisely characterize the complexity of enumeration problems. We report the
very few known lower bounds and hardness results. We then study restricted formalisms of
several kinds to be able to prove stronger results. We either restrict the family of enumeration
problems we consider, or we weaken the computation model, or we even fix the algorithmic
method used to solve an enumeration problem. This allows to prove lower bounds, to classify
problems according to their complexity or to give simpler characterizations of their complex-
ity. We also present several interesting algorithms, often derived from flashlight search, to
capture some tractable cases in the several presented formalisms.


7.1    Hardness and Lower Bound Results
All problems derived from NP-complete problems are in EnumP but not in OutputP because
deciding whether there is a solution is hard. In this section, we are interested in problems
hard for lower complexity classes like IncP, for which deciding whether there is a solution is
easy.

Hard problems Recall that, by Proposition 3.2, a problem Enum·A ∈ IncP if and only
if AnotherSolA ∈ FP. Hence, if we assume P ̸= NP and that AnotherSolA is NP-hard, then
Enum·A ∈  / IncP. This has been used to prove that several problems are IncP-hard: list-
ing maximal models of a Horn formula [Kavvadias et al. 2000], listing vertices of a polyhe-
dron [Khachiyan et al. 2006] and dualization in lattices given by implicational bases [Defrain & Nourine 2019,
Defrain et al. 2021].
48     CHAPTER 7. RESTRICTED FORMALISMS AND CLASSIFICATION


Class from a problem To prove hardness results, we may assume complexity hypothe-
ses on decision problems as in the previous paragraph. An alternative is to base hardness
of an enumeration problem on an hypothesis on the hardness of another enumeration prob-
lem. The best example of this approach are the many problems which have been proven to
be as hard or equivalent to enumerating the minimal transversals of a hypergraph, a prob-
lem not known to be in OutputP after 40 years of research. Among these problems the
dualization of a monotone boolean formula, the generation of vertices of an integral poly-
tope [Boros et al. 2009], the enumeration of minimal keys, the enumeration of minimal dom-
inating sets [Kanté et al. 2014], see [Eiter & Gottlob 1995, Hagen 2008] for many examples.
In fact, a recent article [Defrain & Nourine 2019] classifies dualization problems as either in
IncP or as hard as the enumeration of minimal transversals.
    We can also use the conjectures made on the complexity of Enum·DNF in Chapter 5
as a source of hardness. The class SDelayP is stable under the reduction given in Defini-
tion 8. Hence, if Enum·DNF can be reduced to some problem Enum·A, it is a clue that
Enum·A might not be in SDelayP. We have done such kind of reduction from Enum·DNF
over monotone formulas in [Mary & Strozecki 2019], but it does not give much information,
because the problem has now been proved to be in SDelayPpoly [Capelli & Strozecki 2021a,
Capelli & Strozecki 2021b].
Open problem 7.1. Find a good problem on which to base hardness for DelayP. It should
be in IncPk , with k > 1. Plausible candidates are enumeration of minimal hitting sets in
3-uniform hypergraphs or enumeration of the circuits of a binary matroid.
Open problem 7.2. Can we transfer hardness between classes? Prove that some problem,
for instance Enum·DNF, is not in SDelayP if and only if some other problem, for instance
generating minimal transversals, is not in IncP.

Strong complexity hypothesis Instead of assuming P ̸= NP, we may need to make
stronger assumptions. If we assume that 3SUM, the problem of deciding whether three
numbers in a list sum to zero, cannot be solved faster than O(n2 ), there are several lower
bounds on the complexity of generating all triangles of a graph [Kopelowitz et al. 2016]. Some
lower bounds involving the number of triangles can be rephrased as stating that the delay is
at least O(m1/3 ), with m the number of edges. Another example is the characterization of
the complexity of an acyclic conjunctive query: either it is free-connex and its assignments
can be enumerated in constant delay and linear preprocessing or it is not and its assignments
cannot be enumerated with constant delay and linear preprocessing, unless the product of
boolean matrices can be computed in O(n2 ) [Bagan et al. 2007]. The Strong Exponential
Time Hypothesis (SETH) is a typical hypothesis in fine graind complexity, wich states that
there is no algorithm solving SAT in time 2αn with α < 1. An algorithm that generates
maximal solutions of any strongly accessible set system has a worst case time complexity of
Ω(t2q/2 ), unless SETH is false [Conte et al. 2019], where t denotes the number of solutions
and q denotes their maximal size.
Open problem 7.3. Can we prove the same lower bound for maximal solutions of strongly
accessible set systems, but with ETH as an hypothesis, using the amplification method of
Theorem 3.1?
7.2. HARDNESS FOR SPECIFIC ALGORITHMS OR COMPUTATION
MODEL                                                                                          49

Open problem 7.4. Assuming SETH, prove a weak lower bound: there is no constant delay
or strong polynomial delay algorithm for generating the minimal transversals of a hypergraph,
the circuits of a binary matroid or the maximal cliques of a graph.



7.2     Hardness for Specific Algorithms or Computation model

Extension problem The most common method to obtain a polynomial delay algorithm
is to prove that ExtSol·A is polynomial, which implies that flashlight search has poly-
nomial delay, as explained in Chapter 3. Hence, showing that ExtSol·A is NP-complete
rules out the use of backtrack search. Extension problems have been studied for their own
sake and there are many NP-hardness results, see [Casel et al. 2019b, Casel et al. 2019a] and
the references therein. In particular, the extension problem of minimal transversals is NP-
hard [Boros et al. 1998].
     The only weakness of this approach, is that for some problems, the input of the extension
problem solved when going through the tree of partial solutions may not be arbitrary, since
we can decide in which order the extension is done. Typically, if a solution is a set of elements,
the order in which elements are added (or forbidden) depends on the designer of the flashlight
search and can even be different in every branch of the tree. Most of the time, this degree
of liberty is not exploited but there are a few examples where it is relevant. For instance, to
enumerate models of a matched CNF formula (see [Savickỳ & Kučera 2016] for a definition),
a specific variable must be fixed at each step of the flashlight search, so that the subformula
is still a matched formula [Savickỳ & Kučera 2016].



Maximal cliques Even when we have an algorithm with good theoretical guarantees, it
can be interesting to lower bound the complexity of the algorithms used in practice to solve
it. For instance, linear programs can be solved in polynomial time [Karmarkar 1984] but the
simplex mehod which is often used in practice has been proven to be at least in subexponential
time for many pivot choices [Friedmann et al. 2011].
    The problem of generating maximal cliques is an important problem, used to compute
subgraph isomorphism. While there are many polynomial delay algorithms (see the ref-
erences in [Conte et al. 2016]), algorithms with no guarantee on their delay such as Bron
and Kerbosch algorithm [Bron & Kerbosch 1973] and CLIQUES [Tomita et al. 2006] are of-
ten used to find maximal cliques and are considered efficient in practice. In a recent pa-
per [Conte & Tomita 2021], Conte and Tomita revisit these two algorithms to prove that
they do not have polynomial delay. The Bron and Kerbosch algorithm (and one of its vari-
ants) have a delay at least O(3n/3 ), using the same reasonning as for the total time. For the
CLIQUE algorithm, they are able to prove that if it has polynomial delay then P = NP, by
using it to solve the extension problem for maximal clique, which is NP-hard. It is similar
to the notion of NP-mighty algorithm [Disser & Skutella 2018], i.e. some algorithms such as
the simplex, can solve an NP-hard problem inside their computation even if they are used to
solve a polynomial time problem.
50     CHAPTER 7. RESTRICTED FORMALISMS AND CLASSIFICATION


Equivalence to a simpler enumeration problem A method to generate maximal el-
ements of independent set systems (closed by inclusion), in particular the maximal cliques
of a graph, has been proposed by Lawler et al. [Lawler et al. 1980]. The method relies on
solving the I ∪ {j} problem: given I an independent set maximal among the independent
sets included in {1, . . . , j − 1}, compute all independent sets maximal within I ∪ {j}. If
this problem can be solved in output polynomial time, then an output polynomial algorithm
exists for the general problem. Hence, the complexity of this method can be characterized
through the complexity of a simpler (but similar) problem, which could help to prove that it
cannot be applied. Note that this method yields a polynomial delay algorithm to generate
maximal cliques, while the extension problem is NP-hard [Lawler et al. 1980], meaning that
flashlight search cannot solve it in polynomial delay.
     The enumeration of maximal induced subgraphs satisfying some hereditary property P is a
generalization of enumeration of maximal sets in independent set systems. In [Cohen et al. 2008],
the input restricted problem is introduced: list maximal induced subgraphs, with the addi-
tional constraint that there is a vertex in the input graph G such that G \ v ∈ P. The general
problem is in DelayP if and only if the input restricted version is in polynomial delay (similar
criteria can be given for IncP and OutputP). This has been further generalized to t-restricted
problems, see [Cao 2020]. While these characterizations could help prove lower bounds, they
seem more suited to help design efficient enumeration algorithms (many of which are given
in [Cao 2020]).
     Strongly accessible set systems further generalize the previous frameworks, and their
maximal elements can be enumerated using polynomial space, see [Conte et al. 2019] and
its introduction for a nice description of the relationship between most algorithmic methods
mentioned in this section.


Uniform generator To turn a uniform generator into an enumeration algorithm using
Theorem 5.2, we need to store all enumerated solutions, hence space may be exponential.
Indeed, it seems necessary to encode the set of already generated solutions and these sets are
in doubly exponential number and thus cannot be encoded in polynomial space. Therefore
the enumeration algorithm needs time to rule out a large number of possible sets of generated
solutions.
    This idea has been made precise by Goldberg (Theorem 3, p.33 [Goldberg 1991]): the
product of the delay and the space of an enumeration algorithm obtained from a uniform
generator is lower bounded by the number of solutions to output up to a polynomial factor.
On the other hand it is easy to build an enumeration algorithm with such space and delay,
by generating solutions by blocks in lexicographic order (Theorem 5, p.42 [Goldberg 1991]).
The proof of the lower bound relies on the fact that the enumeration algorithm can only
output solutions which are given by calls to the generator: we are in a restricted black box
model. A set of possible initial sequences of output elements in the enumeration is built so
that its cardinality is bounded by an exponential in the space used and that the enumeration
produces one of these sequences with high probability. Then, if the delay is too small, with
high probability the calls to the generator have not produced any of those special sequences
which proves the theorem.
7.2. HARDNESS FOR SPECIFIC ALGORITHMS OR COMPUTATION
MODEL                                                                                         51

   However, if we allow unbounded repetitions of solutions, thus relaxing the constraint on
the enumeration algorithm, we can devise an incremental linear algorithm with polynomial
space, see Theorem 5.3.

Jumping automaton on graphs Several enumeration algorithms for solving FO queries
over sparse models (see [Vigny 2018]) can be executed by a jumping automaton on graphs
or JAG [Cook & Rackoff 1980]. In this model, the input, usually a graph G = (V, E), is
represented by its incidence graph I, whose vertices are V ∪ E and with an edge (v, e) if the
vertex v is incident to the edge e in G. The graph I is equipped with a unary function, which
maps a vertex in V to the next vertex in V to represent the list of all vertices. For each
vertex, we have access to the list of its incident edges by a function giving the first edge and
one giving the next one. Finally, a constant number of unary relations and functions can be
computed from G and added to the structure I. A unary relation should be interpreted as a
color of elements in V ∪ E and a unary function as a colored edge on the vertex set V ∪ E.
    The JAG is an automaton, it has a fixed number of states of pebbles and a list of tran-
sitions. A transition of a JAG depends on the elements on which its pebbles are placed and
its state. In particular, it can test whether two pebbles are on the same element or if they
are of some given color. The transition moves the pebbles along edges of the structure I.
A JAG solving an enumeration problem has output states and a given subset of its pebbles
represents the output solution when an output state is reached in the computation. A JAG
with a fixed number of pebbles models an almost constant memory. To define constant delay
enumeration, we require that the delay between two outputs of a JAG is constant. We hope
to prove lower bounds for constant delay enumeration using JAGs, in fact they have been
introduced to prove space lower bounds for problems like connectivity [Wigderson 1992].

Proposition 7.1. There is no JAG, which receives as input a structure I representing a
graph G and u, v two vertices of G, and decides whether (u, v) is an edge in G in constant
time.

Proof. Assume that there is a JAG J, such that from any graph G a structure I can be built,
on which J decides in constant time whether two elements are an edge in G. It means that
the computation begins with two pebbles on u and v and J accepts after a constant number
of transitions if and only if (u, v) ∈ E. Assume that all elements of I are labeled by a distinct
label of size O(log(n)), where n = |V ∪ E|. In constant time, a JAG explores only a constant
number of elements around u and v, hence its decision to accept (u, v) as an edge depends on
an information which can be encoded into C log(n) bits, for some constant C. The labeling
of the vertices is necessary to differentiate vertices, since a JAG can test whether two pebbles
are on the same vertex. We have seen that the set of edges of G can be represented by the
neighborhood in I of each vertex v ∈ V , hence it can be encoded by Cn log(n) bits. As a
consequence, there are at most 2Cn log(n) different graphs represented by J and any incidence
                                          2
structure I. Since there are at least 2n /n! unlabeled graphs, which is asymptotically larger
than 2Cn log(n) , then there is no J, which decides the edge relation in constant time.

    We want to prove a lower bound for an enumeration problem, using an approach similar
to the one used for the edge relation. However, the enumeration of edges by a JAG is trivial,
52      CHAPTER 7. RESTRICTED FORMALISMS AND CLASSIFICATION


by enriching I with a function representing the list of edges. Hence, we need to consider a
more complex FO query, such as one defining paths of length 2.
Open problem 7.5 (Suggested by Segoufin, personal communication). Unconditionally
prove that there is some simple FO query, say ∃z(E(x, z) ∧ E(z, y)), which cannot be solved
using a JAG with a constant number of pebbles and constant delay. The preprocessing to
compute the structure I representing the graph may be further restricted.
    Unconditional lower bounds are extremely hard to obtain: after fifty years of research, it is
not even known whether SAT requires superlinear time to be solved. To obtain unconditional
lower bounds in enumeration, the easiest approach is to show that a problem is not in some
small complexity class, like constant delay with linear preprocessing, and even to restrict the
computational model. That is why we have proposed Open Problem 7.5 on the JAG compu-
tational model. Indeed, unconditional separations from classical complexity involve classes of
problems solvable by a family of boolean circuits: strict hierarchy inside AC0 [Hastad 1986],
polynomial size monotone circuits cannot decide the existence of a k-clique [Razborov 1985]
and ACC ̸= NEXP [Williams 2014].
Open problem 7.6. Can we define meaningful circuit classes for enumeration and prove
unconditional separations of DelayP from one of these classes? Can we relate circuit classes
for enumeration to parallel computation or descriptive complexity?


7.3     Restricted Classes of Problems
We now present several families of enumeration problems, which are easier to classify but
nonetheless contain many interesting problems. Saturation under set operators, polynomial
interpolation and queries with second order variables are presented in more details because I
have worked on them.

7.3.1    Constraint Satisfaction Problems
Constraint satisfaction problems are a broad generalization of the 3-SAT problem: an in-
stance of a constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) is given as a conjunction of constraints
over variables. The constraints are relations over a domain, usually finite and come from a
set of constraints called the constraint language, e.g. the disjunctions over three literals for
3-SAT. A solution of a CSP is an assignment of the variables which satisfies all constraints. A
CSP can also be interpreted as finding a homomorphism between two structures representing
respectively the variables and the domain.
     The fundamental question is to classify the constraint languages for which the problem
of finding a solution is easy or hard. It turns out that in the boolean case, all constraint
languages either yield a CSP in P or in NP [Schaefer 1978] and this result has been re-
cently extended to any finite domain [Bulatov 2017, Zhuk 2020], which is surprising since
in general, there are problems of intermediate complexity between P and NP by Ladner’s
theorem [Ladner 1975].
     A CSP problem can easily be turned into an enumeration CSP by asking to generate all of
its satisfying assignments rather than deciding whether there is one. Over a boolean domain,
7.3. RESTRICTED CLASSES OF PROBLEMS                                                                          53


there is a dichotomy: for Horn relations, anti-Horn relations, affine relations and bijunctive
relations, the enumeration is in DelayP, while all other problems are IncP-hard (and even
EnumP-complete) [Creignou & Hébrard 1997]. This result has been generalized to domains
of larger size [Schnoor & Schnoor 2007], with a new efficient algorithm and some hardness
results, but no complete classification. In particular, it is shown that some enumeration CSPs
in DelayP cannot be solved by a flashlight search, contrarily to the boolean case.

Open problem 7.7. Is it possible to prove a dichotomy for enumeration CSPs and finite
domain, using results of [Bulatov 2017, Zhuk 2020]?

    The enumeration CSPs have also been considered with an order constraint on the output of
solutions, as in Chapter 6. When the solutions must be given in increasing or decreasing Ham-
ming weight order, there is also a dichotomy proved in [Creignou et al. 2011, Schmidt 2017].
    Variations on enumeration CSP, where the constraint language is unrestricted but the
instances are restricted, are studied in [Bulatov et al. 2012]. Typically, the problems are
in DelayP when the input has a small tree-width and it seems to be different from the
same results for decision problems, see [Greco & Scarcello 2013] for an overview of results on
variants of enumeration CSPs.

7.3.2     Saturation by Set Operators
As explained in Chapter 3, all algorithms in incremental polynomial time can be interpreted
as saturation algorithms. In particular, saturation problems, which are defined as computing
the closure of a set of elements by a k-ary operation computable in polynomial time, are in
IncPk+1 . A natural question is to understand for which operation, the defined saturation
problem is in fact in IncP1 = DelayP. We tried to settle this question with Arnaud Mary
in [Mary & Strozecki 2016a, Mary & Strozecki 2016b, Mary & Strozecki 2019], by restricting
the set of saturation operators.
    In the proposed framework, a solution is a vector over some finite set, the saturation
operations are of fixed arity and they act component-wise and in the same way on each
component of the vector. We fix a finite domain D. Given a t-ary operation f (a function
from Dt to D), f can be naturally extended to a t-ary operation over vectors of the same
size. Let (v 1 , . . . v t ) be a t-uple of vectors of size n, f acts component-wise on it, that is for
all i ≤ n, f (v 1 , . . . , v t )i = f (vi1 , . . . , vit ). For instance, if f is the conjunction on the boolean
domain (D = {0, 1}), then f acts on two vectors, which can be interpreted as subsets of [n],
and computes their intersection.

Definition 10. Let F be a finite set of operations over D. Let S be a set of vectors over
D. Let F i (S) = {f (v1 , . . . , vt ) | v1 , . . . , vt ∈ F i−1 (S) and f ∈ F} ∪ F i−1 (S) and F 0 (S) = S.
The closure of S by F is ClF (S) = ∪i F i (S).

   Notice that ClF (S) is the smallest set which contains S and which is closed by the
operations of F. As an illustration, assume that D = {0, 1} and that F = {∨}. Then
the elements of S can be seen as subsets of [n] (each vector of size n is the characteristic
vector of a subset of [n]) and Cl{∨} (S) is the closure by union of all sets in S. Let S =
54       CHAPTER 7. RESTRICTED FORMALISMS AND CLASSIFICATION


{{1, 2, 4}, {2, 3}, {1, 3}} then
                    Cl{∨} (S) = {{1, 2, 4}, {1, 2, 3, 4}, {2, 3}, {1, 3}, {1, 2, 3}}.
    For each set of operations F over D, we define the problem EnumClosureF : given a
set of vectors S, list the elements of ClF (S). Note that EnumClosure{∨} is the problem
Enum·Union introduced in Chapter 3. A naive saturation algorithm solves EnumClosureF :
the elements of F are applied to all tuples of S and any new element is added to S, the al-
gorithm stops when no new element can be produced. If the largest arity of an operation
in F is k then this algorithm adds a new element to a set of t elements (or stops) in time
O(tk P (n)) where n is the size of a solution and P (n) the time to evaluate an operation of F.
Hence, EnumClosureF ∈ IncPk+1 .
    One way of solving EnumClosureF in polynomial delay is to solve the associated ex-
tension problem in polynomial time. The extension problem is equivalent to the membership
problem, denoted by MembershipF : given S a set of vectors of size n, and a vector v of size
n does v belong to ClF (S)?

The Post lattice Let F be a finite set of operations over D. The functional clone of F,
denoted by < F >, is the set of operations obtained by any composition of the operations
of F and projections. The sets ClF (S) and Cl<F > (S) are the same, hence it is enough
to study functional clones to understand the complexity of EnumClosureF . When the
domain is boolean, i.e. D = {0, 1}, the functional clones form a lattice called Post’s lattice
(see [Post 1941, Reith & Vollmer 2003, Böhler et al. 2005]). We prove by reduction that, for
many functional clones of this lattice, the problems EnumClosureF are equivalent. We are
left with 4 families of functional clones:
     • The clone E2 =< ∧ > or its dual < ∨ >. The problem MembershipE2 can be solved
       in linear time, and we can design a flashlight search in linear delay in the input, see
       Chapter 3.
     • The clone L0 =< + > where + is the boolean addition. Again Membership<+> is in
       polynomial time, and the vector space it generates can be enumerated in linear delay
       in the size of a solution. The problem is similar to Enum·LinearSystem presented
       in Chapter 6 and is in SDelayP ∩ QueryP. The results are similar for the clone L2
       generated by the sum modulo two of three elements.
     • The clone BF =< ∨, ¬ >, which defines a boolean algebra and M2 =< ∧, ∨ >. In both
       cases, we can compute atoms whose combinations by ∨ produce all solutions, and it
       can be done with linear delay in a solution. Again the problem is in SDelayP ∩ QueryP.
     • The clones S10k =< T hk+1 >, where T hk+1 is the threshold function over k+1 variables,
                              k                 k
       which is equal to one if and only if at least k of its arguments are ones. Because of the
       Baker-Pixley Theorem [Baker & Pixley 1975], ClS k (S) can be characterized by all the
                                                             10
       projections of S over k components. Hence, MembershipS10 ∈ P and the flashlight
       search is in strong polynomial delay. In the particular case of the majority operator
       < T h32 >, a reduction to the problem of enumerating models of a 2CN F formula gives
       a linear delay algoritm, using the algorithm of [Feder 1994].
7.3. RESTRICTED CLASSES OF PROBLEMS                                                       55


   As a conclusion, we obtain the following theorem.

Theorem 7.1 ([Mary & Strozecki 2016a]). For any finite set of boolean operators F, EnumClosureF ∈
DelayP.

    We would like to prove that the complexity of the problem is in SDelayP rather than
DelayP. The only open case is the clone E2 =< ∧ > for which no strong polynomial delay
algorithm is known. It is equivalent to the question Enum·Union ∈ SDelayP, which is
mentioned in Chapter 5.
    We can also consider the complexity of the uniform problem, where the clone is given as
input instead of being fixed. Let ClosureTreshold be the following problem: given a set
S of vectors and an integer k decide whether the vector 1 ∈ ClS k (S), we have proven that
                                                                10
ClosureTreshold is coNP-complete. Hence, we cannot use flashlight search to solve the
uniform problem unless P = NP.

Open problem 7.8. Prove that the uniform problem is hard for IncP. The proof must rely
on infinite families of clones such as ClS k .
                                         10



Larger domain The first generalization of the previous result is to consider domains larger
than 2. However, the lattice of functional clones gets immensly more complicated. For
|D| ≥ 3, we can generalize the polynomial cases of the boolean domain: group operations
or sets of operations containing a near unanimity term (similar to the threshold function)
have a polynomial time membership problem. The problem MembershipF is known in the
universal algebra community under the name subpower membership problem or SMP. The
method for groups also works for extensions of groups by multilinear operations such as ring
or modules. For semigroups, some cases are known to be PSPACE-complete and other are in
P [Bulatov et al. 2016, Steindl 2017].
    The last case we would like to extend is the clone generated by the conjunction. A nat-
ural generalization is to fix an order on D and to study the complexity of Membershipf
with f a binary monotone operation. Let f be the function over D = {0, 1, 2} defined
by f (x, y) = min(x + y, 2). This function is monotone in each of its arguments. The
problem Exact3Cover of finding an exact cover of a set by subsets of size 3 reduces to
Membershipf [Mary & Strozecki 2016a], which proves that Membershipf is NP-complete.
However, a direct application of the supergraph method yields the following proposition.

Proposition 7.2 ([Mary & Strozecki 2016a]). If f is an associative function of arity 2, then
EnumClosuref ∈ DelayP.

Open problem 7.9. Better characterize the clones for which EnumClosuref can be solved
by a supergraph method, in particular for arity larger than 2. Is it possible to do a reverse
search to avoid exponential space?

Non uniform operations The second natural generalization is to allow operations to act
differently on each component of the vectors. First, we only allow unary operations acting
on a single component by turning it to zero or to one. It roughly corresponds to listing
56      CHAPTER 7. RESTRICTED FORMALISMS AND CLASSIFICATION


downward closure (or upward closure) of ClF (S) and for the boolean domain, we are still
able to prove that MembershipF ∈ P.
    If we consider unary operators acting on three componenents, then there is one opera-
tor for which the membership problem is equivalent to Exact3Cover, which leads to the
following question.

Open problem 7.10. Is the membership problem NP-hard for some unary operator acting
on 2 components?

Maximal solution The last generalization is to enumerate minimal or maximal elements
of ClF (S), to reduce the number of solutions output while still producing the most interesting
ones. There is no natural saturation algorithm to compute the maximal elements of ClF (S),
contrarily to all problems studied in this section. Hence, there is no guarantee that the
problem can be solved by an incremental polynomial time algorithm.
    We consider the boolean domain, and the order is the inclusion of solutions. We have
proved that the problems of generating maximal or minimal elements of ClF (S) is either
trivial, or equivalent to one of the following well-known enumeration problems.

     • The enumeration of the maximal models of a 2 − CN F formula, which can be solved
       in linear delay [Kavvadias et al. 2000].

     • The enumeration of the circuits of a binary matroid (eventually with a fixed element
       in the circuits), which is in IncP2 [Khachiyan et al. 2005].

     • The enumeration of maximal independent sets of a hypergraph of dimension k (the size
       of the largest hyperedge), which is in IncPk [Eiter & Gottlob 1995].

   As a conclusion, generating maximal or minimal elements of ClF (S) over the boolean
domain is in IncP for all F.

7.3.3     Query Problem
Let L be some logic, then a query ϕ ∈ L is a formula of L with free variables. Given a model,
solving this query means listing all assignments of elements of the model to the free variables
which satisfy the query. The decision version of this problem is the model checking problem:
decide whether a formula withtout free variables is satisfied over some model.

Small solutions Typically, the query is of small size, while the model is huge, hence we
consider the data complexity of the problem (query size is fixed), see Section 5. Since the size
of a solution to a query is bounded by the number of free variables, the solutions considered
are small.
    The most commonly studied logic is the first order logic (FO). There are constant delay al-
gorithms when the model on which the query is evaluated is restricted to be of bounded or low
degree [Durand & Grandjean 2007, Durand et al. 2020], of bounded expansion [Kazana & Segoufin 2020]
or nowhere dense [Schweikardt et al. 2018]. The last result gives in fact a dichotomy on the
complexity of the enumeration of FO queries modulo a complexity hypothesis.
7.3. RESTRICTED CLASSES OF PROBLEMS                                                           57


Theorem 7.2 ([Vigny 2018]). Let C be a class closed under subgraph and assume FPT ̸=
AW[∗], then the problem of enumerating the models of a FO query is not in DelayP if and
only if C is somewhere dense.

    See [Vigny 2018] for more details on this line of work. Note that there are lower bounds
for the complexity of solving an FO query with regard to the query size (coming from the
model checking problem). For instance, if FPT ̸= AW[∗], there is no doubly exponential
algorithm to solve an FO query over a bounded degree structure [Frick & Grohe 2004].

Large solutions If we consider the combined complexity of solving a query, that is the
formula is part of the input and the complexity depends on its size, then we must consider
simpler queries (but with larger solutions). The most studied queries are conjunctive queries
(CQ): conjunction of relational atoms and equality atoms, existentially quantified. Enumer-
ation algorithms with linear preprocessing and constant delay are known [Bagan et al. 2007,
Bagan 2009, Brault-Baron 2013] for the class of self-join free-connex acyclic CQs. Modulo a
strong complexity assumption, this class characterizes exactly the self-join free acyclic CQs
with a constant delay algorithm. For a nice exposition of the algorithm for conjunctive queries
and of the lower bound see [Berkholz et al. 2020]
    Large solutions also appear when the query is of fixed size but the free variables are second
order. Hence, we list sets of elements of the model, which are of the same size as the domain
of the model. Generalizing Courcelle’s theorem, solving a monadic second order query over
a tree, a graph or a matroid of bounded branch width can be done in SDelayP [Bagan 2006,
Courcelle 2009, Strozecki 2011]. This result cannot be generalized further, since modulo ETH
and some technical conditions, the tree-width of a class of structures must be polylogarithmic
to obtain an FPTmodel checking algorithm [Kreutzer 2009].
    With Arnaud Durand [Durand & Strozecki 2011], we have studied first order queries with
free second order variables in an attempt to find classes of tractable queries with large solu-
tions on general models. Note that the second order variables are not monadic, they can be
of any fixed arity. Since in full generality such formulas may be very expressive, we consider
fragments defined by the quantifier alternation of formulas inspired by results on counting
problems [Saluja et al. 1995].

Example 10. The formula IS(T ) = ∀x∀y T (x) ∧ T (y) ⇒ ¬E(x, y) holds if and only if T is
an independent set.
    A hypergraph H is represented by the incidence structure ⟨D, {V, E, R}⟩ where V (x)
means that x is a vertex, E(y) that y is an hyperedge and R(x, y) that x is a vertex of the
hyperedge y. The formula HS(T ) = ∀x(T (x) ⇒ V (x)) ∧ ∀y∃xE(y) ⇒ (T (x) ∧ R(x, y)) holds
if and only if T is a hitting set of H.

    For any quantifier free formula, there is an algorithm with polynomial time preprocessing
and constant delay. The proof uses a reduction to a constant size CNF formula, whose models
can be enumerated in constant time and are then extended using a Gray code. Note that we
cannot obtain an algorithm with a polynomial preprocessing independent from the formula
if FPT ̸= W[1], since we can express the class of k-cliques of a graph with a quantifier free
formula.
58       CHAPTER 7. RESTRICTED FORMALISMS AND CLASSIFICATION


     For formulas with only existential quantifiers, the solutions are a non disjoint union of
solutions of quantifier free formulas. Hence, we obtain a polynomial delay algorithm us-
ing the method of Theorem 3.2. Moreover, the problem is equivalent to the enumeration
of models of a k-DNF formula, a problem we have recently shown to be in constant de-
lay [Capelli & Strozecki 2021a]. Hence, the complexity of solving quantifer free queries and
existential queries is the same.
     There is a formula with only universal quantifiers such that the enumeration problem
defined by this formula is equivalent to Enum·SAT , which is EnumP-complete. Hence,
we have obtained a complete characterization of the enumeration complexity of first order
formulas with regard to their quantifier alternation. There are interesting tractable fragments
of first order formulas above existential formulas. They correspond to formulas which can be
reduced to the enumeration of models of a 2-CNF formula or a Horn formula. They contain
the problem of generating (maximal) independent sets or dominating sets of a graph.

7.3.4     Polynomial Interpolation
In this section, we consider the interpolation of a multivariate polynomial, a classical problem
from computer algebra, as an enumeration problem. The input polynomial P is given as a
black box: the number of its variables is n, and we can query the black box on n values
v1 , . . . , vn , which returns P (v1 , . . . , vn ). The polynomial may be defined over Z, Q or a finite
field. Interpolating P means computing explicitly P as a set of monomials, by using queries
to compute the value of the polynomial on several points. When analyzing interpolation algo-
rithms from the enumeration point of view, we are interested in their delay and incremental
time.
      While any set of objects can be mapped to the monomials of a polynomial, to obtain
good enumeration algorithms we are interested in polynomials with low degree and which
can be evaluated in polynomial time. Many interesting problems can be embedded in the
monomials of easy to evaluate polynomials:

     • the cycle-covers of a graph are the monomials of the determinant of its adjacency matrix,

     • the spanning trees of a graph are the monomials of the determinant of its Kirchoff
       matrix by the Matrix-Tree theorem (see [Jerrum 2003])

     • the spanning hypertrees of a 3-uniform hypergraph are the monomials of the Pfaffian
       of its Laplacian matrix, as proved in [Masbaum & Vaintrob 2002]

     • the probability of acceptation of n letter words by a probabilistic automaton can be
       encoded into the monomials of a multilinear polynomial obtained as a product of ma-
       trices [Kiefer et al. 2011, Peyronnet et al. 2012]

    To obtain a complexity depending on the number of monomials, interpolation algorithms
for multivariate polynomials need to be randomized. When the complexity depends on the
number of monomials, the interpolation is for sparse polynomials by opposition to interpo-
lation algorithms for dense polynomials, with a complexity depending on the degree and the
number of variables. This corresponds to the notions of input sensitive and output sensitive
7.3. RESTRICTED CLASSES OF PROBLEMS                                                               59


algorithms in enumeration. The first algorithms designed for sparse polynomials are in out-
put polynomial time with a small probability to fail [Ben-Or & Tiwari 1988, Zippel 1990],
while we describe here more recent incremental polynomial time or polynomial delay algo-
rithms [Klivans & Spielman 2001, Strozecki 2010a, Strozecki 2013].
    The decision problem associated to interpolation is called polynomial identity testing
(PIT): given a black box polynomial decide whether it is the zero polynomial. To solve
PIT, we use a probabilistic algorithm, which has a good complexity and an error bound
which can be made exponentially small in polynomial time.

Lemma 7.1 (Schwarz-Zippel [Zippel 1979]). Let P be a non zero polynomial with n variables
of total degree D, let ε > 0, if x1 , . . . , xn are randomly chosen values in a set of integers S of
size Dε then the probability that P (x1 , . . . , xn ) = 0 is bounded by ε.

    The algorithms presented in the following are based on solving PIT in randomized poly-
nomial time, transformations of the considered polynomials by substitution of variables and
interpolation of univariate polynomials in polynomial time.

Polynomial Delay Algorithm Let e be a vector of dimension n with positive integer
coefficients. We denote by Xe the term ni=1 Xiei . A multivariate polynomial is the sum of
                                           Q

monomials, that is disctinct terms multiplied by scalar coefficients. The degree of a monomial
λXe is max1≤i≤n ei , the maximum of the degrees of its variables. The total degree of a
monomial is ni=1 ei , the sum of the degrees of its variables. Let d (respectively D) denote
              P

the degree (respectively the total degree) of the polynomial we consider, that is the maximum
of the degrees (respectively total degrees) of its monomials. We assume for the first algorithm
that the polynomial is multilinear, i.e. d = 1 which implies that D is bounded by n.
    We consider the decision problem Monomial-Factor: an input is a term Xe , that is
a product of variables, and a polynomial P given as a black box; the input is accepted if
Xe divides a monomial of P . This problem corresponds to the extension problem defined in
Chapter 3. Problem Monomial-Factor can be solved in randomized polynomial time for
multilinear polynomials (see [Strozecki 2013]): Substitute a single variable Y to all variables
in Xe , then choose a random assignment of the other variables. The problem has a positive
answer (with high probability) if and only if the degree of the obtained univariate polynomial
in Y is equal to the total degree of Xe .
    From the resolution of Monomial-Factor, we obtain a randomized polynomial delay
interpolation using a flashlight search, with a few technicalities due to the randomization of
the algorithm and the problem of computing the coefficient of each monomial.

Theorem 7.3 ([Strozecki 2013]). Let P be a multilinear black box polynomial with n variables,
and total degree D and let ε > 0. There is an algorithm which computes the set of monomials
of P with probability 1−ε, with a delay in time O(nD2 (n+log(ε−1 ))) and O(nD(n+log(ε−1 )))
black box queries on points of size O(log(D)).

    The support of a monomial is the set of variables which have degree one or more in the
monomial. If the set of supports of monomials of a polynomial is such that, no support is
included into another, then Mon-Factor can be solved in polynomial time by substituting
60     CHAPTER 7. RESTRICTED FORMALISMS AND CLASSIFICATION


zero to all variables not in Xe and solving PIT on the obtained polynomial. We can then
use the same flashlight search as for multilinear polynomial.
Open problem 7.11. Is it possible to solve Mon-Factor for other classes of polynomials,
for instance polynomials given by read twice arithmetic formulas or depth three arithmetic
circuits? Is it possible to design polynomial delay algorithms based on reverse search rather
than on flashlight search?

Polynomial Incremental Time Algorithm In the context of polynomial interpolation,
the problem of finding another solution is equivalent to the problem of finding a single mono-
mial. Indeed, given a polynomial P by Xa black box and an explicit subset S of its X
                                                                                   monomials,
it is easy to simulate queries to P −    M . Then, it is easy to grow S, until P −      M = 0,
                                    M ∈S                                           M ∈S
which can be decided by solving PIT.
    We can relax the condition of supports of monomials not included into another one pre-
sented in the previous section. Let us consider polynomials such that all the supports of
the monomials are different, we say that these polynomials have distinct supports. In this
case, a simple greedy algorithm produces a monomial in polynomial time: from the set of
all variables, remove a variable while the polynomial restricted to this set of variables is non
zero.
    For polynomials with disjoint supports, all monomials can be easily isolated, hence find-
ing a monomial is easy. For general polynomials, there is a clever transformation of a mul-
tivariate polynomial into a univariate polynomial, such that the monomial of lowest degree
in the univariate polynomial comes from a single monomial of the multivariate polynomial
(see [Klivans & Spielman 2001]). The proof relies on a generalized isolation lemma, where
all variables are mapped to a different random power of a single variable.
Theorem 7.4 (Adapted from Theorem 12 of [Klivans & Spielman 2001]). There is a ran-
domized polynomial time algorithm which given a black box access to a non zero polynomial
P with n variables and total degree D and ε > 0 returns a monomial of P with probability
1 − ε in a time polynomial in n, D and with O(n6 D4 ) calls to the black box on integers of
size log( nD
           ε ).

    There is another method for the case of polynomials of small degree. Using a general-
ization of the algorithm solving Mon-Factor over multilinear polynomials, we first find a
maximal power of a linear factor of a monomial. Then, we would like to do the division by
this factor to recursively find a monomial in the quotient. It turns out that this quotient can
be evaluated on values using substitution and univariate interpolation, which is enough for
our algorithm. We obtain an algorihm to find a single monomial, which is better than the
general algorithm when d < 10.
Theorem 7.5 ([Strozecki 2013]). Let P be a polynomial with n variables of degree d and of
total degree D and let ε > 0. There is an algorithm which computes a monomial of P , with
                                                                                   2
probability 1 − ε. It performs O(nDd ) calls to the oracle on points of size log( n εD ).
Open problem 7.12. All incremental polynomial time algorithms rely on the evaluation of
all the monomials found to produce a new one. Is there a class of polynomials for which this
7.3. RESTRICTED CLASSES OF PROBLEMS                                                              61


set can be stored concisely and evaluated efficiently? Is there an alternative algorithm using
only polynomial space?

Lower bounds For any t evaluation points, one may build a polynomial with t monomials
which vanishes at every point (see [Zippel 1990]). Therefore, if we do not have any a priori
bound on t, we must evaluate the polynomial on at least (d + 1)n n-tuples of integers to
decide PIT with a deterministic algorithm. Hence, it is not possible to obtain a deterministic
interpolation algorithm in output polynomial time for a polynomial given as a black box.
Even for an explicit representation of a polynomial, such as arithmetic circuits, finding an
algorithm in P for PIT would be a major achievement with many complexity implications,
see e.g. [Kabanets & Impagliazzo 2004].
    For multilinear polynomials, it is possible to prove that PIT is equivalent to Mon-
Factor [Strozecki 2013], so the fact which yields a randomized polynomial delay algorithm
is also the obstacle to an efficient deterministic enumeration algorithm.
    To rule out the possibility of doing a flashlight search on a class of polynomials, it is enough
to prove a hardness result for Mon-Factor. By encoding a 2-CNF formula into an arith-
metic circuit, which is then homogenized, we prove that Mon-Factor can simulate the prob-
lem of finding an assignment of a 2-CNF formula of minimal Hamming weight. This proves
the NP-hardness of Mon-Factor over a very restricted class of polynomials [Strozecki 2013]:
degree two polynomials represented by a depth four arithmetic circuit.
                                                                                   Chapter 8

              Solving a Practical Enumeration
                                     Problem


Contents
      8.1   Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   63
      8.2   Heuristic Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     64
      8.3   Implementing a Tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       65



     Most concrete enumeration problems are too complex to be solved by an algorithm with
a theoretical guarantee on its delay. In that case, input sensitive algorithms may be ef-
ficient in practice, more than a polynomial delay algorithm, see the example of maximal
cliques [Cazals & Karande 2008]. Instead of trying to obtain the best asymptotic worst case
delay and fail, it becomes worthwile to optimize for the typical size and typical input, while
relaxing the constraints on exhaustivity and redundancy of solutions. In this chapter we
summarize the results we obtained in [Barth et al. 2015]: we present an enumeration prob-
lem from cheminformatic, and an algorithm designed to solve it on small instances rather
than obtaining a good complexity. We show that methods from enumeration can be com-
bined to build an algorithm which performs well in practice, and we try to underline how the
design of a practical algorithm differs from the design of an algorithm with the best possible
delay.


8.1    Model
We study the problem of generating all colored planar maps up to isomorphism
representing possible molecules obtained from a set of elementary starting motifs. A map is
a graph equipped with, for each vertex, a cyclic order on its neighbors. We consider maps,
to retain some geometric properties of the molecule we model. We want to design molecular
cages which can be embbeded on a sphere and are thus planar. When the map is planar,
the orders of each neighborood are given by a planar embedding of the graph. The two main
difficulties of the problem are the sheer number of solutions and the generation of duplicates
because we are interested by maps up to isomorphism.
     The basic chemical elements are modeled by maps called motifs (see Figure 8.1), with a
single center vertex which represents the element and several neighbors which represent its
chemical connections, which are labeled by an element of A. The colors are partitionned into
positive and negative colors: each positive color a in A has a unique complementary negative
64      CHAPTER 8. SOLVING A PRACTICAL ENUMERATION PROBLEM


                 a        a        a       a        a        b        b        a

                      Y next       I           X                 V             J
                      a            a       a        a             a            b

           Figure 8.1: Example of motifs on AM = {Y, I, X, V, J} and A = {a, a, b, b}.

       a     a    I   a   a                                           a   a    I   a     a
 Y     a                  a    Y                                 Y    a   a    I   a     a   Y
       a                  a                                           a   a    I   a     a

Figure 8.2: Example of two maps of motifs based on M = {Y, I}, the right one is saturated.


color denoted by a. Each color represents a different kind of reacting center, which can only
be paired with a reacting center of complementary color. Then the motifs are assembled
to form a map of motifs, as shown in Figure 8.2, by adding an edge between two vertices
from different motifs with complementary colors. A vertex which is connected only to its
center vertex is said to be free. We are interested in saturated maps of motifs, that is maps
with no free vertex, because they may represent real molecules. Note that, in this model,
all geometric informations on the molecule represented by a motif are lost, but the order of
neighbors of a vertex. Hence a map of motifs does not always represent an existing molecule.


8.2        Heuristic Algorithm
To solve such a problem, we decompose it into several simpler steps. Our algorithm works
as follows:

     • Generate very simple maps of motifs with efficient algorithms. Since all graphs have a
       spanning tree, we generate all colored ranked trees built from a given set of motifs. To
       do that, classical CAT algorithms to generate all rooted ranked trees can be adapted so
       that the produced trees respect all degrees and color constraints. This could be further
       improved by generating unrooted trees, by adapting CAT algorithms for this problem
       such as [Li & Ruskey 1999], but it is less clear how to do so.

     • From a tree, with many free vertices, we need to find all possible ways to pair them so
       that the obtained map is planar and saturated. We call the pairing operation a fold. It
       is easy to see that the order in which vertices are paired is irrelevant. Using a dynamic
       program, the possibility for a fold to contain a given pairing is computed in quadratic
       time in the number of vertices. Then, using this information, a flashlight search gives
       all solutions with linear delay.

     • Detect whether the generated map is isomorphic to one generated before, by compar-
       ing its signature to the signatures of the previous maps stored in a set data structure
8.3. IMPLEMENTING A TOOL                                                                       65


      (hash map or AVL in our implementation). If the map is new, compute several in-
      dices useful for the chemist. We consider the minimum sparsity, to represent struc-
      tural soundness of the molecule, which can be computed in polynomial time on planar
      graphs [Park & Phillips 1993]. The equivalence classes of the vertices help to under-
      stand the symmetries and the roundness of the molecule. We are also interested in the
      sizes of the faces of the map, which can be used as entrance inside the molecule when
      used as a cage.
    The problem with this three steps approach is that many useless intermediate results are
generated, such as trees which cannot be folded into a molecular map. Moreover, the same
map has many different spanning trees and is thus generated by folding each of these different
trees obtained at step one. While the three steps have very efficient algorithms, with strong
theoretical guarantees on their complexity, their combination solves our problem, but has no
bound on its delay nor its total time.
    One solution to this problem is to avoid to generate trees which cannot be folded. A
necessary condition for a map of motifs to be foldable into a saturated map is to have as
many free vertices of color a ∈ A as vertices of color ā. Such a map is called an almost
foldable map. To a map of motifs M , we associate the statistic vector CM , which counts the
number of vertices of each type (negative colors are counted negatively). An almost foldable
map has an all zero vector of statistics. It is possible to compute by dynamic programming a
predicate A(CT , n), which is true if and only if there is a tree T of size n and statistic vector
CT . Using this predicate, the algorithm generating all trees can be turned into an algorithm
of the same complexity generating all almost foldable trees. This makes the algorithm run
faster by several orders of magnitude, since the cost of computing A, while large, is done once
in the preprocessing.
    The second problem is that we generate graphs with bad indices which may not be
interesting for the chemist, especially because the maps generated are in too large number
to be inspected manually. The trouble here is that indices of interest may change (and have
changed during our work) depending on the application, the kind of instances or even our
comprehension of the problem. Moreover, there is no clear cut off λ such that we can say, we
want to generate all maps with a minimum sparsity larger than λ. We were not able to solve
this problem, but a good approach, described in Chapter 9, is to enumerate only a subset of
the solutions, which covers as best as possible the set of all solutions.
    Our work leaves many theoretical questions open.
Open problem 8.1. Can we prove that our algorithm is efficient when seen as an output
sensitive algorithm, i.e. is its total time bounded by a polynomial (or even linear) in the
maximal number of generated solutions.
   Is the problem in OutputP? Representation of planar maps by trees [Aleardi et al. 2008]
may be helpful to obtain a better algorithm.


8.3     Implementing a Tool
The aim of this work was to produce a usable tool for chemists, efficient enough to gen-
erate molecular maps with ten to twenty motifs. The source code is available on https://
66       CHAPTER 8. SOLVING A PRACTICAL ENUMERATION PROBLEM


yann-strozecki.github.io/textesmaths.html and results are available on http://kekule.
prism.uvsq.fr/. Figure 8.3 shows how these results are presented to the user. These re-
sults have been used by our colleague Olivier David, to synthesize several new molecules, as
described in [Barth et al. 2020], see Figure 8.4 for the interpretation of a molecular map as a
real molecule.
    To make our tool useful, it has been quite heavily optimized and tuned. Indeed, generating
all molecular maps of size 12 from three different motifs of degree three already takes 50
seconds, because it generates about 50 million trees and 10 million saturated maps, to get
only 4476 distinct maps. We present three important choices made to obtain an efficient
algorithm, which are common in practice but may not be natural for theoreticians.
     1. Forget exhaustiveness. We restrict the set of enumerated solutions to decrease their
        number and to get more efficient enumeration algorithms. However, the enumeration
        is not exhaustive anymore and we may skip interesting solutions. To do that, instead
        of generating trees in the first phase, we generate either paths or cycles, that are folded
        like the trees in the second phase. It implies that we get only maps which have either
        a Hamiltonian path or a Hamiltonian cycle. Since small planar graphs have often
        such subgraphs [Holton & McKay 1988, Aldred et al. 1999] it is a mild restriction and
        it implies that the generated maps are connected or biconnected, which are relevant
        properties for a molecule. Generating paths instead of trees in the previous example
        yields 4463 distinct maps instead of 4476, but the generation time drops to less than a
        second.
     2. Reconsider asymptotic complexity. The main practical bottleneck of our algo-
        rithm, taking more than 90 percent of the time, is the computation of the signa-
        ture of each molecular map we obtain, to decide whether it has already been gen-
        erated. There is a theoretical linear time algorithm to compute the signature of a
        map [Hopcroft & Wong 1974] and an almost linear time algorithm which is imple-
        mentable [Hopcroft & Tarjan 1973]. However, we deal with very small maps in our
        work (size at most 40), hence the complex linear time algorithms are less efficient than
        a simpler quadratic time algorithm: from each edge of the map, do a traversal following
        the order of the edges, and keep the smallest traversal (sequence of vertices encountered)
        as a signature.
     3. Adapt the algorithm to the input. Worst case complexity is not always relevant
        since the typical input may be quite different from the worst one. In our algorithm,
        we know that many redundant solutions are generated, hence when we compute a
        signature, most of the time it is already present. Therefore, we want to be able to
        decide quickly if a solution is redundant, but we have a lot of time budget for each new
        solution found. During the internship of Ruben Staub [Staub 2016], we proposed an
        alternative signature: the set of all traversals instead of the minimal one. When a map
        distinct from the previously generated is found, all traversals are computed and stored.
        Each time a map is generated, a single traversal is computed, which is enough to find
        whether the map has already been generated. This requires more space, but speed-ups
        our algorithm by a factor 10 in some cases.
8.3. IMPLEMENTING A TOOL                                                                      67




  Figure 8.3: Presentation of the results for a set of three motifs and a target size of 9.




                      V1        V2

                  Y     V1    V2     Y

                      V1        V2


        Figure 8.4: A molecule derived from a map generated by our algorithm.
                                                                              Chapter 9

                 New Horizons for Enumeration


Contents
      9.1   Succinct Representation of the Solution Space . . . . . . . . . . . . .      70
      9.2   Approximate Representation of the Solution Space . . . . . . . . . .         72



     There are several popular areas of complexity which have been brought to enumeration
and that we have not covered. For instance, it is possible to define the FPT versions of the
classes presented in this thesis. Enumeration of vertex covers or weighted assignments of satis-
fiability problems admit enumeration algorithms with an FPT delay [Creignou & Vollmer 2015,
Creignou et al. 2017b]. Some complexity results presented here have been adapted to FPT
classes [Meier 2020]. A more restrictive way of defining kernelization for enumeration has
been proposed in [Golovach et al. 2021]. A fully polynomial enumeration kernel character-
izes problems solvable in total time bounded by a polynomial in the input times a function of
the parameter, while a polynomial-delay enumeration kernel charaterizes problems solvable
in FPT delay. Using these definitions, lower and upper bounds for several parametrizations
of the problem of enumerating maximal (minimal) matching cuts are proved.
     In dynamic problems, the input is changed incrementally and some object is maintained,
for instance the maximal matching of a graph [Baswana et al. 2015]. This idea is a good fit for
query answering, where the input is huge and the cost of preprocessing is proportional to the
input but usually not the enumeration phase. Several enumeration algorithms from databases
have been adapted to allow for updates of the input. It means that after modifying the input,
e.g. adding or removing an edge of a graph, or changing the color of a node, the enumeration
can be restarted without doing another preprocessing (or a very short one). For instance,
enumerating the satisfying assignments of MSO formulas over trees can be done with a delay
linear in the size of each solution and update in logarithmic time [Amarilli et al. 2019].
     Enumeration problems are especially subject to the problem of combinatorial explosion
because even a constant delay algorithm cannot escape the cost of going through the whole
solution space, which is often too large. Moreover, even if a modern computer equipped with
a good algorithm can easily generate thousands of billions of spanning trees or shortest paths,
no user will ever be able to make sense of such amount of data. Hence, we should find ways
to generate fewer solutions while still capturing the essence of the set of solutions. Following
ideas of several enumeration specialists (in particular several presentations by Takeaki Uno),
we present promising directions, which have been explored in the last years. The main idea
is, instead of listing the whole set of solutions, to produce a compressed version of this set,
of much smaller size but still useful.
70                        CHAPTER 9. NEW HORIZONS FOR ENUMERATION


9.1     Succinct Representation of the Solution Space
Usually, when confronted to an enumeration problem, one first tries to find a representation
of the set of solutions which minimizes its size while allowing efficient computation on it like
finding its size, its maximum, some statistic on its elements . . . It should be some middle
ground between the set of solutions, which is easy to exploit but often too large to compute
and store and the instance which represents the set of solution very succinctly but is not
directly useful for computation.
     An extreme case consists in problems which admit a polynomial time sampling algorithm
or which are in QueryP. In that case, the input itself (or rather the solution generator) is a
good representation of the set of solutions, since they can all be accessed easily and statistical
properties of the set of solutions can easily be computed.
     Another example of a large set represented in a succinct way is given by algebra: a vector
space is represented by a finite basis, a group by a presentation and a matroid by its funda-
mental cycles. . . In all these cases, it is possible to decompress efficiently the representation,
that is to enumerate the elements of these objects from the succinct representation in incre-
mental polynomial time. In Chapter 7, we have presented the problem of computing closure
under set operators (see [Mary & Strozecki 2019]), which also asks to produce from a basis
all elements of a set system closed under several operations.
     Sometimes, partial solutions can be trivially extended into many solutions. For in-
stance, models of existential F O formulas [Durand & Strozecki 2011] or of k-DNF formu-
las [Capelli & Strozecki 2021a] are obtained by extending a partial model of constant size (a
fixed number of variables are set) with all possible values of the remaining variables using
Gray code enumeration. In this case, instead of exhaustively generating models, it is more
efficient to generate only the partial models, as a concise representation of the set of models.
This approach is relevant because the sets of solutions represented by each partial model
are disjoint. A similar but more general representation of set of models is proposed and
enumerated for Horn formulas [Wild 2012].

Decomposition The two most simple operations on sets are the Cartesian product and
the union and we have seen that they let enumeration classes stable in Chapter 3. Hence,
it is interesting to decompose a set of solutions thanks to these two operations. It may
come naturally: the maximal cliques of a graph are the union of the maximal cliques of its
connected components and the spanning forests of a graph are the Cartesian product of the
spanning forests of its connected components. A constant delay algorithm to list spanning
trees using a more involved Cartesian product decomposition is given in [Conte et al. 2018]
as well as several examples of Cartesian decomposition for enumeration.
    In algebraic complexity, Cartesian product and union correspond to product and sum:
instead of representing a multivariate polynomial explicitly by a list of monomials, it can
be represented by an arithmetic circuit with sum and product gates. However, this rep-
resentation is hard to exploit: deciding whether the represented polynomial is zero is not
believed to be in P, deciding whether a monomial has a zero coefficient is ♯P-hard and count-
ing monomials is even harder, see [Fournier et al. 2015]. A more tractable representation, for
which most of the previous problems are simple, is to decompose a polynomial into product
9.1. SUCCINCT REPRESENTATION OF THE SOLUTION SPACE                                         71


of small polynomials. We have investigated with several coauthors the task of factoring the
sparse representation of a polynomial [Chattopadhyay et al. 2021]. Interestingly, this does
not always yield a smaller representation since X k+1 − 1 = (X − 1) ki=0 X i .
                                                                      P

    The previous decompositions are reminiscent of knowledge compilation [Darwiche & Marquis 2002],
where a boolean function is represented by a succinct logical circuit (an OBDD or a DNNF).
While the cost of computing the representation may be large, after compilation all queries
over the original function can be evaluated efficiently over the representation. Amarilli et
al. [Amarilli et al. 2017] give a strong polynomial delay algorithm to enumerate the models
of d-DNNF circuits used in knowledge compilation. They relate it to set circuits, which can
be seen as way of generating a set of solutions by using only Cartesian products and disjoint
unions of ground solutions. Several known enumeration problems such as the enumeration of
the models of an MSO formula on a structure of bounded tree-width can then be reduced to
the enumeration of the models of a d-DNNF. Set circuit is also essentially the same notion
as factorised representation of a database [Olteanu & Závodnỳ 2012], used to succintly rep-
resent databases and query results. The methods of enumerating objects by first reducing
the instance to compact boolean circuits is also used to obtain good practical algorithms, for
instance to generate interval subgraphs [Kawahara et al. 2019].
Open problem 9.1. What enumeration problem can we capture using circuits of Cartesian
products and general unions? Is it possible to generalize Cartesian product by some form of
join without losing tractability?
Open problem 9.2. What decomposition of solution sets can be useful in enumeration out-
side of union and Cartesian product?

Equivalence Relation Another way to reduce the solution space is to define an equivalence
relation, to identifiate solutions which are too similar. Then, only one representative per
equivalence class is enumerated. Representatives are often harder to enumerate, a good
example is the enumeration of classes of trees or graphs up to isomorphism, see Chapter 8
of [Ruskey 2003] and the problem presented in Chapter 8.
    For problems whose solutions can be represented by AND/OR graphs (representing dy-
namic programs), there is a natural notion of equivalence for which equivalence classes can be
generated with polynomial delay [Wang et al. 2020], with interesting applications in bioin-
formatics.
    With Maël Guiraud and Dominique Barth, we have designed algorithms to find schedul-
ings of periodic messages with a small latency [Barth et al. 2021, Guiraud 2021]. As often
with optimization problems, we enumerate exhaustively all solutions to find the best one.
Therefore, to make our algorithms interesting both theoretically and practically, the set of
considered schedulings must be reduced as much as possible. We use two equivalence relations
and a partial order to filter the set of schedulings:

   • Compact representation: an equivalence class, which takes into account the combina-
     torial structure of a scheduling but abstracts away the precise timings.

   • Canonical representation: an equivalence class, to abstract out the symmetries of a
     scheduling.
72                       CHAPTER 9. NEW HORIZONS FOR ENUMERATION


     • Minimal solutions: the latency of all messages must be locally minimal, otherwise the
       scheduling is dominated and is not useful for computing an optimum.


9.2      Approximate Representation of the Solution Space
In the previous section we have explored the idea of compressing the set of solutions exactly.
But we could also compress it with loss, that is producing a representation which cannot be
used to recover all solutions but only to approximate them.
    This idea has been used to replace the Pareto’s frontier of a problem by a much smaller
number of approximate Pareto optimal points [Papadimitriou & Yannakakis 2000]. The lossy
compression approach is also reminiscent of sketches used to obtain a succinct representa-
tion of a very large stream, while maintaining some property with high probability. For
instance, using a logarithmic space, the number of distinct elements in a stream can be eval-
uated [Durand & Flajolet 2003], or with a sublinear space the minimum spanning tree or
maximal matching can be approximated [McGregor 2014].


Over-approximation Instead of approximating each solution, we may approximate the
set of solutions by a larger set, outputting elements which are not far from being solutions.
For the problem of enumerating minimal sets of size at most k satisfying monotone properties
such as minimal vertex covers, minimal dominating sets in bounded degree graphs, minimal
feedback vertex set . . . , efficient algorithms exist but they produce solutions of weight up to
ck for a constant c [Kobayashi et al. 2020].
    Query enumeration over a bounded degree structure can be done in constant delay and
linear preprocessing [Durand & Grandjean 2007]. To speed-up the preprocessing, since the
database cannot be read entirely anymore, a randomized algorithm must be used, as in
property testing. There is a constant delay algorithm with polylogarithmic preprocessing
instead of linear if tuples not far from a solution for the edit distance are allowed in the
enumeration [Adler & Fahey 2021]. If the proportion of tuples that are answers to the query
is sufficiently large, then all answers will be enumerated, by interleaving randomly sampled
tuples. The idea of interleaving solutions, when there is an efficient algorithm to enumerate
all solutions and that almost all potential solutions are indeed solutions has already been
proposed by Leslie Ann Goldberg in a deterministic setting. She proved that all classes
of graphs defined by almost sure first order property can be enumerated with polynomial
delay [Goldberg 1991].
    Many enumeration problems ask to enumerate minimal or maximal objects, such as max-
imal cliques or minimal hitting sets, to avoid less useful solutions. However, these problems
are much harder and are sometimes solved by generating all non extremal objects. For
instance, to generate minimal hitting set, the most efficient algorithms are based on the gen-
eration of all hitting sets, using pruning rules to avoid as most non minimal hitting set as
possible [Murakami & Uno 2014].
    Finally, a more restricted way to do an over-approximation is to allow repetitions of a
solution instead of allowing elements which are not solutions. It is our approach when turning
a random generator into an exhaustive enumeration algorithm using only polynomial space,
9.2. APPROXIMATE REPRESENTATION OF THE SOLUTION SPACE                                       73


as explained in Chapter 4.

Under-approximation In the previous section, the approximation is done by outputting
more elements than solutions, which goes against the idea of reducing the solution space
and may thus not be useful in practice. To approximate a set of solutions A(x), we can use
some subset S such that |S| is within some factor of |A(x)|. I am not aware of any result
of this kind, however some algorithms use the property that a large subset of solutions is
easy to enumerate to have enough time to enumerate the rest. Such algorithms are used
for the enumeration of clause sequences of a k-CNF formula [Bérczi et al. 2021] and for the
enumeration of the models of a k-DNF formula [Capelli & Strozecki 2021a].
Open problem 9.3. Design a constant factor under-approximation in incremental polyno-
mial time for a non artificial enumeration problem not known to be in IncP.
    When designing an under-approximation, the choice of solutions in the approximation is
critical. We would like them to be more interesting than the ones not enumerated. When
there is a relevant order on solutions, enumerating in this order, as in Chapter 6, can be seen
as a way to do meaningful under-approximation.
    To be more general, we could allow both to enumerate elements which are not solutions
and to miss some solutions. Let S be the set enumerated to approximate the solution set
A(x). To control the quality of the approximation, we say that S is an ε-approximation if
|S△A(x)| ≤ ε|A(x)|. This definition is similar to the notion of approximation in knowledge
compilation, for which several lower bounds are known [de Colnet & Mengel 2020].

Diversity The approximation based on the number of solutions may not be relevant: what
if we get a large family of similar solutions but miss all the diversity of the solution set?
     Most of the time, there is no notion of quality over the solutions or this notion is too
vague to formalize. Think about a system recommanding routes between two locations, each
user may have specific desires such as only using streets she already knows or constraints too
informal to be implemented such as prefering roads with a beautiful scenery. Hence, such
a system should propose solutions as diverse as possible, to maximize the chance that one
fulfills the unknown constraints of each user.
     To this aim, we could equip the solutions with some distance and try to cover them all
by as few of them as possible. Given an instance x of a problem Enum·A and an integer
d, we define a d-cover of A(x) as S ⊆ A(x) such that for all solutions of A(x), there is a
solution in S at distance at most d. An enumeration problem is d-approximable in polynomial
time when S can be generated in total time polynomial in the size of the smallest d-cover of
A(x). Allowing randomization to be able to sample the solutions could be important in this
context, since we have much less time than solutions. A d-approximation algorithm could
be extremely useful for a user-interactive system, where the user sets the value d, obtains
first a coarse representation of the solutions and can then zoom on an interesting solution
by restricting the problem around it and asking for an approximation with a smaller d. The
notion of d-approximability is designed so that any solution is close to some solution in the
cover. Hence, among the cover, there must be many solutions which are quite different, which
hopefully makes such a cover useful in practice.
74                       CHAPTER 9. NEW HORIZONS FOR ENUMERATION




Figure 9.1: Solutions on a circle and around its center. A subset of solutions (here in red)
maximising diversity always lies on the circle, missing solutions at the center.


Open problem 9.4. Give a d-approximation algorithm for a problem with a structured set of
solutions, such as the minimal spanning trees or the shortest paths, for any relevant distance
over solutions.

Open problem 9.5. Assume we have a supergraph of solutions, and the distance over solu-
tions is related to the distance in the supergraph. What random walk on the supergraph and
which property of the supergraph yield a d-approximation? Can we use the same approach
with flashlight search?

    A similar approach has been recently proposed through the notion of diversity, which is
the sum of the Hamming distances of pairs of elements in a set. A family of hard problems,
such as vertex cover, admit FPT algorithms for producing a set of solutions of high enough
diversity [Baste et al. 2020]. The method converts any tree-decomposition based dynamic
programming algorithm into a dynamic programming algorithm for the same problem with
an additional diversity constraint. However, the method is exponential in the number of
produced solutions in addition to the treewidth of the graph. To find r maximally diverse
spanning trees, there is a polynomial time algorithm in r [Hanaka et al. 2021], which allows
to produce a large set of diverse solutions.
    Diversity seems to well capture the notion of producing different solutions, however it
does not garantee to cover well the set of solutions, see Figure 9.1. We would like to relate
large set of diverse solutions to the notion of d-approximability. To that aim, it is interesting
to replace the sum of the distances between solutions by the minimum of the distances in the
definition of diversity.

Open problem 9.6. Generate r spanning trees, while maximising their minimal Hamming
distances, in time polynomial in r.
                                                              Bibliography
[Adler & Fahey 2021] Isolde Adler and Polly Fahey. Towards Approximate Query Enumera-
       tion with Sublinear Preprocessing Time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.06240, 2021. (Cited
       on page 72.)

[Agrawal et al. 1994] Rakesh Agrawal, Ramakrishnan Srikantet al. Fast algorithms for min-
      ing association rules. In Proc. 20th int. conf. very large data bases, VLDB, volume
      1215, pages 487–499, 1994. (Cited on page 2.)

[Aho & Hopcroft 1974] Alfred V Aho and John E Hopcroft. The design and analysis of
      computer algorithms. Pearson Education India, 1974. (Cited on pages 8 and 10.)

[Aldred et al. 1999] Robert EL Aldred, Sheng Bau, Derek A Holton and Brendan D McKay.
       Cycles through 23 vertices in 3-connected cubic planar graphs. Graphs and Combina-
       torics, vol. 15, no. 4, pages 373–376, 1999. (Cited on page 66.)

[Aleardi et al. 2008] Luca Castelli Aleardi, Olivier Devillers and Gilles Schaeffer. Succinct
       representations of planar maps. Theor. Comput. Sci., vol. 408, no. 2-3, pages 174–187,
       2008. (Cited on page 65.)

[Amarilli et al. 2017] Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Louis Jachiet and Stefan Mengel. A
       Circuit-Based Approach to Efficient Enumeration. In 44th International Colloquium
       on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2017, July 10-14, 2017, Warsaw,
       Poland, pages 111:1–111:15, 2017. (Cited on pages 33, 39 and 71.)

[Amarilli et al. 2019] Antoine Amarilli, Pierre Bourhis, Stefan Mengel and Matthias Niew-
       erth. Enumeration on Trees with Tractable Combined Complexity and Efficient Up-
       dates. In Proceedings of the 38th ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGAI Symposium on
       Principles of Database Systems, pages 89–103. ACM, 2019. (Cited on page 69.)

[Andrade et al. 2016] Ricardo Andrade, Martin Wannagat, Cecilia C Klein, Vicente Acuña,
      Alberto Marchetti-Spaccamela, Paulo V Milreu, Leen Stougie and Marie-France Sagot.
      Enumeration of minimal stoichiometric precursor sets in metabolic networks. Algo-
      rithms for Molecular Biology, vol. 11, no. 1, page 25, 2016. (Cited on page 3.)

[Avis & Fukuda 1996] D. Avis and K. Fukuda. Reverse search for enumeration. Discrete
       Applied Mathematics, vol. 65, no. 1, pages 21–46, 1996. (Cited on pages 4, 18, 20, 25
       and 26.)

[Bagan et al. 2007] Guillaume Bagan, Arnaud Durand and Etienne Grandjean. On acyclic
      conjunctive queries and constant delay enumeration. In International Workshop on
      Computer Science Logic, pages 208–222. Springer, 2007. (Cited on pages 48 and 57.)

[Bagan et al. 2008] Guillaume Bagan, Arnaud Durand, Etienne Grandjean and Frédéric
      Olive. Computing the jth solution of a first-order query. RAIRO-Theoretical In-
      formatics and Applications, vol. 42, no. 1, pages 147–164, 2008. (Cited on page 45.)
76                                                                    BIBLIOGRAPHY


[Bagan 2006] Guillaume Bagan. MSO Queries on Tree Decomposable Structures Are Com-
      putable with Linear Delay. In Zoltán Ésik, editor, Computer Science Logic, 20th
      International Workshop, CSL 2006, 15th Annual Conference of the EACSL, Szeged,
      Hungary, September 25-29, 2006, Proceedings, volume 4207 of Lecture Notes in Com-
      puter Science, pages 167–181. Springer, 2006. (Cited on page 57.)

[Bagan 2009] Guillaume Bagan. Algorithms and complexity of enumeration problems for the
      evaluation of logical queries. PhD thesis, University of Caen Normandy, France, 2009.
      (Cited on pages 1, 8, 9, 10, 22, 44 and 57.)

[Baker & Pixley 1975] Kirby A Baker and Alden F Pixley. Polynomial interpolation and the
       Chinese remainder theorem for algebraic systems. Mathematische Zeitschrift, vol. 143,
       no. 2, pages 165–174, 1975. (Cited on page 54.)

[Barth et al. 2015] Dominique Barth, Olivier David, Franck Quessette, Vincent Reinhard,
       Yann Strozecki and Sandrine Vial. Efficient Generation of Stable Planar Cages for
       Chemistry. In International Symposium on Experimental Algorithms, pages 235–246.
       Springer International Publishing, 2015. (Cited on pages 3 and 63.)

[Barth et al. 2020] Dominique Barth, Olivier R.P. David, Franck Quessette, Yann Strozecki
       and Sandrine Vial. In silico discovery of complex molecular containers. 2020. (Cited
       on page 66.)

[Barth et al. 2021] Dominique Barth, Maël Guiraud and Yann Strozecki. Deterministic
       scheduling of periodic messages for cloud ran. 2021. (Cited on page 71.)

[Baste et al. 2020] Julien Baste, Michael R. Fellows, Lars Jaffke, Tomás Masarík, Mateus
       de Oliveira Oliveira, Geevarghese Philip and Frances A. Rosamond. Diversity of
       Solutions: An Exploration Through the Lens of Fixed-Parameter Tractability Theory.
       In Christian Bessiere, editor, Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint
       Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2020, pages 1119–1125. ijcai.org, 2020.
       (Cited on page 74.)

[Baswana et al. 2015] Surender Baswana, Manoj Gupta and Sandeep Sen. Fully Dynamic
      Maximal Matching in O(log(n) Update Time. SIAM Journal on Computing, vol. 44,
      no. 1, pages 88–113, 2015. (Cited on page 69.)

[Bazgan et al. 2015] Cristina Bazgan, Florian Jamain and Daniel Vanderpooten. Approxi-
      mate Pareto sets of minimal size for multi-objective optimization problems. Operations
      Research Letters, vol. 43, no. 1, pages 1–6, 2015. (Cited on page 3.)

[Ben-Or & Tiwari 1988] Michael Ben-Or and Prasoon Tiwari. A deterministic algorithm for
      sparse multivariate polynomial interpolation. In Proceedings of the twentieth annual
      ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 301–309, 1988. (Cited on page 59.)

[Bérczi et al. 2021] Kristóf Bérczi, Endre Boros, Ondřej Čepek, Khaled Elbassioni, Petr
        Kučera and Kazuhisa Makino. Generating clause sequences of a CNF formula. The-
        oretical Computer Science, vol. 856, pages 68–74, 2021. (Cited on pages 15 and 73.)
BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                             77


[Berkholz et al. 2020] Christoph Berkholz, Fabian Gerhardt and Nicole Schweikardt. Con-
       stant delay enumeration for conjunctive queries: a tutorial. ACM SIGLOG News,
       vol. 7, no. 1, pages 4–33, 2020. (Cited on page 57.)

[Blind et al. 2020] Sarah Blind, Nadia Creignou and Frédéric Olive. Locally definable vertex
       set properties are efficiently enumerable. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 2020. (Cited
       on page 33.)

[Böhler et al. 2005] Elmar Böhler, Steffen Reith, Henning Schnoor and Heribert Vollmer.
       Bases for Boolean co-clones. Information Processing Letters, vol. 96, no. 2, pages
       59–66, 2005. (Cited on page 54.)

[Böhmová et al. 2018] Kateřina Böhmová, Luca Häfliger, Matúš Mihalák, Tobias Pröger,
      Gustavo Sacomoto and Marie-France Sagot. Computing and listing st-paths in public
      transportation networks. Theory of Computing Systems, vol. 62, no. 3, pages 600–621,
      2018. (Cited on page 3.)

[Bonamy et al. 2019] Marthe Bonamy, Oscar Defrain, Marc Heinrich and Jean-Florent Ray-
      mond. Enumerating Minimal Dominating Sets in Triangle-Free Graphs. In 36th In-
      ternational Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS 2019).
      Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2019. (Cited on page 23.)

[Bonamy et al. 2020] Marthe Bonamy, Oscar Defrain, Marc Heinrich, Michał Pilipczuk and
      Jean-Florent Raymond. Enumerating minimal dominating sets in Kt-free graphs and
      variants. ACM Transactions on Algorithms (TALG), vol. 16, no. 3, pages 1–23, 2020.
      (Cited on page 16.)

[Boros et al. 1998] Endre Boros, Vladimir Gurvich and Peter L Hammer. Dual subimplicants
       of positive Boolean functions. Optimization Methods and Software, vol. 10, no. 2,
       pages 147–156, 1998. (Cited on page 49.)

[Boros et al. 2009] Endre Boros, Khaled Elbassioni, Vladimir Gurvich and Kazuhisa Makino.
       Generating vertices of polyhedra and related problems of monotone generation. Pro-
       ceedings of the Centre de Recherches Mathématiques at the Université de Montréal,
       special issue on Polyhedral Computation (CRM Proceedings and Lecture Notes),
       vol. 49, pages 15–43, 2009. (Cited on page 48.)

[Brault-Baron 2013] Johann Brault-Baron. De la pertinence de l’énumération: complexité en
       logiques propositionnelle et du premier ordre. PhD thesis, 2013. (Cited on pages 1, 9
       and 57.)

[Bron & Kerbosch 1973] Coen Bron and Joep Kerbosch. Algorithm 457: finding all cliques
       of an undirected graph. Communications of the ACM, vol. 16, no. 9, pages 575–577,
       1973. (Cited on pages 13 and 49.)

[Bulatov et al. 2012] Andrei A Bulatov, Víctor Dalmau, Martin Grohe and Dániel Marx.
       Enumerating homomorphisms. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, vol. 78,
       no. 2, pages 638–650, 2012. (Cited on pages 4 and 53.)
78                                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY


[Bulatov et al. 2016] Andrei Bulatov, Marcin Kozik, Peter Mayr and Markus Steindl. The
       subpower membership problem for semigroups. International Journal of Algebra and
       Computation, vol. 26, no. 07, pages 1435–1451, 2016. (Cited on page 55.)

[Bulatov 2017] Andrei A Bulatov. A dichotomy theorem for nonuniform CSPs. In 2017
       IEEE 58th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages
       319–330. IEEE, 2017. (Cited on pages 52 and 53.)

[Cao 2020] Yixin Cao.      Enumerating maximal induced subgraphs.         arXiv preprint
       arXiv:2004.09885, 2020. (Cited on pages 20 and 50.)

[Capelli & Strozecki 2019] Florent Capelli and Yann Strozecki. Incremental delay enumera-
       tion: Space and time. Discrete Applied Mathematics, vol. 268, pages 179–190, 2019.
       (Cited on pages 1, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 28, 30 and 40.)

[Capelli & Strozecki 2021a] Florent Capelli and Yann Strozecki. Enumerating models of DNF
       faster: Breaking the dependency on the formula size. Discrete Applied Mathematics,
       vol. 303, pages 203–215, 2021. Combined Special Issue: 1) 17th Cologne–Twente
       Workshop on Graphs and Combinatorial Optimization (CTW 2019); Guest edited by
       Johann Hurink, Bodo Manthey 2) WEPA 2018 (Second Workshop on Enumeration
       Problems and Applications); Guest edited by Takeaki Uno, Andrea Marino. (Cited
       on pages 1, 34, 35, 38, 48, 58, 70 and 73.)

[Capelli & Strozecki 2021b] Florent Capelli and Yann Strozecki. Regularizing enumeration
       delay with polynomial memory. 2021. (Cited on pages 28, 29, 31, 32, 34, 35 and 48.)

[Carmeli & Kröll 2019] Nofar Carmeli and Markus Kröll. On the Enumeration Complexity of
      Unions of Conjunctive Queries. In Proceedings of the 38th ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-
      SIGAI Symposium on Principles of Database Systems, PODS 2019, Amsterdam, The
      Netherlands, June 30 - July 5, 2019., pages 134–148, 2019. (Cited on page 16.)

[Carmeli et al. 2020] Nofar Carmeli, Shai Zeevi, Christoph Berkholz, Benny Kimelfeld and
      Nicole Schweikardt. Answering (Unions of ) Conjunctive Queries using Random Ac-
      cess and Random-Order Enumeration. In Proceedings of the 39th ACM SIGMOD-
      SIGACT-SIGAI Symposium on Principles of Database Systems, pages 393–409, 2020.
      (Cited on page 45.)

[Carmeli et al. 2021] Nofar Carmeli, Nikolaos Tziavelis, Wolfgang Gatterbauer, Benny
      Kimelfeld and Mirek Riedewald. Tractable Orders for Direct Access to Ranked An-
      swers of Conjunctive Queries. In Proceedings of the 40th ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-
      SIGAI Symposium on Principles of Database Systems, pages 325–341, 2021. (Cited
      on page 45.)

[Casel et al. 2019a] Katrin Casel, Henning Fernau, Mehdi Khosravian Ghadikolaei, Jérôme
       Monnot and Florian Sikora. Extension of Some Edge Graph Problems: Standard and
       Parameterized Complexity. In Fundamentals of Computation Theory - 22nd Interna-
       tional Symposium, FCT 2019, Copenhagen, Denmark, August 12-14, 2019, Proceed-
       ings, pages 185–200, 2019. (Cited on page 49.)
BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                             79


[Casel et al. 2019b] Katrin Casel, Henning Fernau, Mehdi Khosravian Ghadikolaei, Jérôme
       Monnot and Florian Sikora. Extension of Vertex Cover and Independent Set in Some
       Classes of Graphs. In Algorithms and Complexity - 11th International Conference,
       CIAC 2019, Rome, Italy, May 27-29, 2019, Proceedings, pages 124–136, 2019. (Cited
       on page 49.)

[Cazals & Karande 2008] Frédéric Cazals and Chinmay Karande. A note on the problem of
       reporting maximal cliques. Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 407, no. 1-3, pages
       564–568, 2008. (Cited on page 63.)

[Chan 1996] Timothy M Chan. Optimal output-sensitive convex hull algorithms in two and
      three dimensions. Discrete & Computational Geometry, vol. 16, no. 4, pages 361–368,
      1996. (Cited on page 3.)

[Chattopadhyay et al. 2021] Arkadev Chattopadhyay, Bruno Grenet, Pascal Koiran, Natacha
       Portier and Yann Strozecki. Computing the multilinear factors of lacunary polynomials
       without heights. Journal of Symbolic Computation, vol. 104, pages 183–206, 2021.
       (Cited on page 71.)

[Cohen et al. 2008] Sara Cohen, Benny Kimelfeld and Yehoshua Sagiv. Generating all maxi-
      mal induced subgraphs for hereditary and connected-hereditary graph properties. Jour-
      nal of Computer and System Sciences, vol. 74, no. 7, pages 1147–1159, 2008. (Cited
      on pages 4 and 50.)

[Conte & Tomita 2021] Alessio Conte and Etsuji Tomita. Overall and Delay Complexity of
       the CLIQUES and Bron-Kerbosch Algorithms. In WALCOM: Algorithms and Com-
       putation: 15th International Conference and Workshops, WALCOM 2021, Yangon,
       Myanmar, February 28–March 2, 2021, Proceedings 15, pages 195–207. Springer In-
       ternational Publishing, 2021. (Cited on page 49.)

[Conte & Uno 2019] Alessio Conte and Takeaki Uno. New polynomial delay bounds for max-
       imal subgraph enumeration by proximity search. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual
       ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 1179–1190. ACM, 2019.
       (Cited on pages 4 and 20.)

[Conte et al. 2016] Alessio Conte, Roberto Grossi, Andrea Marino and Luca Versari.
       Sublinear-Space Bounded-Delay Enumeration for Massive Network Analytics: Max-
       imal Cliques. In 43rd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Pro-
       gramming, ICALP 2016, July 11-15, 2016, Rome, Italy, pages 148:1–148:15, 2016.
       (Cited on pages 25 and 49.)

[Conte et al. 2018] Alessio Conte, Roberto Grossi, Andrea Marino, Romeo Rizzi and Luca
       Versari. Listing Subgraphs by Cartesian Decomposition. In Igor Potapov, Paul Spirakis
       and James Worrell, editors, 43rd International Symposium on Mathematical Founda-
       tions of Computer Science (MFCS 2018), volume 117 of Leibniz International Pro-
       ceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 84:1–84:16, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2018. Schloss
       Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik. (Cited on page 70.)
80                                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY


[Conte et al. 2019] Alessio Conte, Roberto Grossi, Andrea Marino and Luca Versari. List-
       ing Maximal Subgraphs Satisfying Strongly Accessible Properties. SIAM Journal on
       Discrete Mathematics, vol. 33, no. 2, pages 587–613, 2019. (Cited on pages 4, 25, 48
       and 50.)

[Cook & Rackoff 1980] Stephen A Cook and Charles W Rackoff. Space lower bounds for maze
      threadability on restricted machines. SIAM Journal on Computing, vol. 9, no. 3, pages
      636–652, 1980. (Cited on page 51.)

[Cook & Reckhow 1973] Stephen A. Cook and Robert A. Reckhow. Time Bounded Random
      Access Machines. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., vol. 7, no. 4, pages 354–375, 1973. (Cited on
      pages 8, 9 and 10.)

[Cook 1971] Stephen A Cook. The complexity of theorem-proving procedures. In Proceedings
       of the third annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 151–158. ACM,
       1971. (Cited on page 11.)

[Cormen et al. 2009] Thomas H Cormen, Charles E Leiserson, Ronald L Rivest and Clifford
      Stein. Introduction to algorithms. MIT press, 2009. (Cited on page 9.)

[Courcelle 2009] Bruno Courcelle. Linear delay enumeration and monadic second-order logic.
       Discret. Appl. Math., vol. 157, no. 12, pages 2675–2700, 2009. (Cited on pages 33, 45
       and 57.)

[Creignou & Hébrard 1997] Nadia Creignou and Jean-Jacques Hébrard. On generating all
       solutions of generalized satisfiability problems. Informatique théorique et applications,
       vol. 31, no. 6, pages 499–511, 1997. (Cited on pages 4, 22 and 53.)

[Creignou & Vollmer 2015] Nadia Creignou and Heribert Vollmer. Parameterized complexity
       of weighted satisfiability problems: Decision, enumeration, counting. Fundamenta
       Informaticae, vol. 136, no. 4, pages 297–316, 2015. (Cited on page 69.)

[Creignou et al. 2001] Nadia Creignou, Sanjeev Khanna and Madhu Sudan. Complexity
       classifications of boolean constraint satisfaction problems. SIAM, 2001. (Cited on
       page 22.)

[Creignou et al. 2011] Nadia Creignou, Frédéric Olive and Johannes Schmidt. Enumerating
       All Solutions of a Boolean CSP by Non-decreasing Weight. In Karem A. Sakallah
       and Laurent Simon, editors, Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing - SAT
       2011 - 14th International Conference, SAT 2011, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, June 19-22,
       2011. Proceedings, volume 6695 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 120–133.
       Springer, 2011. (Cited on pages 44 and 53.)

[Creignou et al. 2017a] Nadia Creignou, Markus Kröll, Reinhard Pichler, Sebastian Skritek
       and Heribert Vollmer. On the complexity of hard enumeration problems. In Interna-
       tional Conference on Language and Automata Theory and Applications, pages 183–
       195. Springer, 2017. (Cited on pages 8, 15, 23 and 25.)
BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                              81


[Creignou et al. 2017b] Nadia Creignou, Arne Meier, Julian-Steffen Müller, Johannes
       Schmidt and Heribert Vollmer. Paradigms for parameterized enumeration. Theory
       of Computing Systems, vol. 60, no. 4, pages 737–758, 2017. (Cited on page 69.)

[Daigo & Hirata 2009] Taishin Daigo and Kouichi Hirata. On generating all maximal acyclic
       subhypergraphs with polynomial delay. In International Conference on Current Trends
       in Theory and Practice of Computer Science, pages 181–192. Springer, 2009. (Cited
       on page 44.)

[Darwiche & Marquis 2002] Adnan Darwiche and Pierre Marquis. A knowledge compilation
       map. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, vol. 17, pages 229–264, 2002. (Cited
       on page 71.)

[de Colnet & Mengel 2020] Alexis de Colnet and Stefan Mengel. Lower Bounds for Ap-
       proximate Knowledge Compilation. In Christian Bessiere, editor, Proceedings of the
       Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2020,
       pages 1834–1840. ijcai.org, 2020. (Cited on page 73.)

[Defrain & Nourine 2019] Oscar Defrain and Lhouari Nourine. Dualization in lattices given
       by implicational bases. In International Conference on Formal Concept Analysis, pages
       89–98. Springer, 2019. (Cited on pages 47 and 48.)

[Defrain et al. 2021] Oscar Defrain, Lhouari Nourine and Takeaki Uno. On the dualization
       in distributive lattices and related problems. Discrete Applied Mathematics, vol. 300,
       pages 85–96, 2021. (Cited on page 47.)

[Disser & Skutella 2018] Yann Disser and Martin Skutella. The simplex algorithm is NP-
        mighty. ACM Transactions on Algorithms (TALG), vol. 15, no. 1, pages 1–19, 2018.
        (Cited on page 49.)

[Duchon et al. 2004] Philippe Duchon, Philippe Flajolet, Guy Louchard and Gilles Schaeffer.
      Boltzmann samplers for the random generation of combinatorial structures. Combi-
      natorics, Probability and Computing, vol. 13, no. 4-5, pages 577–625, 2004. (Cited on
      page 41.)

[Durand & Flajolet 2003] Marianne Durand and Philippe Flajolet. Loglog counting of large
      cardinalities. In European Symposium on Algorithms, pages 605–617. Springer, 2003.
      (Cited on page 72.)

[Durand & Grandjean 2007] Arnaud Durand and Etienne Grandjean. First-order queries on
      structures of bounded degree are computable with constant delay. ACM Trans. Comput.
      Log., vol. 8, no. 4, page 21, 2007. (Cited on pages 10, 39, 56 and 72.)

[Durand & Strozecki 2011] Arnaud Durand and Yann Strozecki. Enumeration complex-
      ity of logical query problems with second-order variables. In Computer Science
      Logic (CSL’11)-25th International Workshop/20th Annual Conference of the EACSL.
      Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2011. (Cited on pages 33, 57
      and 70.)
82                                                                    BIBLIOGRAPHY


[Durand et al. 2005] Arnaud Durand, Miki Hermann and Phokion G Kolaitis. Subtractive
      reductions and complete problems for counting complexity classes. Theoretical Com-
      puter Science, vol. 340, no. 3, pages 496–513, 2005. (Cited on page 21.)

[Durand et al. 2020] Arnaud Durand, Nicole Schweikardt and Luc Segoufin. Enumer-
      ating Answers to First-Order Queries over Databases of Low Degree. CoRR,
      vol. abs/2010.08382, 2020. (Cited on page 56.)

[Durand 2020] Arnaud Durand. Fine-Grained Complexity Analysis of Queries: From De-
      cision to Counting and Enumeration. In Proceedings of the 39th ACM SIGMOD-
      SIGACT-SIGAI Symposium on Principles of Database Systems, pages 331–346, 2020.
      (Cited on page 39.)

[Ehrlich & Rarey 2011] Hans-Christian Ehrlich and Matthias Rarey. Maximum common sub-
        graph isomorphism algorithms and their applications in molecular science: a review.
        Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Molecular Science, vol. 1, no. 1,
        pages 68–79, 2011. (Cited on page 3.)

[Eiter & Gottlob 1995] Thomas Eiter and Georg Gottlob. Identifying the minimal transver-
       sals of a hypergraph and related problems. SIAM Journal on Computing, vol. 24, no. 6,
       pages 1278–1304, 1995. (Cited on pages 48 and 56.)

[Eiter et al. 2003] Thomas Eiter, Georg Gottlob and Kazuhisa Makino. New results on mono-
        tone dualization and generating hypergraph transversals. SIAM Journal on Computing,
        vol. 32, no. 2, pages 514–537, 2003. (Cited on page 3.)

[Eppstein et al. 2015] David Eppsteinet al. K-Best Enumeration. Bulletin of EATCS, vol. 1,
       no. 115, 2015. (Cited on pages 14 and 43.)

[Erdos & Rényi 1961] Paul Erdos and Alfred Rényi. On a classical problem of probability
       theory. Magyar Tud. Akad. Mat. Kutató Int. Közl, vol. 6, no. 1-2, pages 215–220,
       1961. (Cited on page 40.)

[Feder 1994] Tomás Feder. Network flow and 2-satisfiability. Algorithmica, vol. 11, no. 3,
       pages 291–319, 1994. (Cited on pages 38 and 54.)

[Flajolet & Martin 1985] Philippe Flajolet and G Nigel Martin. Probabilistic counting algo-
        rithms for data base applications. Journal of computer and system sciences, vol. 31,
        no. 2, pages 182–209, 1985. (Cited on page 41.)

[Florêncio et al. 2015] Christophe Costa Florêncio, Jonny Daenen, Jan Ramon, Jan Van den
       Bussche and Dries Van Dyck. Naive Infinite Enumeration of Context-free Languages
       in Incremental Polynomial Time. J. UCS, vol. 21, no. 7, pages 891–911, 2015. (Cited
       on pages 7 and 33.)

[Fomin & Kratsch 2010] Fedor V Fomin and Dieter Kratsch. Exact exponential algorithms.
      Springer Science & Business Media, 2010. (Cited on page 3.)
BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                                83


[Fournier et al. 2015] Hervé Fournier, Guillaume Malod and Stefan Mengel. Monomials in
       arithmetic circuits: Complete problems in the counting hierarchy. computational com-
       plexity, vol. 24, no. 1, pages 1–30, 2015. (Cited on page 70.)

[Fredkin 1960] Edward Fredkin. Trie memory. Communications of the ACM, vol. 3, no. 9,
       pages 490–499, 1960. (Cited on page 34.)

[Fredman & Khachiyan 1996] Michael L Fredman and Leonid Khachiyan. On the complexity
      of dualization of monotone disjunctive normal forms. Journal of Algorithms, vol. 21,
      no. 3, pages 618–628, 1996. (Cited on page 3.)

[Fredman & Willard 1993] Michael L Fredman and Dan E Willard. Surpassing the infor-
      mation theoretic bound with fusion trees. Journal of computer and system sciences,
      vol. 47, no. 3, pages 424–436, 1993. (Cited on page 10.)

[Frick & Grohe 2004] Markus Frick and Martin Grohe. The complexity of first-order and
       monadic second-order logic revisited. Annals of pure and applied logic, vol. 130, no. 1-
       3, pages 3–31, 2004. (Cited on page 57.)

[Friedmann et al. 2011] Oliver Friedmann, Thomas Dueholm Hansen and Uri Zwick. Subex-
       ponential lower bounds for randomized pivoting rules for the simplex algorithm. In
       Proceedings of the forty-third annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages
       283–292, 2011. (Cited on page 49.)

[Goldberg 1991] Leslie Ann Goldberg. Efficient algorithms for listing combinatorial struc-
      tures. PhD thesis, University of Edinburgh, UK, 1991. (Cited on pages 40, 50 and 72.)

[Golovach et al. 2018] Petr A Golovach, Pinar Heggernes, Mamadou Moustapha Kanté, Di-
       eter Kratsch, Sigve H Sæther and Yngve Villanger. Output-polynomial enumeration
       on graphs of bounded (local) linear mim-width. Algorithmica, vol. 80, no. 2, pages
       714–741, 2018. (Cited on page 4.)

[Golovach et al. 2021] Petr A Golovach, Christian Komusiewicz, Dieter Kratsch and
       Van Bang Le. Refined Notions of Parameterized Enumeration Kernels with Appli-
       cations to Matching Cut Enumeration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.03800, 2021. (Cited
       on page 69.)

[Grandjean & Schwentick 2002] Etienne Grandjean and Thomas Schwentick. Machine-
      independent characterizations and complete problems for deterministic linear time.
      SIAM Journal on Computing, vol. 32, no. 1, pages 196–230, 2002. (Cited on page 10.)

[Greco & Scarcello 2013] Gianluigi Greco and Francesco Scarcello. Structural tractability of
       enumerating CSP solutions. Constraints, vol. 18, no. 1, pages 38–74, 2013. (Cited on
       page 53.)

[Guiraud 2021] Maël Guiraud. Deterministic scheduling of periodic datagrams for low latency
       in 5G and beyond. PhD thesis, Université Paris Saclay, 2021. (Cited on page 71.)
84                                                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY


[Hagen 2008] Matthias Hagen. " algorithmic and computational complexity issues of monet.
      Cuvillier Verlag, 2008. (Cited on pages 2, 7 and 48.)

[Hanaka et al. 2021] Tesshu Hanaka, Yasuaki Kobayashi, Kazuhiro Kurita and Yota Otachi.
      Finding Diverse Trees, Paths, and More. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
      Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pages 3778–3786, 2021. (Cited on page 74.)

[Hartmanis & Stearns 1965] Juris Hartmanis and Richard E Stearns. On the computa-
      tional complexity of algorithms. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society,
      vol. 117, pages 285–306, 1965. (Cited on pages 21 and 37.)

[Hartung et al. 2019] Elizabeth Hartung, Hung Phuc Hoang, Torsten Mütze and Aaron
       Williams. Combinatorial generation via permutation languages. I. Fundamentals.
       arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.06069, 2019. (Cited on page 38.)

[Hastad 1986] John Hastad. Almost optimal lower bounds for small depth circuits. In Pro-
       ceedings of the eighteenth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages
       6–20. Citeseer, 1986. (Cited on page 52.)

[Holton & McKay 1988] Derek A Holton and Brendan D McKay. The smallest non-
       hamiltonian 3-connected cubic planar graphs have 38 vertices. Journal of Combi-
       natorial Theory, Series B, vol. 45, no. 3, pages 305–319, 1988. (Cited on page 66.)

[Hopcroft & Tarjan 1973] John E. Hopcroft and Robert Endre Tarjan. A V log V algorithm
      for isomorphism of triconnected planar graphs. Journal of Computer and System
      Sciences, vol. 7, no. 3, pages 323–331, 1973. (Cited on page 66.)

[Hopcroft & Wong 1974] John E Hopcroft and Jin-Kue Wong. Linear time algorithm for
      isomorphism of planar graphs (preliminary report). In ACM symposium on Theory
      of computing, pages 172–184, 1974. (Cited on page 66.)

[Jerrum 2003] Mark Jerrum. Counting, sampling and integrating: algorithms and complexity.
       Springer Science & Business Media, 2003. (Cited on pages 40 and 58.)

[Jiang et al. 2013] Chuntao Jiang, Frans Coenen and Michele Zito. A survey of frequent
       subgraph mining algorithms. The Knowledge Engineering Review, vol. 28, no. 1, pages
       75–105, 2013. (Cited on page 2.)

[Johnson et al. 1988] David S. Johnson, Christos H. Papadimitriou and Mihalis Yannakakis.
       On Generating All Maximal Independent Sets. Inf. Process. Lett., vol. 27, no. 3, pages
       119–123, 1988. (Cited on pages 2, 27, 43 and 44.)

[Kabanets & Impagliazzo 2004] Valentine Kabanets and Russell Impagliazzo. Derandomizing
      polynomial identity tests means proving circuit lower bounds. computational complex-
      ity, vol. 13, no. 1-2, pages 1–46, 2004. (Cited on page 61.)

[Kane et al. 2010] Daniel M Kane, Jelani Nelson and David P Woodruff. An optimal al-
       gorithm for the distinct elements problem. In Proceedings of the twenty-ninth ACM
BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                               85


       SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGART symposium on Principles of database systems, pages 41–
       52. ACM, 2010. (Cited on page 41.)

[Kanté et al. 2014] Mamadou Moustapha Kanté, Vincent Limouzy, Arnaud Mary and
       Lhouari Nourine. On the enumeration of minimal dominating sets and related no-
       tions. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, vol. 28, no. 4, pages 1916–1929, 2014.
       (Cited on pages 23 and 48.)

[Kanté et al. 2015] Mamadou Moustapha Kanté, Vincent Limouzy, Arnaud Mary, Lhouari
       Nourine and Takeaki Uno. A polynomial delay algorithm for enumerating minimal
       dominating sets in chordal graphs. In International Workshop on Graph-Theoretic
       Concepts in Computer Science, pages 138–153. Springer, 2015. (Cited on page 23.)

[Karmarkar 1984] Narendra Karmarkar. A new polynomial-time algorithm for linear pro-
      gramming. In Proceedings of the sixteenth annual ACM symposium on Theory of
      computing, pages 302–311, 1984. (Cited on page 49.)

[Kavvadias et al. 2000] Dimitris J Kavvadias, Martha Sideri and Elias C Stavropoulos. Gen-
      erating all maximal models of a Boolean expression. Information Processing Letters,
      vol. 74, no. 3-4, pages 157–162, 2000. (Cited on pages 47 and 56.)

[Kawahara et al. 2019] Jun Kawahara, Toshiki Saitoh, Hirofumi Suzuki and Ryo Yoshinaka.
      Colorful Frontier-Based Search: Implicit Enumeration of Chordal and Interval Sub-
      graphs. In International Symposium on Experimental Algorithms, pages 125–141.
      Springer, 2019. (Cited on page 71.)

[Kazana & Segoufin 2020] Wojciech Kazana and Luc Segoufin. First-order queries on classes
      of structures with bounded expansion. Log. Methods Comput. Sci., vol. 16, no. 1, 2020.
      (Cited on page 56.)

[Khachiyan et al. 2005] Leonid Khachiyan, Endre Boros, Khaled Elbassioni, Vladimir Gur-
      vich and Kazuhisa Makino. On the complexity of some enumeration problems for
      matroids. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, vol. 19, no. 4, pages 966–984,
      2005. (Cited on pages 3, 15, 27 and 56.)

[Khachiyan et al. 2006] Leonid Khachiyan, Endre Boros, Konrad Borys, Khaled Elbassioni
      and Vladimir Gurvich. Generating all vertices of a polyhedron is hard. In Proceedings
      of the seventeenth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithm, pages 758–
      765. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2006. (Cited on page 47.)

[Kiefer et al. 2011] S. Kiefer, A. Murawski, J. Ouaknine, B. Wachter and J. Worrell. Lan-
        guage Equivalence for Probabilistic Automata. In Computer Aided Verification, pages
        526–540. Springer, 2011. (Cited on page 58.)

[Klivans & Spielman 2001] Adam R Klivans and Daniel Spielman. Randomness efficient
       identity testing of multivariate polynomials. In Proceedings of the thirty-third annual
       ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 216–223, 2001. (Cited on pages 59
       and 60.)
86                                                                         BIBLIOGRAPHY


[Knuth 1997] Donald Ervin Knuth. The art of computer programming, volume 3. Pearson
      Education, 1997. (Cited on page 3.)

[Knuth 2011] Donald E Knuth. The art of computer programming, volume 4a: combinatorial
      algorithms, part 1. Pearson Education India, 2011. (Cited on pages 2 and 38.)

[Kobayashi et al. 2020] Yasuaki Kobayashi, Kazuhiro Kurita and Kunihiro Wasa. Efficient
      Constant-Factor Approximate Enumeration of Minimal Subsets for Monotone Prop-
      erties with Cardinality Constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.08830, 2020. (Cited on
      page 72.)

[Kopelowitz et al. 2016] Tsvi Kopelowitz, Seth Pettie and Ely Porat. Higher lower bounds
       from the 3SUM conjecture. In Proceedings of the twenty-seventh annual ACM-SIAM
       symposium on Discrete algorithms, pages 1272–1287. SIAM, 2016. (Cited on page 48.)

[Kreutzer 2009] Stephan Kreutzer. On the parameterised intractability of monadic second-
       order logic. In International Workshop on Computer Science Logic, pages 348–363.
       Springer, 2009. (Cited on page 57.)

[Ladner 1975] Richard E Ladner. On the structure of polynomial time reducibility. Journal
       of the ACM (JACM), vol. 22, no. 1, pages 155–171, 1975. (Cited on page 52.)

[Lawler et al. 1980] Eugene L. Lawler, Jan Karel Lenstra and A. H. G. Rinnooy Kan. Gener-
       ating all Maximal Independent Sets: NP-Hardness and Polynomial-Time Algorithms.
       SIAM J. Comput., vol. 9, no. 3, pages 558–565, 1980. (Cited on pages 18, 25, 43
       and 50.)

[Li & Ruskey 1999] Gang Li and Frank Ruskey. The advantages of forward thinking in gen-
       erating rooted and free trees. In ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms, pages
       939–940, 1999. (Cited on page 64.)

[Lovász & Simonovits 1993] László Lovász and Miklós Simonovits. Random walks in a convex
       body and an improved volume algorithm. Random structures & algorithms, vol. 4,
       no. 4, pages 359–412, 1993. (Cited on page 40.)

[Lucas 1882] Édouard Lucas. Récréations mathématiques: Les traversees. les ponts. les
       labyrinthes. les reines. le solitaire. la numération. le baguenaudier. le taquin, volume 1.
       Gauthier-Villars et fils, 1882. (Cited on page 2.)

[Marino 2015] Andrea Marino. Enumeration algorithms. In Analysis and Enumeration, pages
       13–35. Springer, 2015. (Cited on page 1.)

[Mary & Strozecki 2016a] Arnaud Mary and Yann Strozecki. Efficient Enumeration of Solu-
      tions Produced by Closure Operations. In 33rd Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of
      Computer Science, 2016. (Cited on pages 15, 53 and 55.)

[Mary & Strozecki 2016b] Arnaud Mary and Yann Strozecki. Generating maximal solutions
      given by closure operations. First Workshop on Enumeration Problems and Applica-
      tions, 2016. (Cited on page 53.)
BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                            87


[Mary & Strozecki 2019] Arnaud Mary and Yann Strozecki. Efficient enumeration of solu-
      tions produced by closure operations. Discrete Mathematics & Theoretical Computer
      Science, vol. 21, no. 3, 2019. (Cited on pages 1, 4, 18, 35, 48, 53 and 70.)

[Mary 2013] Arnaud Mary. Énumération des Dominants Minimaux d’un graphe. PhD thesis,
      Université Blaise Pascal, 2013. (Cited on pages 1, 4, 9 and 22.)

[Masbaum & Vaintrob 2002] Gregor Masbaum and Arkady Vaintrob. A new matrix-tree the-
      orem. International Mathematics Research Notices, vol. 2002, no. 27, pages 1397–1426,
      2002. (Cited on page 58.)

[McGregor 2014] Andrew McGregor. Graph stream algorithms: a survey. ACM SIGMOD
      Record, vol. 43, no. 1, pages 9–20, 2014. (Cited on page 72.)

[Megiddo & Papadimitriou 1991] Nimrod Megiddo and Christos H Papadimitriou. On total
      functions, existence theorems and computational complexity. Theoretical Computer
      Science, vol. 81, no. 2, pages 317–324, 1991. (Cited on page 16.)

[Meier 2020] Arne Meier. Incremental FPT Delay. Algorithms, vol. 13, no. 5, page 122, 2020.
       (Cited on page 69.)

[Murakami & Uno 2014] Keisuke Murakami and Takeaki Uno. Efficient algorithms for du-
      alizing large-scale hypergraphs. Discrete Applied Mathematics, vol. 170, pages 83–94,
      2014. (Cited on page 72.)

[Nakano & Uno 2003] Shin-ichi Nakano and Takeaki Uno. A simple constant time enumer-
      ation algorithm for free trees. PSJ SIGNotes ALgorithms, no. 091-002, 2003. (Cited
      on page 38.)

[Nishimura 2018] Naomi Nishimura. Introduction to reconfiguration. Algorithms, vol. 11,
       no. 4, page 52, 2018. (Cited on page 41.)

[Olteanu & Závodnỳ 2012] Dan Olteanu and Jakub Závodnỳ. Factorised representations of
       query results: Size bounds and readability. In Proceedings of the 15th International
       Conference on Database Theory, pages 285–298, 2012. (Cited on page 71.)

[Papadimitriou & Yannakakis 2000] Christos H Papadimitriou and Mihalis Yannakakis. On
      the approximability of trade-offs and optimal access of web sources. In Proceedings
      41st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 86–92. IEEE,
      2000. (Cited on pages 3 and 72.)

[Papadimitriou 2003] Christos H Papadimitriou. Computational complexity. John Wiley and
      Sons Ltd., 2003. (Cited on page 9.)

[Park & Phillips 1993] James K Park and Cynthia A Phillips. Finding minimum-quotient
       cuts in planar graphs. In ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 766–775,
       1993. (Cited on page 65.)
88                                                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY


[Peyronnet et al. 2012] S. Peyronnet, M. De Rougemont and Y. Strozecki. Approximate ver-
       ification and enumeration problems. Theoretical Aspects of Computing–ICTAC 2012,
       pages 228–242, 2012. (Cited on pages 40 and 58.)

[Post 1941] Emil Leon Post. The two-valued iterative systems of mathematical logic. Prince-
       ton University Press, 1941. (Cited on page 54.)

[Pruesse & Ruskey 1994] Gara Pruesse and Frank Ruskey. Generating linear extensions fast.
       SIAM Journal on Computing, vol. 23, no. 2, pages 373–386, 1994. (Cited on page 3.)

[Razborov 1985] Alexander A Razborov. Lower bounds for the monotone complexity of some
      Boolean functions. In Soviet Math. Dokl., volume 31, pages 354–357, 1985. (Cited on
      page 52.)

[Read & Tarjan 1975] RC Read and RE Tarjan. Bounds on backtrack algorithms for listing
      cycles, paths, and spanning trees. Networks, vol. 5, no. 3, pages 237–252, 1975. (Cited
      on page 4.)

[Reith & Vollmer 2003] Steffen Reith and Heribert Vollmer. Optimal satisfiability for propo-
       sitional calculi and constraint satisfaction problems. Information and Computation,
       vol. 186, no. 1, pages 1–19, 2003. (Cited on page 54.)

[Ruskey 2003] Frank Ruskey. Combinatorial generation. Preliminary working draft. Univer-
      sity of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada, vol. 11, page 20, 2003. (Cited on pages 2, 38
      and 71.)

[Saluja et al. 1995] Sanjeev Saluja, KV Subrahmanyam and Madhukar N Thakur. Descrip-
        tive complexity of# P functions. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, vol. 50,
        no. 3, pages 493–505, 1995. (Cited on page 57.)

[Savickỳ & Kučera 2016] Petr Savickỳ and Petr Kučera. Generating models of a matched
       formula with a polynomial delay. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, vol. 56,
       pages 379–402, 2016. (Cited on page 49.)

[Schaefer 1978] Thomas J Schaefer. The complexity of satisfiability problems. In Proceedings
       of the tenth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 216–226, 1978.
       (Cited on page 52.)

[Schmidt 2017] Johannes Schmidt. The Weight in Enumeration. In Frank Drewes, Carlos
      Martín-Vide and Bianca Truthe, editors, Language and Automata Theory and Ap-
      plications - 11th International Conference, LATA 2017, Umeå, Sweden, March 6-9,
      2017, Proceedings, volume 10168 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 208–
      219, 2017. (Cited on pages 44 and 53.)

[Schnoor & Schnoor 2007] Henning Schnoor and Ilka Schnoor. Enumerating all solutions for
       constraint satisfaction problems. In Annual Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of
       Computer Science, pages 694–705. Springer, 2007. (Cited on page 53.)
BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                              89


[Schweikardt et al. 2018] Nicole Schweikardt, Luc Segoufin and Alexandre Vigny. Enumera-
       tion for FO Queries over Nowhere Dense Graphs. In Jan Van den Bussche and Marcelo
       Arenas, editors, Proceedings of the 37th ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGAI Symposium
       on Principles of Database Systems, Houston, TX, USA, June 10-15, 2018, pages 151–
       163. ACM, 2018. (Cited on pages 26 and 56.)

[Segoufin 2015] Luc Segoufin. Constant Delay Enumeration for Conjunctive Queries. SIG-
       MOD Record, vol. 44, no. 1, pages 10–17, 2015. (Cited on pages 4 and 39.)

[Staub 2016] Ruben Staub. Calculs d’isomorphismes pour la chemoinformatique. Master’s
       thesis, Université de Versailles Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, 2016. (Cited on page 66.)

[Steindl 2017] Markus Steindl. The subpower membership problem for bands. Journal of
       Algebra, vol. 489, pages 529–551, 2017. (Cited on page 55.)

[Strozecki 2010a] Y. Strozecki. Enumeration of the monomials of a polynomial and related
       complexity classes. Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science, pages 629–640,
       2010. (Cited on pages 13 and 59.)

[Strozecki 2010b] Yann Strozecki. Enumeration complexity and matroid decomposition. PhD
       thesis, Université Paris Diderot - Paris 7, 2010. (Cited on pages 1, 8, 9, 15, 22, 26
       and 44.)

[Strozecki 2011] Yann Strozecki. Monadic second-order model-checking on decomposable ma-
       troids. Discrete Applied Mathematics, vol. 159, no. 10, pages 1022–1039, 2011. (Cited
       on page 57.)

[Strozecki 2013] Yann Strozecki. On enumerating monomials and other combinatorial struc-
       tures by polynomial interpolation. Theory of Computing Systems, vol. 53, no. 4, pages
       532–568, 2013. (Cited on pages 59, 60 and 61.)

[Strozecki 2019] Yann Strozecki. Enumeration Complexity.        Bulletin of EATCS, vol. 1,
       no. 129, 2019. (Cited on page 1.)

[Tiernan 1970] James C Tiernan. An efficient search algorithm to find the elementary circuits
       of a graph. Communications of the ACM, vol. 13, no. 12, pages 722–726, 1970. (Cited
       on page 2.)

[Tomita et al. 2006] Etsuji Tomita, Akira Tanaka and Haruhisa Takahashi. The worst-case
       time complexity for generating all maximal cliques and computational experiments.
       Theoretical computer science, vol. 363, no. 1, pages 28–42, 2006. (Cited on page 49.)

[Uno 1997] Takeaki Uno. Algorithms for enumerating all perfect, maximum and maximal
       matchings in bipartite graphs. In International Symposium on Algorithms and Com-
       putation, pages 92–101. Springer, 1997. (Cited on pages 26 and 45.)

[Uno 2015] Takeaki Uno. Constant time enumeration by amortization. In Workshop on
       Algorithms and Data Structures, pages 593–605. Springer, 2015. (Cited on pages 3,
       34 and 38.)
90                                                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY


[Valiant 1979] Leslie G Valiant. The complexity of computing the permanent. Theoretical
       computer science, vol. 8, no. 2, pages 189–201, 1979. (Cited on page 45.)

[Vassilvitskii & Yannakakis 2005] Sergei Vassilvitskii and Mihalis Yannakakis. Efficiently
        computing succinct trade-off curves. Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 348, no. 2-3,
        pages 334–356, 2005. (Cited on page 3.)

[Vigny 2018] Alexandre Vigny. Query enumeration and nowhere dense graphs. PhD thesis,
       2018. (Cited on pages 1, 51 and 57.)

[Walsh 2003] Timothy Walsh. Generating Gray codes in O(1) worst-case time per word. In
       International Conference on Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science,
       pages 73–88. Springer, 2003. (Cited on page 38.)

[Wang et al. 2020] Yishu Wang, Arnaud Mary, Marie-France Sagot and Blerina Sinaimeri.
      Lazy listing of equivalence classes–A paper on dynamic programming and tropical cir-
      cuits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12143, 2020. (Cited on page 71.)

[Wasa 2016] Kunihiro Wasa. Enumeration of enumeration algorithms.              arXiv preprint
      arXiv:1605.05102, 2016. (Cited on page 2.)

[Wigderson 1992] Avi Wigderson. The complexity of graph connectivity. In International Sym-
      posium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science, pages 112–132. Springer,
      1992. (Cited on page 51.)

[Wild 2012] Marcel Wild. Compactly generating all satisfying truth assignments of a Horn
       formula. Journal on satisfiability, Boolean modeling and computation, vol. 8, no. 1-2,
       pages 63–82, 2012. (Cited on page 70.)

[Williams 2014] Ryan Williams. Nonuniform ACC circuit lower bounds. Journal of the ACM
       (JACM), vol. 61, no. 1, page 2, 2014. (Cited on page 52.)

[Williams 2018] Virginia Vassilevska Williams. On some fine-grained questions in algorithms
       and complexity. In Proceedings of the ICM, 2018. (Cited on page 16.)

[Wright et al. 1986] Robert Alan Wright, Bruce Richmond, Andrew Odlyzko and Brendan D
       McKay. Constant time generation of free trees. SIAM Journal on Computing, vol. 15,
       no. 2, pages 540–548, 1986. (Cited on pages 3 and 38.)

[Zhuk 2020] Dmitriy Zhuk. A Proof of the CSP Dichotomy Conjecture. Journal of the ACM
       (JACM), vol. 67, no. 5, pages 1–78, 2020. (Cited on pages 52 and 53.)

[Zippel 1979] Richard Zippel. Probabilistic algorithms for sparse polynomials. In International
       symposium on symbolic and algebraic manipulation, pages 216–226. Springer, 1979.
       (Cited on page 59.)

[Zippel 1990] R. Zippel. Interpolating polynomials from their values. Journal of Symbolic
       Computation, vol. 9, no. 3, pages 375–403, 1990. (Cited on pages 13, 59 and 61.)
