On Linear Recurrence Sequences and Loop Termination
Joël Ouaknine, Department of Computer Science, Oxford University, UK
James Worrell, Department of Computer Science, Oxford University, UK


A sequence of real numbers is said to be positive if all terms are positive, and ultimately positive if all but
finitely many terms are positive. In this article we survey recent progress on long-standing open problems
concerning deciding the positivity and ultimate positivity of integer linear recurrence sequences. We briefly
discuss some of the many contexts in which these problems arise, and relate them to the well-known Skolem
Problem, which asks whether a given linear recurrence sequence has a zero term. We also highlight some of
the mathematical techniques that have been used to obtain decision procedures for these problems, pointing
out obstacles to further progress.
   In the second half of this survey we move on to closely related questions concerning the termination of
linear while loops. This is a well-studied subject in software verification and by now there is rich toolkit of
techniques to prove termination in practice. However the decidability of termination for some of the most
basic types of loop remains open. Here again we discuss recent progress and remaining open problems.

1. INTRODUCTION
Linear recurrence sequences (LRS) , such as the Fibonacci numbers, arise in a sur-
prisingly diverse range of contexts, particularly in mathematics and computer science,
but also in fields such as physics, biology, and economics. Connections to automata the-
ory abound: for example, let A be a (deterministic or nondeterministic) finite automa-
ton over some alphabet, and for every non-negative integer n, write un to denote the
number of distinct words of length n accepted by A. Then the sequence hu0 , u1 , u2 , . . .i
of integers is an LRS. Moreover, given any integer LRS v = hv0 , v1 , v2 , . . .i, one can
always find two finite automata A and B such that each vn is precisely the difference
between the number of words of length n accepted by A and the number of words of
length n accepted by B.
   In this short survey, we examine connections between LRS and the termination of
linear loops. The latter is a central problem in software verification that has attracted
a substantial amount of attention over the last three decades, and has led to the devel-
opment of tools such as Microsoft Research’s T ERMINATOR and T2 [Cook et al. 2011].
See also the surveys by Ben-Amram and Genaim [Ben-Amram and Genaim 2014],
and by Gasarch [Gasarch 2015] describing semi-algorithmic approaches to termina-
tion based on ranking functions. By contrast, our interest here lies in decidability (and
complexity) questions. Perhaps surprisingly, such questions are in turn related to deep
problems and techniques from analytic and algebraic number theory, Diophantine ge-
ometry, and real algebraic geometry.
   Let us start with some definitions. A (real) LRS is an infinite sequence u =
hu0 , u1 , u2 , . . .i of real numbers having the following property: there exist real constants
a1 , a2 , . . . , ak such that, for all n ≥ 0,
                            un+k = a1 un+k−1 + a2 un+k−2 + . . . + ak un .                                    (1)
If the initial values u0 , . . . , uk−1 of the sequence are provided, the recurrence relation
defines the rest of the sequence uniquely. The smallest k for which an LRS obeys such
a recurrence relation is the order of the LRS.
   Given an LRS u satisfying the recurrence relation (1), the characteristic polyno-
mial of u is
                               p(x) = xk − a1 xk−1 − . . . − ak−1 x − ak .
An LRS is said to be simple if its characteristic polynomial has no repeated roots.
Simple LRS, such as the Fibonacci sequence, possess a number of desirable properties

ACM SIGLOG News                                      1                                   April 2015, Vol. 2, No. 2
which considerably simplify their analysis. They constitute a large and well-studied
class of sequences, and correspond to the iterated application of diagonalisable matri-
ces, as we explain shortly.
  Real LRS can equivalently be characterised as those sequences u = hu0 , u1 , u2 , . . .i
admitting an exponential-polynomial representation
                                  r
                                  X                   s
                                                      X
                           un =         Pi (n)ρni +         Qi (n)λni + Qi (n)λni ,
                                  i=1                 i=1

where the ρi are distinct real numbers, the Pi are non-zero polynomials with real co-
efficients, the λi are distinct complex numbers, and the Qi are non-zero polynomials
with complex coefficients. Such a sequence is an LRS of order r +2s, with characteristic
roots ρ1 , . . . , ρr , λ1 , λ1 , . . . , λs , λs . Under this representation, u is a simple LRS if and
only if each of the polynomial terms is constant.
   Motivated by questions in language theory and formal power series, Rozenberg, Sa-
lomaa, and Soittola [Salomaa and Soittola 1978; Rozenberg and Salomaa 1994] high-
lighted the following four decision problems concerning LRS over rational numbers.
Given an LRS u as above:
(1) Does un = 0 for some n?
(2) Does un = 0 for infinitely many n?
(3) Is un ≥ 0 for all n?
(4) Is un ≥ 0 for all but finitely many n?
   Problem 1 is known as the Skolem Problem, after the Skolem-Mahler-Lech Theo-
rem [Everest et al. 2003; Halava et al. 2005] which characterises the set {n ∈ N : un =
0} of zeros of an LRS u as semi-linear, i.e., consisting of a finite set together with a
finite number of (infinite) arithmetic progressions. The proof of the latter is however
non-effective, and the decidability of the Skolem Problem is generally considered to
have been open for over 80 years [Tao 2008], a state of affairs described as “faintly
outrageous” by Tao [Tao 2008] and a “mathematical embarrassment” by Lipton [Lip-
ton and Regan 2013]. A breakthrough occurred in the mid-1980s, when Mignotte et
al. [Mignotte et al. 1984] and Vereshchagin [Vereshchagin 1985] independently showed
decidability for LRS of order 4 or less. These deep results make essential use of Baker’s
theorem on linear forms in logarithms (which earned Baker the Fields Medal in 1970),
as well as a p-adic analogue of Baker’s theorem due to van der Poorten. Unfortunately,
little progress on that front has since been recorded.1 The Skolem Problem can also be
seen as a generalisation of the Orbit Problem, studied by Kannan and Lipton [Kannan
and Lipton 1986, Sec. 5].
   Interestingly and in contrast, Problem 2—hitting zero infinitely often—was shown
to be decidable for arbitrary LRS by Berstel and Mignotte [Berstel and Mignotte 1976].
   Problems 3 and 4 are respectively known as the Positivity and the Ultimate Pos-
itivity Problems. It is considered folklore that the decidability of Positivity (for arbi-
trary LRS) would entail that of the Skolem Problem [Ouaknine and Worrell 2014b],
noting however that the reduction increases the order of LRS quadratically. Both Pos-
itivity and Ultimate Positivity are stated as open in literature going back at least to
the 1970s (see, e.g., [Soittola 1976; Salomaa 1976; Berstel and Mignotte 1976]), as
well as more recently (cf. [Halava et al. 2006; Bell and Gerhold 2007; Laohakosol and
Tangsupphathawat 2009; Liu 2010; Tarasov and Vyalyi 2011; Ouaknine and Worrell
2014b], among others).

1 A proof of decidability of the Skolem Problem for LRS of order 5 was announced in [Halava et al. 2005].
However, as pointed out in [Ouaknine and Worrell 2012], the proof seems to have a serious gap.


ACM SIGLOG News                                       2                               Vol. 2, No. 2, April 2015
   Hitherto, all decidability results for Positivity and Ultimate Positivity have been
for low-order LRS; the paper [Ouaknine and Worrell 2014b] gives a detailed account
of these results, obtained over a period of time stretching back some 35 years, and
proves decidability of both problems for sequences of order at most 5 (with complexity
in the Counting Hierarchy, itself contained within PSPACE). In addition, it is shown
in [Ouaknine and Worrell 2014b] that obtaining decidability for either Positivity or
Ultimate Positivity at order 6 would necessarily entail major breakthroughs in analytic
number theory (more precisely regarding long-standing open problems in Diophantine
approximation of transcendental numbers).
   For simple LRS, Positivity is known to be decidable up to order 9 [Ouaknine and Wor-
rell 2014a], and Ultimate Positivity is decidable for all orders [Ouaknine and Worrell
2014c] (in PSPACE when the order is not fixed, with a nearly matching lower bound,
and in P for any fixed order—see [Ouaknine and Worrell 2014c] for details). However,
beyond order 9, the algorithm for Ultimate Positivity is non-constructive: given an ulti-
mately periodic LRS hun i∞ n=0 , the procedure of [Ouaknine and Worrell 2014c] does not
produce a threshold N such that un ≥ 0 for all n ≥ N ; indeed the ability to compute
such a threshold would immediately yield an algorithm for the Positivity Problem for
simple LRS of all orders, since the signs of u0 , . . . , uN −1 can be evaluated directly. In
turn this would yield decidability of the Skolem Problem for simple LRS (known to
be open) and also would enable one to decide the Skolem Problem for general LRS of
order 5, as the only remaining unsolved sub-case involves distinct characteristic roots
(cf. [Ouaknine and Worrell 2012]).
   The non-constructive nature of the algorithm for deciding Ultimate Positivity of
simple LRS arises from the use of lower bounds in Diophantine approximation con-
cerning sums of S-units. These bounds were established in [Evertse 1984; van der
Poorten and Schlickewei 1982] using Schlickewei’s p-adic generalisation of Schmidt’s
Subspace Theorem (itself a far-reaching generalisation of the Thue-Siegel-Roth The-
orem), and therein applied to study the asymptotic growth of LRS in absolute value.
By contrast, [Ouaknine and Worrell 2014a] invokes Baker’s Theorem on linear forms
in logarithms to show decidability of Positivity for simple LRS of order at most 9. Un-
fortunately, while Baker’s Theorem yields effective Diophantine-approximation lower
bounds, it appears only to be applicable to low-order LRS. In particular, the analytic
and geometric arguments that are used in [Ouaknine and Worrell 2014a] to bring
Baker’s Theorem to bear do not seem applicable beyond order 9.

2. EXTENDED EXAMPLE
The following extended example illustrates some of the main ideas involved in deciding
positivity of an LRS, as well as some of the obstacles to generalising the decidability
results described in the previous section. Full details of the method illustrated here
can be found in [Ouaknine and Worrell 2014a].
  Consider the sequence u given by the exponential-polynomial expression
                                    33
                             un =      + λn1 + λn1 + 2λn2 + 2λn2 ,
                                     8
where
                              −3 + 4i                −7 + 24i
                          λ1 =           and λ2 =             .
                                  5                     25
This expression defines a sequence of rational numbers satisfying an order-5 linear
recurrence with rational coefficients:
                          19        114        114         19
               un+5 = − un+4 −          un+3 +     un+2 + un+1 + un
                          25        125        125         25

ACM SIGLOG News                               3                           Vol. 2, No. 2, April 2015
whose characteristic roots are 1, λ1 , λ2 , λ1 , and λ2 . In this example we consider how to
establish the positivity of u, that is, whether un ≥ 0 for all n ∈ N.
   Notice first that λ1 and λ2 both lie on the unit circle T := {z ∈ C : |z| = 1} in the
complex plane. Moreover, neither λ1 nor λ2 is a complex root of unity, so their respective
orbits {λn1 : n ∈ N} and {λn2 : n ∈ N} are both dense in T. In light of this one might be
led to believe that un can be negative, e.g., if n is such that Re(λn1 ) and Re(λn2 ) are both
at most − 43 then clearly un < 0. Crucially, however, the joint orbit {(λn1 , λn2 ) : n ∈ N}
is not dense in T2 . This is because λ1 and λ2 satisfy the multiplicative relationship
λ21 λ2 = 1. From this it is immediate that {(λn1 , λn2 ) : n ∈ N} is contained in the set
                                   T := {(z1 , z2 ) ∈ T2 : z12 z2 = 1} .
In fact, the set of all multiplicative relationships
                                     {(n1 , n2 ) ∈ Z2 : λn1 1 λn2 2 = 1}
among λ1 and λ2 is a rank-1 subgroup of Z2 with generator (2, 1). It follows from Kro-
necker’s theorem on simultaneous inhomogeneous Diophantine approximation [Cas-
sels 1965] that {(λn1 , λn2 ) : n ∈ N} is a dense subset of T .
  Now consider the function f : T2 → R given by
                                                 33
                                f (z1 , z2 ) =      + z1 + z1 + 2z2 + 2z2 .
                                                 8
Then un = f (λn1 , λn2 ) and (by calculus) f is non-negative on the set T . It follows that
un ≥ 0 for all n.2
  Next we extend the example by considering the order-6 LRS v = hv0 , v1 , v2 , . . .i, given
by vn := un − 21n . We have already established positivity of u. Positivity of v amounts
to establishing the lower bound 21n ≤ un for all n ∈ N. But this is a delicate question
because un comes arbitrarily close to 0 as n ranges over N. Indeed the function f above
has two zeros on the set T —at the point
                                                 √              √     
                            (z1∗ , z2∗ ) := − 18 + 863 i, − 32
                                                            31
                                                               + 3263 i

and its complex conjugate. Since {(λn1 , λn2 ) : n ∈ N} is a dense subset of T it follows that
lim inf n un = lim inf n f (λn1 , λn2 ) = 0.
   One can obtain a lower bound for f (λn1 , λn2 ) as a function of n via lower bounds on
the distance between (λn1 , λn2 ) and the two zeros of f in T . Baker’s Theorem on linear
forms in logarithms of algebraic numbers is instrumental in obtaining such bounds.
   A simple form of Baker’s Theorem (restricted to linear forms in three logarithms) is
as follows. Let α1 , α2 , α3 be algebraic numbers and b1 , b2 , b3 integers of absolute value
at most H. Then for the principal branch log of the complex logarithm function,
                                 Λ := b1 log α1 + b2 log α2 + b3 log α3
is either 0 or satisfies |Λ| > H −C , where C is an effectively computable constant de-
pending only on α1 , α2 , and α3 .
   With this result in hand, we can bound the distance between λn1 and z1∗ as follows.
Note that for any α ∈ T, we have log α = i arg α. Next, let n be such that λn1 6= z1∗ and

2 Note that density of {(λn , λn ) : n ∈ N} in T is not needed to certify the positivity of u, only inclusion.
                          1    2
However the fact that the topological closure of the orbit {(λn    n                                       2
                                                              1 , λ2 ) : n ∈ N} is an algebraic subset of C is
an important property that is relevant to the completeness of method of proving positivity illustrated in this
example.


ACM SIGLOG News                                       4                                 Vol. 2, No. 2, April 2015
choose m ∈ Z such that −π < n arg λ1 − 2πm ≤ π. Then
                                       1
                          |λn1 − z1∗ | ≥ |n arg λ1 − 2πm − arg z1∗ |
                                       2
                                          1
                                     ≥          ,                                                 (2)
                                       poly(n)

where poly(n) is an effectively computable polynomial depending only on λ1 and z1∗ .
Here the first inequality involves estimating the distance between λn1 and z1∗ in terms of
the length of the circular segment of T lying between λn1 and z1∗ . The second inequality
follows from Baker’s Theorem, using the facts that π = arg(−1) and |m| is less than n.
   We can now compute N ∈ N such that un ≥ 21n for all n ≥ N . First, invoking ideas
similar to those used by Kannan and Lipton in their work on the Orbit Problem [Kan-
nan and Lipton 1986], one can choose N sufficiently large such that (λn1 , λn2 ) is not
equal to either or the two zeros of the function f on T for n ≥ N . One can then apply
inequalities of type (2) to get lower bounds for the distance between (λn1 , λn2 ) and the
                                                                                  1
zeros of f , and hence obtain a lower bound on un = f (λn1 , λn2 ) of the form poly(n) for some
                                                                                  1
fixed effectively computable polynomial poly(n). Choosing N such that poly(n)          ≥ 21n for
all n ≥ N , we have un ≥ 21n for all n ≥ N . It immediately follows that vn < 0 can only
happen if n < N . Thus the positivity of v can be established by checking positivity of
vn for n < N by exhaustive search.
   We conclude the example with several remarks. First, recall that an important step
in establishing the positivity of u was to show that the function f only assumes non-
negative values on T . In the case at hand, this fact could be shown using elementary
calculus. More generally one can phrase such a question as the truth of a universal
sentence in the theory of real-closed fields. This is the approach taken in [Ouaknine
and Worrell 2014c], which gives a procedure to decide the ultimate positivity of simple
linear recurrence sequences. In the other direction, we have also shown in [Ouaknine
and Worrell 2014c] that deciding the truth of such universal sentences is reducible
in polynomial time to deciding the ultimate positivity of simple linear recurrence se-
quences.
   Next, observe that our analysis of the positivity of v crucially depends on comput-
ing an effective sub-exponential lower bound on un . We were able to do this thanks
to the effective nature of the constants in Baker’s Theorem. In turn, our applica-
tion of Baker’s Theorem hinged on the fact that the function f had only isolated
zeros on T . This isolated-zero condition can be shown to fail for higher-order recur-
rences. In particular, as we have described in the previous section, our result that ul-
timate positivity is decidable for simple LRS of arbitrary order relies on non-effective
Diophantine-approximation lower bounds in place of Baker’s Theorem [Ouaknine and
Worrell 2014c]. Such results suffice for considering ultimate positivity as well as for
handling termination of linear while loops, as we will see in the next section.
   Finally, observe that the sequence v in the above example is simple. Even at order
6, if one admits linear terms in exponential polynomials then to decide positivity one
provably needs much sharper Diophantine-approximation estimates for logarithms of
algebraic numbers than are currently known; see [Ouaknine and Worrell 2014b] for
details.

3. TERMINATION OF LINEAR LOOPS
Termination is a fundamental decision problem in program verification. In particu-
lar, termination of programs with linear assignments and guards has been extensively
studied over the last decade; as discussed earlier, this has led to the development of

ACM SIGLOG News                               5                              Vol. 2, No. 2, April 2015
powerful semi-algorithms to prove termination via synthesis of ranking functions, sev-
eral of which have been implemented in software-verification tools.
  In this survey, we focus on linear loops, i.e., programs of the form:
                        P : x ← t ; while Bx ≥ c do x ← Ax + a ,
where x is vector of variables, t is a vector of integer, rational, or real numbers, a and
c are integer vectors, and A and B are integer matrices of the appropriate dimensions.
Here the loop guard is a conjunction of linear inequalities and the loop body consists
of a simultaneous affine assignment to x. When vectors a and c are both zero, the loop
is said to be homogeneous.
   The dimension of a linear loop is that of vector x. For P of dimension d, we say
that P terminates on a set S ⊆ Rd if it terminates for all initial vectors t ∈ S. In
2004, Tiwari gave a procedure to decide whether a given linear loop terminates on
Rd [Tiwari 2004], and two years later Braverman showed decidability of termination
on Qd [Braverman 2006]. However the most natural problems from the point of view
of program verification are (i) termination on Zd and (ii) termination on given integer
singleton sets (corresponding to fixed initial starting conditions, and also known as the
Halting Problem for linear loops).
   While termination on Zd reduces to termination on Qd in the homogeneous case (by
a straightforward scaling argument), termination on Zd in the general case is stated
as an open problem in [Ben-Amram et al. 2012; Braverman 2006; Tiwari 2004]. Re-
cently, we established decidability of termination on Zd for linear loops provided either
that such loops have dimension at most 4 or that the update matrix A is diagonalis-
able [Ouaknine et al. 2015]. (The general case however remains open.)
   Two observations are in order. First—recalling that the guard of linear loops con-
sists of a conjunction of linear inequalities—a given linear loop eventually halts if and
only if one of the linear inequalities is eventually violated. In the study of linear loop
termination, it is therefore sufficient to restrict one’s attention to loops with a single
inequality as guard. Second, given an inhomogeneous linear loop P of dimension d as
above, one can readily manufacture a homogeneous linear loop P0 such that P halts on
a given initial starting vector t ∈ Rd if and only if P0 halts on t, 1 ∈ Rd+1 (i.e., the vector
t augmented by a (d + 1)th entry of 1. When studying termination on singleton sets, we
may therefore assume homogeneity at the cost of increasing the dimension by 1. Note
however that the attendant transformation may fail to preserve certain properties of
the update matrix, such as diagonalisability.
   Let us therefore examine the following d-dimensional homogeneous linear loop:
                          Q : x ← t ; while bT x ≥ 0 do x ← Ax ,
where bT is a row vector. Writing un = bT An t, easily follows from the Cayley-Hamilton
theorem that u = hu0 , u1 , u2 , . . .i is an LRS of order at most d. (Conversely, any LRS of
order d may be realised as such a d-dimensional linear loop.) One can moreover show
that u is simple if and only if A is diagonalisable.
  From the above observations and our earlier results on LRS, we immediately obtain
the following: it is decidable, for any fixed starting vector t ∈ Zd , whether Q terminates
provided either that d is at most 5, or that A is diagonalisable and d is at most 9.
Moreover, by way of hardness, decidability of termination in dimension 6 or above (in
the non-diagonalisable case) would necessarily entail major breakthroughs in analytic
number theory. Turning to the inhomogeneous program P, one can decide termination
on a singleton set provided that P has dimension 4 or less, simply by homogenising.
  Let us return to the question of the termination of P on Zd , under the assumption
that A is diagonalisable. This problem can equivalently be posed in terms of whether
the set NT of initial values t ∈ Rd on which P is non-terminating contains an integer

ACM SIGLOG News                              6                              Vol. 2, No. 2, April 2015
point. The set NT is easily seen to be convex. In the following example it also hap-
pens to be a semi-algebraic subset of Rd , i.e., defined by a conjunction of polynomial
inequalities with integer coefficients.
  Example 3.1. Let θ be a fixed real number that is not a rational multiple of π, and
consider the program
              x                           x       cos θ − sin θ 0   x
                 !                          !                     !   !
               y ← t ; while z − y ≥ 0 do y ← sin θ cos θ 0         y .
               z                          z         0      0    1   z
The update matrix in the loop body is a counter-clockwise rotation around the z-axis by
angle θ. The set of non-terminating points is thus the cone {(x, y, z) ∈ R3 : z 2 ≥ x2 +y 2 }.

   Note that the update matrix in Example 3.1 is both diagonalisable and orthogonal.
It follows that it has a basis of eigenvectors, all corresponding to eigenvalues of modu-
lus one. More generally, consider an inhomogeneous linear loop with a diagonalisable
update matrix A. Writing Rd as a direct sum Rd = V1 ⊕ . . . ⊕ Vm , where each Vi is a
sum of eigenspaces of A corresponding to eigenvalues of a given fixed modulus, it is
shown in [Ouaknine et al. 2015] that for each i the set NT ∩ Vi is an (effectively com-
putable) semi-algebraic subset of Rd . A key step to proving this result is to show how
to compute all integer linear relationships among the phases of the eigenvalues asso-
ciated to each Vi . Such a computation is possible thanks to number-theoretic results of
Masser [Masser 1988].
   While we know that NT ∩ Vi is semi-algebraic for i = 1, . . . , m, whether the set NT it-
self is semi-algebraic appears to be a much harder question. However for the purposes
of deciding termination, this issue can be side-stepped by focusing on eventual non-
termination rather than non-termination. We say that P is eventually non-terminating
on t ∈ Rd if, starting from initial value t, after executing the loop body x ← Ax + a a
finite number of times whilst disregarding the loop guard, we eventually reach a value
on which P fails to terminate. We write ENT for the set of eventually non-terminating
initial vectors. Clearly and NT ⊆ ENT and P is non-terminating if and only if ENT
contains an integer point.
   Decidability of termination in arbitrary dimension (assuming a diagonalisable up-
date matrix) was shown in [Ouaknine et al. 2015] through an analysis of the set
ENT. Given a linear loop, it is shown in [Ouaknine et al. 2015] how to compute a
convex semi-algebraic set W ⊆ Rd such that the integer points t ∈ W are precisely
the eventually non-terminating integer initial values. Since, by a result of Khachiyan
and Porkolab [Khachiyan and Porkolab 1997], it is decidable whether a convex semi-
algebraic set contains an integer point [Khachiyan and Porkolab 1997],3 one can de-
cide whether a linear loop is terminating on Zd . The computation of W makes crit-
ical use of deep number-theoretic tools such as the S-units theorem of Evertse, van
der Poorten, and Schlickewei [Evertse 1984; van der Poorten and Schlickewei 1982],
which as mentioned earlier played a key role in establishing decidability of Ultimate
Positivity for simple LRS of all orders. Roughly speaking, these tools are used to prove
that the termination of P on a given initial vector t is determined by the components
of t on eigenspaces corresponding to eigenvalues of maximum modulus. Critically the
non-effectiveness of these results is not a problem when considering eventual non-
termination.

3 By contrast, recall that the existence of an integer point in an arbitrary (i.e., not necessarily convex) semi-
algebraic set—which is equivalent to Hilbert’s tenth problem—is well-known to be undecidable.


ACM SIGLOG News                                       7                                    Vol. 2, No. 2, April 2015
  The set W is used in [Ouaknine et al. 2015] in lieu of the set ENT of eventually non-
terminating points. It is immediate from the definition of W that W and ENT have
the same topological closure, and thus [Ouaknine et al. 2015] shows inter alia that the
topological closure of ENT is semi-algebraic. Whether ENT or NT are semi-algebraic is,
to the best of our knowledge, open. We refer the reader to [Ouaknine et al. 2015] for
full details.
  With regard to complexity, termination of linear loops over the set of all integer
points is easily seen to be coNP-hard, by reduction from integer programming, taking
the update matrix A to be the identity. The procedure proposed in [Ouaknine et al.
2015], on the other hand, requires exponential space. In contrast, even though not
stated explicitly in [Tiwari 2004] and [Braverman 2006], deciding termination on Rd
and Qd (which relies mainly on spectral techniques and linear algebra) can be done in
polynomial time.4

4. OPEN PROBLEMS
Decidability of termination of linear loops remains open if we do not assume a diago-
nalisable update matrix. Decidability of termination is also open for the more general
class of linear constraint loops, that is, loops of the form
                                                     
                                                      x
                        x ← t ; while Bx ≥ c do A         ≤d ,
                                                      x0
in which the loop body consists of a conjunction of linear constraints among the “before”
and “after” values of the program variables, respectively denoted x and x0 .
   A special case of linear constraint loops feature octagonal constraints, which have
the form x − y 0 ∼ k or x + y 0 ∼ k for (possibly identical) program variables x and y,
integer k, and comparison operator ∼ ∈ {≤, ≥}. It is shown in [Bozga et al. 2012] that
for linear constraint loops with exclusively octagonal constraints, the set of integer
points in NT is effectively semi-linear. In fact more is true: for such loops the reflexive
transitive closure of the transition relation denoted by the loop body is an effectively
computable semi-linear set.
   The outstanding open problem in the area is the decidability of Skolem’s Problem. At
we have remarked above, currently decidability is only known for LRS of order at most
4. While decidability at order 2 is elementary, the proofs of decidability at orders 3 and
4 make use of Baker’s Theorem. On the other hand, unlike for the Positivity Problem,
it is not clear that a solution to Skolem’s Problem necessarily entails progress in un-
derstanding Diophantine approximation for logarithms of algebraic numbers. In terms
of computational complexity, the current best lower bound is NP-hardness (which al-
ready holds for the restricted case of matrices with all entries either 0 or 1).

REFERENCES
J. P. Bell and S. Gerhold. 2007. On the Positivity Set of a Linear Recurrence. Israel Jour. Math. 57 (2007).
A. M. Ben-Amram and S. Genaim. 2014. Ranking Functions for Linear-Constraint Loops. J. ACM 61, 4
      (2014).
A. M. Ben-Amram, S. Genaim, and A. N. Masud. 2012. On the Termination of Integer Loops. ACM Trans.
      Program. Lang. Syst. 34, 4 (2012).
J. Berstel and M. Mignotte. 1976. Deux propriétés décidables des suites récurrentes linéaires. Bull. Soc.
      Math. France 104 (1976).
M. Bozga, R. Iosif, and F. Konecný. 2012. Deciding conditional termination. In Proc. TACAS (LNCS), Vol.
      7214. Springer.

4 This observation relies on the facts that one can compute Jordan canonical forms of integer matrices and
solve instances of linear programming problems with algebraic numbers in polynomial time [Cai 1994].


ACM SIGLOG News                                      8                                  Vol. 2, No. 2, April 2015
M. Braverman. 2006. Termination of integer linear programs. In Proc. CAV (LNCS), Vol. 4144. Springer.
J.-Y. Cai. 1994. Computing Jordan Normal Forms Exactly for Commuting Matrices in Polynomial Time. Int.
     J. Found. Comput. Sci. 5, 3/4 (1994), 293–302.
J.W.S. Cassels. 1965. An introduction to Diophantine approximation. Camb. Univ. Press.
B. Cook, A. Podelski, and A. Rybalchenko. 2011. Proving Program Termination. Commun. ACM 54, 5 (2011).
G. Everest, A. van der Poorten, I. Shparlinski, and T. Ward. 2003. Recurrence Sequences. American Mathe-
     matical Society.
J.-H. Evertse. 1984. On sums of S-units and linear recurrences. Compositio Mathematica 53, 2 (1984).
W. I. Gasarch. 2015. Proving Programs Terminate Using Well-Founded Orderings, Ramsey’s Theorem, and
     Matrices. Advances in Computers 97 (2015), 147–200.
V. Halava, T. Harju, and M. Hirvensalo. 2006. Positivity of second order linear recurrent sequences. Discrete
     Applied Mathematics 154, 3 (2006).
V. Halava, T. Harju, M. Hirvensalo, and J. Karhumäki. 2005. Skolem’s Problem – On the Border between
     Decidability and Undecidability. Technical Report 683. Turku Centre for Computer Science.
R. Kannan and R. J. Lipton. 1986. Polynomial-Time Algorithm for the Orbit Problem. J. ACM 33, 4 (1986).
L. Khachiyan and L. Porkolab. 1997. Computing Integral Points in Convex Semi-algebraic Sets. In Proc.
     FOCS. 162–171.
V. Laohakosol and P. Tangsupphathawat. 2009. Positivity of third order linear recurrence sequences. Discrete
     Applied Mathematics 157, 15 (2009).
R. J. Lipton and K. W. Regan. 2013. People, Problems, and Proofs - Essays from Gödel’s Lost Letter: 2010.
     Springer.
L. Liu. 2010. Positivity of Three-Term Recurrence Sequences. Elec. J. Comb. 17, 1 (2010).
D. W. Masser. 1988. Linear Relations on Algebraic Groups. In New Advances in Transcendence Theory.
     Camb. Univ. Press.
M. Mignotte, T. Shorey, and R. Tijdeman. 1984. The distance between terms of an algebraic recurrence
     sequence. J. für die reine und angewandte Math. 349 (1984).
J. Ouaknine, J. Sousa Pinto, and J. Worrell. 2015. On Termination of Integer Linear Loops. In Proc. SODA.
     ACM-SIAM.
J. Ouaknine and J. Worrell. 2012. Decision Problems for Linear Recurrence Sequences. In Proc. RP (LNCS),
     Vol. 7550. Springer.
J. Ouaknine and J. Worrell. 2014a. On the Positivity Problem for Simple Linear Recurrence Sequences. In
     Proc. ICALP (LNCS), Vol. 8573. Springer.
J. Ouaknine and J. Worrell. 2014b. Positivity Problems for Low-Order Linear Recurrence Sequences. In Proc.
     SODA. ACM-SIAM.
J. Ouaknine and J. Worrell. 2014c. Ultimate Positivity is Decidable for Simple Linear Recurrence Sequences.
     In Proc. ICALP (LNCS), Vol. 8573. Springer.
G. Rozenberg and A. Salomaa. 1994. Cornerstones of Undecidability. Prentice Hall.
A. Salomaa. 1976. Growth Functions of Lindenmayer Systems: Some New Approaches. In Automata, Lan-
     guages, Development, A. Lindenmayer and G. Rozenberg (Eds.). North-Holland.
A. Salomaa and M. Soittola. 1978. Automata-theoretic aspects of formal power series. Springer.
M. Soittola. 1976. On D0L Synthesis Problem. In Automata, Languages, Development, A. Lindenmayer and
     G. Rozenberg (Eds.). North-Holland.
T. Tao. 2008. Structure and randomness: pages from year one of a mathematical blog. American Mathemati-
     cal Society.
S. P. Tarasov and M. N. Vyalyi. 2011. Orbits of Linear Maps and Regular Languages. In Proc. CSR (LNCS),
     Vol. 6651. Springer.
A. Tiwari. 2004. Termination of Linear Programs. In Proc. CAV (LNCS), Vol. 3114. Springer.
A.J. van der Poorten and H.P. Schlickewei. 1982. The growth conditions for recurrence sequences. Macquarie
     Math. Reports 82-0041 (1982).
N. K. Vereshchagin. 1985. The problem of appearance of a zero in a linear recurrence sequence (in Russian).
     Mat. Zametki 38, 2 (1985).




ACM SIGLOG News                                     9                                  Vol. 2, No. 2, April 2015
