                                               An Introduction to Temporal Graphs: An
                                                       Algorithmic Perspective?

                                                                            Othon Michail
                                                     Computer Technology Institute & Press “Diophantus” (CTI),
arXiv:1503.00278v1 [cs.DM] 1 Mar 2015




                                                          N. Kazantzaki Str., Patras University Campus,
                                                                    Rio, P.O. Box 1382, 26504,
                                                                          Patras, Greece
                                                                     Email: michailo@cti.gr
                                                                     Phone: +30 2610 960300



                                                Abstract. A temporal graph is, informally speaking, a graph that
                                                changes with time. When time is discrete and only the relationships
                                                between the participating entities may change and not the entities them-
                                                selves, a temporal graph may be viewed as a sequence G1 , G2 . . . , Gl of
                                                static graphs over the same (static) set of nodes V . Though static graphs
                                                have been extensively studied, for their temporal generalization we are
                                                still far from having a concrete set of structural and algorithmic princi-
                                                ples. Recent research shows that many graph properties and problems
                                                become radically different and usually substantially more difficult when
                                                an extra time dimension in added to them. Moreover, there is already
                                                a rich and rapidly growing set of modern systems and applications that
                                                can be naturally modeled and studied via temporal graphs. This, further
                                                motivates the need for the development of a temporal extension of graph
                                                theory. We survey here recent results on temporal graphs and temporal
                                                graph problems that have appeared in the Computer Science community.


                                        1     Introduction

                                        The conception and development of graph theory is probably one of the
                                        most important achievements of mathematics and combinatorics of the
                                        last few centuries. Its applications are inexhaustible and ubiquitous. Al-
                                        most every scientific domain, from mathematics and computer science to
                                        chemistry and biology, is a natural source of problems of outstanding im-
                                        portance that can be naturally modeled and studied by graphs. The 1736
                                        paper of Euler on the Seven Bridges of Königsberg problem is regarded as
                                        the first formal treatment of a graph-theoretic problem. Till then, graph
                                        ?
                                            Supported in part by the project “Foundations of Dynamic Distributed Computing
                                            Systems” (FOCUS) which is implemented under the “ARISTEIA” Action of the
                                            Operational Programme “Education and Lifelong Learning” and is co-funded by
                                            the European Union (European Social Fund) and Greek National Resources.
theory has found applications in electrical networks, theoretical chem-
istry, social network analysis, computer networks (like the Internet) and
distributed systems, to name a few, and has also revealed some of the
most outstanding problems of modern mathematics like the four color
theorem and the traveling salesman problem.
    Graphs simply represent a set of objects and a set of pairwise relations
between them. It is very common, and shows up in many applications, the
pairwise relations to come with some additional information. For example,
in a graph representing a set of cities and the available roads from each
city to the others, the additional information of an edge (C1 , C2 ) could
be the average time it takes to drive from city C1 to city C2 . In a graph
representing bonding between atoms in a molecule, edges could also have
an additional bond order or bond strength information. Such applications
can be modeled by weighted or, more generally, by labeled graphs, in
which edges (and in some cases also nodes) are assigned values from some
domain, like the set of natural numbers. An example of a classical, very
rich, and well-studied area of labeled graphs is the area of graph coloring
[MR02].
    Temporal graphs (also known as dynamic, evolving [Fer04], or time-
varying [FMS09, CFQS12] graphs) can be informally described as graphs
that change with time. In terms of modeling, they can be thought of as
a special case of labeled graphs, where labels capture some measure of
time. Inversely, it is also true that any property of a graph labeled from a
discrete set of labels corresponds to some temporal property if interpreted
appropriately. For example, a proper edge-coloring, i.e. a coloring of the
edges in which no two adjacent edges share a common color, corresponds
to a temporal graph in which no two adjacent edges share a common
time-label, i.e. no two adjacent edges ever appear at the same time. Still,
the time notion and the rich domain of modern applications motivating
its incorporation to graphs, gives rise to a brand new set of challenging,
important, and practical problems that could not have been observed
from the more abstract perspective of labeled graphs.
    Though the formal treatment of temporal graphs is still in its infancy,
there is already a huge identified set of applications and research domains
that motivate it and that could benefit from the development of a con-
crete set of results, tools, and techniques for temporal graphs. A great
variety of both modern and traditional networks such as information and
communication networks, social networks, transportation networks, and
several physical systems can be naturally modeled as temporal graphs. In
fact, this is true for almost any network with a dynamic topology. Most

                                     2
modern communication networks, such as mobile ad-hoc, sensor, peer-to-
peer, opportunistic, and delay-tolerant networks, are inherently dynamic.
In social networks, the topology usually represents the social connections
between a group of individuals and it changes as the social relationships
between the individuals are updated, or as individuals leave or enter the
group. In a transportation network, there is usually some fixed network of
routes and a set of transportation units moving over these routes and dy-
namicity refers to the change of the positions of the transportation units
in the network as time passes. Physical systems of interest may include
several systems of interacting particles or molecules reacting in a well-
mixed solution. Temporal relationships and temporal ordering of events
are also present in the study of epidemics, where a group of individuals
(or computing entities) come into contact with each other and we want
to study the spread of an infectious disease (or a computer virus) in the
population.


    A very rich motivating domain is that of distributed computing sys-
tems that are inherently dynamic. The growing interest in such sys-
tems has been mainly driven by the advent of low-cost wireless com-
munication devices and the development of efficient wireless communi-
cation protocols. Apart from the huge amount of work that has been
devoted to applications, there is also a steadily growing concrete set
of foundational work. A notable set of works has studied (distributed)
computation in worst-case dynamic networks in which the topology may
change arbitrarily from round to round subject to some constraints that
allow for bounded end-to-end communication [OW05, KLO10, MCS14,
MCS13, DPR+ 13, APRU12]. Population protocols [AAD+ 06] and vari-
ants [MCS11a, MS14a] are collections of finite-state agents that move
passively, according to the dynamicity of the environment, and interact
in pairs when they come close to each other. The goal is typically for
the population to compute (i.e. agree on) something useful or construct
a desired network or structure in such an adversarial setting. Another in-
teresting direction assumes that the dynamicity of the network is a result
of randomness (this is also the case sometimes in population protocols).
Here the interest is on determining “good” properties of the dynamic
network that hold with high probability (abbreviated w.h.p. and mean-
ing with probability at least 1 − 1/nc for some constant c ≥ 1), such
as small (temporal) diameter, and on designing protocols for distributed
tasks [CMM+ 08, AKL08]. In all the above subjects, there is always some
sort of underlying temporal graph either assumed or implied. For in-

                                    3
troductory texts on the above lines of research in dynamic distributed
networks the reader is referred to [CFQS12, MCS11b, Sch02, KO11].
    Though static graphs 1 have been extensively studied, for their tempo-
ral generalization we are still far from having a concrete set of structural
and algorithmic principles. Additionally, it is not yet clear how is the com-
plexity of combinatorial optimization problems affected by introducing
to them a notion of time. In an early but serious attempt to answer this
question, Orlin [Orl81] observed that many dynamic languages derived
from NP-complete languages can be shown to be PSPACE-complete.
Among the other few things that we do know, is that the max-flow min-
cut theorem holds with unit capacities for time-respecting paths [Ber96].
Additionally, Kempe et al. [KKK00] proved that, in temporal graphs, the
classical formulation of Menger’s theorem is violated and the computation
of the number of node-disjoint s-z paths becomes NP-complete. A refor-
mulation of Menger’s theorem which is valid for all temporal graphs was
recently achieved in [MMCS13]. These results are discussed in Section 3.
Recently, building on the distributed online dynamic network model of
[KLO10], Dutta et al. [DPR+ 13], among other things, presented offline
centralized algorithms for the k-token dissemination problem. In k-token
dissemination, there are k distinct pieces of information (tokens) that are
initially present in some distributed processes and the problem is to dis-
seminate all the k tokens to all the processes in the dynamic network,
under the constraint that one token can go through an edge per round.
These results, motivated by distributed computing systems, are presented
in Section 4.
    Another important problem is that of designing an efficient temporal
graph given some requirements that the graph should meet. This problem
was recently studied in [MMCS13], where the authors introduced several
interesting cost minimization parameters for optimal temporal network
design. One of the parameters is the temporality of a graph G, in which the
goal is to create a temporal version of G minimizing the maximum num-
ber of labels of an edge, and the other is the temporal cost of G, in which
the goal is to minimize the total number of labels used. Optimization of
these parameters is performed subject to some connectivity constraint.
They proved several upper and lower bounds for the temporality of some
very basic graph families such as rings, directed acyclic graphs, and trees,
as well as a trade-off between the temporality and the maximum label
1
    In this article, we use “static” to refer to classical graphs. This is plausible as the
    opposite of “dynamic” that is also commonly used for temporal graphs. In any case,
    the terminology is still very far from being standard.


                                             4
of rings. Furthermore, they gave a generic method for computing a lower
bound of the temporality of an arbitrary graph with respect to (abbre-
viated w.r.t.) the constraint of preserving a time-respecting analogue of
every simple path of G. Finally, they proved that computing the temporal
cost w.r.t. the constraint of preserving at least one time-respecting path
from u to v whenever v is reachable from u in G, is APX-hard. Most of
these results are discussed in Section 5.
    Other recent papers have focused on understanding the complexity
and providing algorithms for temporal versions of classical graph prob-
lems. For example, the authors of [MS14b] considered temporal analogues
of traveling salesman problems (TSP) in temporal graphs, and in the
way also introduced and studied temporal versions of other fundamental
problems like Maximum Matching, Path Packing, Max-TSP, and
Minimum Cycle Cover. One such version of TSP is the problem of
exploring the nodes of a temporal graph as soon as possible. In contrast
to the positive results known for the static case strong inapproximability
results can be proved for the dynamic case [MS14b, EHK15]. Still, there
is room for positive results for interesting special cases [EHK15]. Another
such problem is the Temporal Traveling Salesman Problem with
Costs One and Two (abbreviated TTSP(1,2)), a temporal analogue
of TSP(1,2), in which the temporal graph is a complete weighted graph
with edge-costs from {1, 2} and the cost of an edge may vary from in-
stance to instance [MS14b]. The goal is to find a minimum cost temporal
TSP tour. Several polynomial-time approximation algorithms have been
proved for TTSP(1,2) [MS14b]. The best approximation is (1.7 + ε) for
the generic TTSP(1,2) and (13/8 + ε) for its interesting special case in
which the lifetime of the temporal graph is restricted to n. These and
related results are presented in Section 6.
    Additionally, there are works that have considered random tempo-
ral graphs, in which the labels are chosen according to some probability
distribution. We give a brief introduction to such models in Section 8.
Moreover, Section 2 provides all necessary preliminaries and definitions
and also a first discussion on temporal paths and Section 7 discusses a
temporal graph model in which the availability times of the edges are
provided by a set of linear functions.
    As is always the case, not all interesting results and material could fit
in a single document. We list here some of them. Holme and Saramäki
[HS12] give an extensive overview of the literature related to temporal
networks from a diverge range of scientific domains. Harary and Gupta
[HG97] discuss applications of temporal graphs and highlight the great

                                     5
importance of a systematic treatment of the subject. Kostakos [Kos09]
uses temporal graphs to represent real datasets, shows how to derive var-
ious node metrics like average temporal proximity, average geodesic prox-
imity and temporal availability, and also gives a static representation of a
temporal graph (similar to the static expansion that we discuss in Section
2). Avin et al. [AKL08] studied the cover time of a simple random walk
on Markovian dynamic graphs and proved that, in great contrast to be-
ing always polynomial in static graphs, it is exponential in some dynamic
graphs. Clementi et al. [CMM+ 08] studied the flooding time (also known
as information dissemination; see a similar problem discussed in Section
4) in the following type of edge-markovian dynamic graphs: if an edge
exists at time t then, at time t + 1, it disappears with probability q, and if
instead the edge does not exist at time t, then it appears at time t+1 with
probability p. There are also several papers that have focused on temporal
graphs in which every instance of the graph is drawn independently at
random according to some distribution [CPMS07, HHL88, Pit87, KK02]
(the last three did it in the context of dynamic gossip-based mechanisms),
e.g. according to G(n, p). A model related to random temporal graphs, is
the random phone-call model, in which each node, at each step, can com-
municate with a random neighbour [DGH+ 87, KSSV00]. Other authors
[XFJ03, FT98] have assumed that an edge may be available for a whole
time-interval [t1 , t2 ] or several such intervals and not just for discrete mo-
ments. Aaron et al. [AKM14] studied the Dynamic Map Visitation
problem, in which a team of agents must visit a collection of critical
locations as quickly as possible in a dynamic environment. Kontogian-
nis et al. [KMP+ 15], among other things, presented oracles for providing
time-dependent min-cost route plans and conducted their experimental
evaluation on a data set of the city of Berlin.


2   Modeling and Basic Properties

When time is assumed to be discrete, a temporal graph (or digraph) is
just a static graph (or digraph) G = (V, E) with every edge e ∈ E labeled
with zero or more natural numbers. The labels of an edge may be viewed
as the times at which the the edge is available. For example, an edge
with no labels is never available while, on the other hand, an edge with
labels all the even natural numbers is available every even time. Labels
could correspond to seconds, days, years, or could even correspond to
some artificial discrete measure of time under consideration.

                                       6
    There are several ways of modeling formally discrete temporal graphs.
One is to consider an underlying static graph G = (V, E) together with a
labeling λ : E → 2IN of G assigning to every edge of G a (possibly empty)
set of natural numbers, called labels. Then the temporal graph of G with
respect to λ is denoted by λ(G). This notation is particularly useful when
one wants to explicitly refer to and study properties of the labels of the
temporal graph. For example, the multiset of all labelsPof λ(G) can be
denoted by λ(E), their cardinality is defined as |λ| = e∈E |λ(e)|, and
the maximum and minimum label assigned to the whole temporal graph
as λmax = max{l ∈ λ(E)} and λmin = min{l ∈ λ(E)}, respectively.
Moreover, we define the age (or lifetime) of a temporal graph λ(G) as
α(λ) = λmax − λmin + 1 (or simply α when clear from context). Note that
in case λmin = 1 then we have α(λ) = λmax .
    Another, often convenient, notation of a temporal graph D is as an
ordered pair of disjoint sets (V, A) such that A ⊆ V2 × IN in case of a
graph and with V2 replaced by V 2 \{(u, u) : u ∈ V } in case of a digraph.
                       

The set A is called the set of time-edges. A can also be used to refer to
the structure of the temporal graph at a particular time. In particular,
A(t) = {e : (e, t) ∈ A} is the (possibly empty) set of all edges that appear
in the temporal graph at time t. In turn, A(t) can be used to define a
snapshot of the temporal graph D at time t, which is usually called the
t-th instance of D, and is the static graph D(t) = (V, A(t)). So, it becomes
evident that a temporal graph may also be viewed as a sequence of static
graphs (G1 , G2 , . . . , Gλmax ).
    Finally, it is typically very useful to expand in time the whole tem-
poral graph and obtain an equivalent static graph without losing any
information. The reason for doing this is mainly because static graphs
are much better understood and there is a rich set of well established
tools and techniques for them. So, a common approach to solve a prob-
lem concerning temporal graphs is to first express the given temporal
graph as a static graph and then try to apply or adjust one of the exist-
ing tools that works on static graphs. Formally, the static expansion of a
temporal graph D = (V, A) is a DAG H = (S, E) defined as follows. If
V = {u1 , u2 , . . . , un } then S = {uij : λmin − 1 ≤ i ≤ λmax , 1 ≤ j ≤ n} and
E = {(u(i−1)j , uij 0 ) : λmin ≤ i ≤ λmax and j = j 0 or (uj , uj 0 ) ∈ A(i)}. In
words, for every discrete moment we create a copy of V representing the
instance of the nodes at that time (called time-nodes). We may imagine
the moments as levels or rows from top to bottom, every level contain-
ing a copy of V . Then we add outgoing edges from time-nodes of one
level only to time-nodes of the level below it. In particular, we connect a

                                       7
time-node u(i−1)j to its own subsequent copy uij and to every time-node
uij 0 s.t. (uj , uj 0 ) is an edge of the temporal graph at time i. Observe that
the above construction includes all possible vertical edges from a node to
its own subsequent instance. These edges express the fact that nodes are
usually not oblivious and can preserve their on history in time (modeled
like propagating information to themselves). Nevertheless, depending on
the application, these edges may some times be omitted.

2.1    Journeys
As is the case in static graphs, the notion of a path is one of the most
central notions of a temporal graph, however it has to be redefined to
take time into account. A temporal (or time-respecting) walk W of a
temporal graph D = (V, A) is an alternating sequence of nodes and times
(u1 , t1 , u2 , t2 , . . . , uk−1 , tk−1 , uk ) where (ui ui+1 , ti ) ∈ A, for all 1 ≤ i ≤
k − 1, and ti < ti+1 , for all 1 ≤ i ≤ k − 2. We call tk−1 − t1 + 1 the duration
(or temporal length) of the walk W , t1 its departure time and tk−1 its
arrival time. A journey (or temporal/time-respecting path) J is a temporal
walk with pairwise distinct nodes. In words, a journey of D is a path of
the underlying static graph of D that uses strictly increasing edge-labels.
A u-v journey J is called foremost from time t ∈ IN if it departs after time
t and its arrival time is minimized. The temporal distance from a node u
at time t to a node v is defined as the duration of a foremost u-v journey
from time t. We say that a temporal graph D = (V, A) has temporal (or
dynamic) diameter d, if d is the minimum integer for which it holds that
the temporal distance from every time-node (u, t) ∈ V × {0, 1, . . . , α − d}
to every node v ∈ V is at most d.
     A nice property of foremost journeys is that they can be computed
efficiently. In particular there is an algorithm that, given a source node s ∈
V and a time tstart , computes for all w ∈ V \{s} a foremost s-w journey
from time tstart [MMCS13, MMS15]. The running time of the algorithm
is O(nα3 (λ) + |λ|), where n here and throughout this article denotes the
number of nodes of the temporal graph. It is worth mentioning that this
algorithm takes as input the whole temporal graph D. Such algorithms
are known as offline algorithms in contrast to online algorithms to which
the temporal graph is revealed on the fly. The algorithm is essentially a
temporal translation of the breadth-first search (BFS) algorithm (see e.g.
[CLRS01] page 531) with path length replaced by path arrival time. For
every time t, the algorithm picks one after the other all nodes that have
been already reached (initially only the source node s) and inspects all
edges that are incident to that node at time t. If a time-edge (e, t) leads to

                                            8
a node w that has not yet been reached, then (e, t) is picked as an edge of
a foremost journey from the source to w. This greedy algorithm is correct
for the same reason that the BFS algorithm is correct. An immediate
way to see this is by considering the static expansion of the temporal
graph. The algorithm begins from the upper copy (i.e. at level 0) of the
source in the static expansion and essentially executes the following slight
variation of BFS: at step i+1, given the set R of already reached nodes at
level i, the algorithm first follows all vertical edges leaving R in order to
reach in one step the (i + 1)-th copy of each node in R, and then inspects
all diagonal edges leaving R to discover new reachabilities. The algorithm
outputs as a foremost journey to a node u, the directed path of time-edges
by which it first reached the column of u (vertical edges are interpreted
as waiting on the corresponding node). The above algorithm computes a
shortest path to each column of the static expansion. Correctness follows
from the fact that shortest paths to columns are equivalent to foremost
journeys to the nodes corresponding to the columns.

3     Connectivity and Menger’s Theorem

Assume that we are given a static graph G and a source node s and a sink
node z of G. 2 Two paths from s to z are called node-disjoint if they have
only the nodes s and z in common. Menger’s theorem [Men27], which is
the analogue of the max-flow min-cut theorem for undirected graphs, is
one of the most basic theorems in the theory of graph connectivity. It
states that the maximum number of node-disjoint s-z paths is equal to
the minimum number of nodes that must be removed in order to separate
s from z (see also [Bol98] page 75).
    It was first observed in [Ber96] and then further studied in [KKK00]
that this fundamental theorem of static graphs, is violated in temporal
graphs if we keep its original formulation and only require it to hold
for journeys instead of paths. In fact, the violation holds even for a very
special case of temporal graphs, those in which every edge has at most one
label, which are known as single-labeled temporal graphs (as opposed to
the more general multi-labeled temporal graphs that we have discussed so
far). Even in such temporal graphs, the maximum number of node-disjoint
journeys from s to z can be strictly less than the minimum number of
nodes whose deletion leaves no s-z journey. For a simple example, observe
in Figure 1 that there are no two node-disjoint journeys from s to z but
2
    The sink is usually denoted by t in the literature. We use z instead as we reserve t
    to refer to time moments.


                                           9
after deleting any one node (other than s or z) there still remains a s-z
journey. To see this, notice that every journey has to visit at least two of
the inner-nodes u2 , u3 , u4 . If u2 is one of them, then a vertical obstacle is
introduced which cannot be avoided by any other journey. If u2 is not,
then the only disjoint path remaining is (s, u2 , z) which is not a journey.
On the other hand, any set of two inner vertices has a s-z journey going
through them implying that any s-z separator must have size at least 2.
As shown in [KKK00], this construction can be generalized to a single-
labeled graph with 2k − 1 inner nodes in which: (i) every s-z journey
visits at least k of these nodes, ensuring again that there are no two
node-disjoint s-z journeys and (ii) there is a journey through any set of k
inner nodes, ensuring that every s-z separator must have size at least k.


                                      u2
                            5                    3

             s=    u1            2          6              u5   =z

                        1                              7
                            u3                  u4
                                      4

Fig. 1. A counterexample of Menger’s theorem for temporal graphs (adopted from
[KKK00]). Each edge has a single time-label indicating its availability time.


    On the positive side, the violation does not hold if we replace node-
disjointness by edge-disjointness and node removals by edge removals.
In particular, it was proved in [Ber96] that for single-labeled tempo-
ral graphs, the maximum number of edge-disjoint journeys from s to
z is equal to the minimum number of edges whose deletion leaves no s-
z journey, that is, that the max-flow min-cut theorem of static graphs
holds with unit capacities for journeys in single-labeled temporal graphs.
The construction (which we adopt from [KKK00]) is simply an ad-hoc
static expansion for the special case of single-labeled temporal graphs.
Let G = (V, E) be the underlying graph of an undirected single-labeled
temporal graph. We construct a labeled directed graph G0 = (V 0 , E 0 ) as
follows. for every {u, v} ∈ E we add in G0 two new nodes x and y and the
directed edges (u, x), (v, x), (y, u), (y, v), (x, y). Then we relax all labels
required so that there is sufficient “room” (w.r.t. time) to introduce (by
labeling the new edges) both a (u, x, y, v) journey and a (v, x, y, u) jour-
ney. The goal is to be able to both move by a journey from u to v and

                                      10
from v to u in G0 . An easy way to do this is the following: if t is the la-
bel of {u, v}, then we can label (u, x), (x, y), (y, v) by (t.1, t.2, t.3), where
t.1 < t.2 < t.3, and similarly for (v, x), (x, y), (y, u). Then we construct
a static directed graph G00 = (V 00 , E 00 ) as follows: For every u ∈ V let
y1 , y2 , . . . , yi , . . . be its incoming edges and x1 , x2 , . . . , xj , . . . its outgoing
edges. We want to preserve only the time-respecting y, u, x traversals. To
this end, for each one of the (yi , u) edges we introduce a node wi and the
edge (yi , wi ) and for each one of the (u, xi ) edges we introduce a node
vj and the edge (vj , xj ) and we delete node u. Finally, we introduce the
edge (wi , vj ) iff (yi , u), (u, xj ) is time-respecting. This reduction preserves
edge-disjointness and sizes of edge separators and if we add a super-source
and a super-sink to G00 the max-flow min-cut theorem for static directed
graphs yields the aforementioned result. Another interesting thing is that
reachability in G under journeys corresponds to (path) reachability in
G00 so that we can use BFS on G00 to answer questions about foremost
journeys in G, as we did with the static expansion in Section 2.1.
     Fortunately, the above important negative result concerning Menger’s
theorem has a turnaround. In particular, it was proved in [MMCS13] that
if one reformulates Menger’s theorem in a way that takes time into ac-
count then a very natural temporal analogue of Menger’s theorem is ob-
tained, which is valid for all (multi-labeled) temporal networks. The idea
is to replace in the original formulation node-disjointness by node depar-
ture time disjointness (or out-disjointness) and node removals by node
departure times removals. When we say that we remove node departure
time (u, t) we mean that we remove all edges leaving u at time t, i.e. we
remove label t from all (u, v) edges (for all v ∈ V ). So, when we ask “how
many node departure times are needed to separate two nodes s and z?”
we mean how many node departure times must be selected so that after
the removal of all the corresponding time-edges the resulting temporal
graph has no s-z journey (note that this is a different question from how
many time-edges must be removed and, in fact, the latter question does
not result in a Menger’s analogue). Two journeys are called out-disjoint
if they never leave from the same node at the same time (see Figure 2 for
an example).


Theorem 1 (Menger’s Temporal Analogue [MMCS13]). Take any
temporal graph λ(G), where G = (V, E), with two distinguished nodes s
and z. The maximum number of out-disjoint journeys from s to z is equal
to the minimum number of node departure times needed to separate s from
z.

                                              11
                                         u2               2
                        1

                        1,2                               2,3
                                2
        s = u1                                   3                   u4 = z
                                        3
                                                      4
                            3                          4,5
                       3                    u3            5


Fig. 2. An example of a temporal graph. The dashed curves highlight the directions of
three out-disjoint journeys from s to z. The labels used by each of these journeys are
indicated by the labels that are enclosed in boxes.



    The idea is to take the static expansion H = (S, A) of λ(G) and,
for each time-node uij with at least two outgoing edges to nodes different
than ui+1 j, add a new node wij and the edges (uij , wij ) and (wij , u(i+1)j1 ),
(wij , u(i+1)j2 ), . . . , (wij , u(i+1)jk ). Then define an edge capacity function
c : A → {1, λmax } as follows: edges (uij , u(i+1)j ) take capacity λmax and
all other edges take capacity 1. The theorem follows by observing that
the maximum u01 -uλmax n flow is equal to the minimum of the capacity of
a u01 -uλmax n cut, the maximum number of out-disjoint journeys from s to
z is equal to the maximum u01 -uλmax n flow, and the minimum number of
node departure times needed to separate s from z is equal to the minimum
of the capacity of a u01 -uλmax n cut. See also Figure 3 for an illustration.


4    Dissemination and Gathering of Information

A natural application domain of temporal graphs is that of gossiping
and in general of information dissemination, mainly by a distributed set
of entities (e.g. a group of people or a set of distributed processes). Two
early such examples were the telephone problem [BS72] and the minimum
broadcast time problem [Rav94]. In both, the goal is to transmit some
information to every participant of the system, while minimizing some
measure of communication or time. A more modern setting, but in the
same spirit, comes from the very young area of distributed computing
in highly dynamic networks [OW05, KLO10, KO11, CFQS12, MCS14,
MCS13].

                                            12
        s                                                                s
 u01                u02              u03               u04        u01                u02           u03               u04


                                                                                                                                    t=1

 u11                u12              u13               u14         u11               u12           u13               u14


                                                                                                                                    t=2

 u21                u22              u23               u24         u21               u22           u23               u24

                                                                                             w22
                                                                                                                                    t=3

 u31                 u32             u33               u34         u31                u32          u33               u34


                                                                                                                                    t=4

 u41                u42              u43               u44         u41               u42           u43               u44


                                                                                                                                    t=5

  u51               u52              u53                u54        u51               u52           u53                u54
                                                              z                                                             z
                           (a)                                                                     (b)
       s                                                                 s
 u01                u02              u03               u04        u01                u02           u03               u04

                                                                                 1
  5                   5               5                  5                                                                          t=1
            1                                                       2

 u11                u12              u13               u14                                  u12    u13               u14
                                           5                             u11
                                                                                                   1
                                 1                       5                       1
   5                  5                                                      1                                                      t=2
            1

 u21                u22              u23               u24        u21                u22           u23               u24
                       5    1                                                                 1
                                           5
                1          w22                                                   1           w22
                                                         5                                                                      1   t=3
   5                             1             1                                                       1
 u31                u32              u33               u34        u31                u32                   u33       u34

                                                   1                                                             1
   5                 5                5                  5                                             1                        1   t=4

 u41                u42              u43               u44        u41                u42           u43           u44

                                                   1                                                             1          2
   5                  5                5                 5                                                                          t=5

 u51                u52              u53               u54        u51                u52           u53               u54
                                                             z                                                             z
                           (c)                                                                     (d)

Fig. 3. (a) The static expansion of a temporal graph. Here, only two edges leave from
the same node at the same time: (u22 , u33 ) and (u22 , u34 ). (b) Adding a new node w22
and three new edges. This we ensures that a node departure time can be removed
by removing a single diagonal edge: removing edge (u22 , w22 ) removes all possible de-
partures from u22 . This ensures that separation of s and z by node-departure times
is equivalent to separation by a usual static cut. (c) Adding capacities to the edges.
Vertical edges take capacity λmax = 5 and diagonal edges take capacity 1. (d) The
maximum number of out-disjoint journeys from s to z is equal to the maximum flow
from s to z and both are equal to 3.
                                                                  13
    There are n nodes. In this context, nodes represent distributed pro-
cesses. Note, however, that most of the results that we will discuss, con-
cern centralized algorithms (and in case of lower bounds, these immedi-
ately hold for distributed algorithms as well). The nodes communicate
with other nodes in discrete rounds by interchanging messages. In every
round, an adversary scheduler selects a set of edges between the nodes
and every node may communicate with its current neighbors, as selected
by the adversary, usually by broadcasting a single message to be delivered
to all its neighbors. So, the dynamic topology behaves as a discrete tem-
poral graph where the i-th instance of the graph is the topology selected
by the adversary in round i. The main difference, compared to the setting
of the previous sections, is that now (in all results that we will discuss
in this section, apart from the last one) the topology is revealed to the
algorithms in an online and totally unpredictable way. An interesting spe-
cial case of temporal graphs consists of those temporal graphs that have
connected instances. A temporal graph D is called continuously connected
(also known as 1-interval connected ) if D(t) is connected for all times t ≥ 1
[OW05, KLO10]. Such temporal graphs have some very useful properties
concerning information propagation in a distributed setting, like, for ex-
ample, that if all nodes broadcast in every round all information that
they have heard so far, then in every round at least one more node learns
something new, which implies that a piece of information can in principle
be disseminated in at most n − 1 rounds. Naturally, the problem of in-
formation dissemination becomes much more interesting and challenging
if we do not allow nodes to transmit an unlimited amount of information
in every round, that is, if we restrict the size of the messages that they
can transmit.
    An interesting problem of token dissemination in such a setting, called
the k-token dissemination problem, was introduced and first studied in
[KLO10]. In this problem there is a domain of tokens T , each node is as-
signed a subset of the tokens, and a total of k distinct tokens is assigned
to the nodes. The goal is for an algorithm (centralized or distributed) to
organize the communication between the nodes in such a way that, under
any dynamic topology (from those described above), each node eventually
terminates and outputs (i.e. has learned) all k tokens. In particular, the
focus here is on token-forwarding algorithms. Such an algorithm is quite
restricted in that, in every round r and for every node u, it only picks a
single token from those already known by u (or the empty token ⊥) and
this token will be delivered to all the current neighbors of u by a single
broadcast transmission. Token-forwarding algorithms are simple, easy to

                                     14
implement, typically incur low overhead, and have been extensively stud-
ied in static networks [Lei92, Pel00]. We will present now a lower bound
from [KLO10] on the number of rounds for token dissemination, that
holds even for centralized token forwarding algorithms. Such centralized
algorithms are allowed to see and remember the whole state and history
of the entire network, but they have to make their selection of tokens to
be forwarded without knowing what topology will be scheduled by the
adversary in the current round. So, first the algorithm selects and then
the adversary reveals the topology, taking into account the algorithm’s
selection. For simplicity, it may be assumed that each of the k tokens is
assigned initially to exactly one (distinct) node.

Theorem 2 ([KLO10]). Any deterministic centralized algorithm for k-
token dissemination in continuously connected temporal graphs requires
at least Ω(n log k) rounds to complete in the worst case.

     The idea behind the proof is to define a potential function that charges
by 1/(k − i) the i-th token learned by each node. So, for example, the
first token learned by a node comes at a cheap price of 1/k while the last
token learned costs 1. The initial total potential is 1, because k nodes
have obtained their first token each, and the final potential (i.e. when all
nodes have learned all k tokens) is n · Hk = Θ(n log k). Then it suffices
to present an adversarial schedule, i.e. a continuously connected tempo-
ral graph, that forces any algorithm to achieve in every round at most a
bounded increase in potential. The topology of a round can be summa-
rized as follows. First we select all edges that contribute no cost, called
free edges. An edge {u, v} is free if the token transmitted by u is already
known by v and vice versa. The free edges partition the nodes into l com-
ponents C1 , C2 , . . . , Cl . We pick a representative vi from each component
Ci . It remains to construct a connected graph over the vi s. An observa-
tion is that each vi transmits a distinct token ti , otherwise at least two
of them should have been connected by a free edge (because two nodes
interchanging the same token cannot learn anything new). The idea is to
further partition the representatives into a small set of nodes that know
many tokens each and a large set of nodes that know few tokens each.
We can call the nodes that know many tokens the expensive ones, be-
cause according to the above potential function a new token at a node
that already knows a lot of tokens comes at a high price, and similarly
we call those nodes that know few tokens the cheap ones. In particular, a
node is expensive if it is missing at most l/6 tokens and cheap otherwise.
Roughly, a cheap node learns a new token at the low cost of at most

                                     15
6/l, because the cost of a token is inversely proportional to the number
of missing tokens before the token’s arrival. First we connect the cheap
nodes by an arbitrary line. As there are at most l such nodes and each
one of them obtains at most two new tokens (because it has at most two
neighbors on the line and each node transmits a single token), the total
cost of this component is at most 12, that is, bounded as desired. It re-
mains to connect the expensive nodes. It can be shown that there is a way
to match each expensive node to a distinct cheap node (i.e. by construct-
ing a matching between the expensive and the cheap nodes), so that no
expensive node learns a new token. So, the only additional cost is that
of the new tokens that cheap nodes obtain from expensive nodes. This
additional cost is roughly at most 6, so the total cost have been shown
to be bounded by a small constant as required. It is worth mentioning
that [KLO10], apart from the above lower bound, also proposed a simple
distributed algorithm for k-token dissemination that needs O(nk) rounds
in the worst case to deliver all tokens.
    The above lower bound can be further improved by exploiting the
probabilistic method [DPR+ 13]. In particular it can be shown that any
randomized token-forwarding algorithm (centralized or distributed) for
k-token dissemination needs Ω(nk/ log n) rounds. This lower bound is
within a logarithmic factor of the O(nk) upper bound of [KLO10]. The
construction is trivial (as is typical in probabilistic results, the inter-
esting machinery is in the analysis). Now all the representatives of the
connected components formed by the free edges are connected arbitrarily
by a line. The idea is to first prove the bound w.h.p. over an initial token
distribution, in which each of the nodes receives each of the k tokens inde-
pendently with probability 3/4. It can be shown in this case that, w.h.p.
over the initial assignment of tokens, in every round there are at most
O(log n) new token deliveries and an overall of Ω(nk) new token deliveries
must occur for the protocol to complete. Finally, it can be shown via the
probabilistic method, that, in fact, any initial token distribution can be
reduced to the above distribution for which the bound holds. The above
lower bounding technique, based on the probabilistic method, was applied
in [HK12] to several variations of k-token dissemination. For example, if
the nodes are allowed to transmit b ≤ k tokens instead of only one token in
every round, then it can be proved that any randomized token-forwarding
algorithm requires Ω(n + nk/(b2 log n log log n)) rounds.
    In [DPR+ 13], also offline token forwarding algorithms were designed,
that is, algorithms provided the whole dynamic topology in advance. One
of the problems that they studied, was that of delivering all tokens to a

                                    16
given sink node z as fast as possible, called the gathering problem. We
now present a lemma from [DPR+ 13] concerning this problem, mainly
because its proof constitutes a nice application of the temporal ana-
logue of Menger’s theorem presented in Section 3 (the simplified proof
via Menger’s temporal analogue is from [MMCS13]).

Lemma 1 (DPRS13). Let there be k ≤ n tokens at given source nodes
and let z be an arbitrary node. Then, if the temporal graph D is continu-
ously connected, all the tokens can be delivered to z, using local broadcasts,
in O(n) rounds.

    Let S = {s1 , s2 , . . . , sh } be the set of source nodes, let N (si ) be the
number of tokens of source node si and let the age of the temporal graph
be n + k = O(n). It suffices to prove that there are at least k out-disjoint
journeys from S to any given z, such that N (si ) of these journeys leave
from each source node si . Then, all tokens can be forwarded in parallel,
each on one of these journeys, without conflicting with each other in an
outgoing transmission and, as the age is O(n), they all arrive at z in
O(n) rounds. To show the existence of k out-disjoint journeys, we create
a supersource node s and connect it to the source node with token i (as-
suming an arbitrary ordering of the tokens from 1 to k) by an edge labeled
i. Then we shift the rest of the temporal graph in time, by increasing all
other edge labels by k. The new temporal graph D0 has asymptotically
the same age as the original and all properties have been preserved. Now,
it suffices to show that there are at least k out-disjoint journeys from s to
z, because the k edges of s respect the N (si )’s. Due to Menger’s temporal
analogue, it is equivalent to show that at least k departure times must
be removed to separate s from z. Indeed, any removal of fewer than k
departure times must leave at least n rounds during which all departure
times are available (because, due to shifting by k, the age of D0 is n + 2k).
Due to the fact that the original temporal graph is connected in every
round, n rounds guarantee the existence of a journey from s to z.

5   Design Problems

So far, we have mainly presented problems in which a temporal graph is
provided somehow (either in an offline or an online way) and the goal is
to solve a problem on that graph. Another possibility is when one wants
to design a desired temporal graph. In most cases, such a temporal graph
cannot be arbitrary, but it has to satisfy some properties prescribed by the
underlying application. This design problem was introduced and studied

                                       17
in [MMCS13] (and its full version [MMS15]). An abstract definition of the
problem is that we are given an underlying (di)graph G and we are asked
to assign labels to the edges of G so that the resulting temporal graph
λ(G) minimizes some parameter while satisfying some connectivity prop-
erty. The parameters studied in [MMCS13] were the maximum number of
labels of an edge, called the temporality, and the total number of labels,
called the temporal cost. The connectivity properties of [MMCS13] had to
do with the preservation of a subset of the paths of G in time-respecting
versions. For example, we might want to preserve all reachabilities be-
tween nodes defined by G, in the sense that for every pair of nodes u, v
such that there is a path from u to v in G there must be a temporal path
from u to v in λ(G). Another such property is to guarantee in λ(G) time-
respecting versions of all possible paths of G. All these can be thought
of as trying to preserve a connectivity property of a static graph in the
temporal dimension while trying to minimize some cost measure of the
resulting temporal graph.
    The provided graph G represents some given static specifications, for
example the available roads between a set of cities or the available routes
of buses in the city center. In scheduling problems it is very common to
have such a static specification and to want to organize a temporal sched-
ule on it, for example to specify the precise time at which a bus should
pass from a particular bus stop while guaranteeing that every possible
pair of stops are connected by a route. Furthermore, it is very common
that any such solution should at the same time take into account some
notion of cost. Minimizing cost parameters may be crucial as, in most real
networks, making a connection available and maintaining its availability
does not come for free. For example, in wireless sensor networks the cost
of making edges available is directly related to the power consumption of
keeping nodes awake, of broadcasting, of listening the wireless channel,
and of resolving the resulting communication collisions. The same holds
for transportation networks where the goal is to achieve good connectivity
properties with as few transportation units as possible.
     For an example, imagine that we are given a directed ring
u1 , u2 , . . . , un and we want to assign labels to its edges so that the re-
sulting temporal graph has a journey for every simple path of the ring
and at the same time minimizes the maximum number of labels of an
edge. In more technical terms, we want to determine or bound the tempo-
rality of the ring subject to the all paths property. It is worth mentioning
that the temporality (and the temporal cost) is defined as the minimum
possible achievable value that satisfies the property, as, for example, is

                                     18
also the case for the chromatic number of a graph, which is defined as
the minimum number of colors that can properly color a graph. Looking
at Figure 4, it is immediate to observe that an increasing sequence of
labels on the edges of path P1 implies a decreasing pair of labels on edges
(un−1 , un ) and (u1 , u2 ). On the other hand, path P2 uses first (un−1 , un )
and then (u1 , u2 ) thus it requires an increasing pair of labels on these
edges. It follows that in order to preserve both P1 and P2 we have to use
a second label on at least one of these two edges, thus the temporality is
at least 2. Next, consider the labeling that assigns to each edge (ui , ui+1 )
the labels {i, n + i}, where 1 ≤ i ≤ n and un+1 = u1 . It is not hard
to see that this labeling preserves all simple paths of the ring. Since the
maximum number of labels that it assigns to an edge is 2, we conclude
that the temporality is also at most 2. Taking both bounds into account,
we may conclude that the temporality of preserving all simple paths of
a directed ring is 2. Moreover, it holds that the temporality of graph G
is lower bounded by the maximum temporality of its subgraphs, because
if a labeling preserves all paths of G then it has to preserve all paths of
any subgraph of G, paying every time the temporality of the subgraph.
So, for example, if the input graph G contains a directed ring then the
temporality of G must be at least 2 (and could be higher depending on
the structure of the rest of the graph).


                                                       P2

                                            un
                                     un−1
                                                      u1



                                u5                     u2


                                       u4        u3
                           P1



  Fig. 4. Path P2 forces a second label to appear on either (un−1 , un ) or (u1 , u2 ).



    Rings have very small temporality w.r.t. the all paths property, how-
ever there is a large family of graphs with even smaller. This is the family
of directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). DAGs have the very convenient prop-
erty that they can be topologically sorted. In fact, DAGs are the only

                                            19
digraphs that satisfy this property. A topological sort of a digraph G is
a linear ordering of its nodes such that if G contains an edge (u, v) then
u appears before v in the ordering. So, we can order the nodes from left
to right and have all edges pointing to the right. Now, we can assign to
the nodes the indices 1, 2, . . . , n in ascending order from left to right and
then assign to each edge the label of its tail, as shown in Figure 5. In this
way, every edge obtains exactly one label and every path of G has been
converted to a journey, because every path moves from left to right thus
always moves to greater node indices. As these indices are also the labels
of the corresponding edges, the path has strictly increasing labels which
makes it a journey. This, together with the fact that the temporality is at
least 1 in all graphs with non-empty edge sets, shows that the temporality
of any DAG w.r.t. the all paths property is 1.

                                                                  5
                  1
                                         3
        u1            u2   2    u3           u4         u5            u6         u7
                                                  4                        6
              1
                                     3
                           2


Fig. 5. A topological sort of a DAG. Edges are labeled by the indices of their tails
(which are strictly increasing from left to right) and this labeling converts every possible
path of the dag to a journey. For example, (u1 , u2 , u3 , u5 , u7 ) is a journey because its
labels (1, 2, 3, 5) are strictly increasing.



    In both of the above examples, all paths could be preserved by using
very few labels per edge. One may immediately wonder whether con-
verting all paths to journeys can always be achieved with few labels per
edge, e.g. a constant number of labels. However, a more careful look at
the previous examples may provide a first indication that this is not the
case. In particular, the ring example suggests that cycles can cause an
increase of temporality, compared to graphs without cycles, like DAGs.
Of course, a single ring only provides a very elementary exposition of this
phenomenon, however as proved in [MMCS13], this core observation can
be extended to give a quite general method for lower bounding the tem-
porality. The idea is to identify a subset of the edges of G such that, for
every possible permutation of these edges, G has a path following the di-
rection of the permutation. Such subsets of edges, with many interleaved
cycles, are called edge-kernels (see Figure 6 for an example) and it can
be proved that the preservation of all paths of an edge-kernel on k edges
yields a temporality of at least k. To see this, consider an edge-kernel

                                             20
K = {e1 , e2 , . . . , ek } and order increasingly the labels of each edge. Now
take an edge with maximum first label, move from it to an edge of max-
imum second label between the remaining edges, then move from this to
an edge of maximum third label between the remaining edges, and so on.
All these moves can be performed because K is an edge-kernel, thus there
is a path no matter which permutation of the edges we choose. As in step
i we are on the edge e with maximum i-th label, we cannot use the 1st,
2nd, . . ., i-th labels of the next edge to continue the journey because none
of these can be greater than the i-th label of e. So, we must necessarily
use the (i + 1)-th label of the next edge, which by induction shows that
in order to go through the k-th edge in this particular permutation we
need to use a kth label on that edge.




          e1                             e2                             e3


Fig. 6. The graph consists of the solid and dashed edges. The long curves highlight
some of the paths that the graph defines. Edges e1 , e2 , and e3 constitute an edge-kernel
of the graph, because for every possible permutation of these edges the graph has a
directed path (one of those highlighted in the figure) that traverses the edges in the
order defined by the permutation. As a result, at least 3 labels must be assigned on an
edge in order to preserve a temporal analogue of every possible path.



    Also, as stated above, the temporality of a graph w.r.t to the all paths
property is always lower bounded by the temporality of any of its sub-
graphs. As a consequence, we can obtain a lower bound on the temporality
of a graph or of a whole graph family by identifying a large edge-kernel in
it. For a simple application of this method, it is possible to show that in
order to preserve all paths of a complete digraph, at least bn/2c labels are
required on some edge. This is done by showing that complete digraphs
have an edge-kernel of size bn/2c. Moreover, it is possible to construct a
planar graph containing an edge-kernel of size Ω(n1/3 ), which yields that
there exist planar graphs with temporality at least Ω(n1/3 ). It is worth
noting that the absence of a large edge-kernel does not necessarily imply
small temporality. In fact, it is an interesting open problem whether there

                                           21
are other structural properties of the underlying graph that could cause
a growth of the temporality.
     The above show that preserving all paths in time can be very costly
in several cases. On the other hand, preserving only the reachabilities can
always be achieved inexpensively. In particular, it can be proved that for
every strongly connected digraph G, we can preserve a journey from u to
v for every u, v for which there exists a path from u to v in G, by using at
most two labels per edge [MMCS13]. Recall the crucial difference: now it
suffices to preserve a single path from all possible paths that go from u to
v. The result is proved by picking any node u and considering an in-tree
rooted at u. We then label the edges of each level i, counting from the
leaves, with label i, so that all paths of the tree become time-respecting
(this also follows from the fact that the tree is a DAG so, as we discussed
previously, all of its paths can be preserved with a single label per edge).
Next we consider an out-tree rooted at u and we label that tree inversely,
i.e. from the root to the leaves, and beginning with the label i + 1. The
first tree has a journey from every node to u arriving by time i and the
second tree has a journey from u to every other node beginning at time
i + 1. This shows that there is a journey from every node to every other
node. Moreover, this was achieved by using at most two labels per edge
because every edge of the in-tree has a single label and every edge of
the out-tree has a single label and an edge is in the worst case used by
both trees, in which case it is assigned two labels. Furthermore, it can
be proved that the temporality w.r.t. reachabilities of any digraph G is
upper bounded by the maximum temporality of its strongly connected
components. But we just saw that each component needs at most two
labels, thus it follows that two labels per edge are sufficient for preserving
all reachabilities of any digraph G.
    Finally, we should mention an interesting relation between the tem-
porality and the age of a temporal graph. In particular, restricting the
maximum label that the labeling is allowed to use makes the temporality
grow. For an intuition why this happens, consider the case in which there
are many maximum length shortest paths between different pairs of nodes
that all must be necessarily be preserved in order to preserve the reach-
abilities. Now if it happens that all of them pass through the same edge
e but use e at many different times, then e must necessarily have many
different labels, one for each of these paths. A simple example to further
appreciate this is given in Figure 7. In that figure, each ui -vi path is a
unique shortest path between ui and vi and has additionally length equal
to the diameter (i.e. it is also a maximum one), so we must necessarily

                                     22
preserve all 5 ui -vi paths. Note now that each ui -vi path passes through
e via its i-th edge. Each of these paths can only be preserved without
violating d(G) by assigning the labels 1, 2, . . . , d(G), however note that
then edge e must necessarily have all labels 1, 2, . . . , d(G). To see this,
notice simply that if any label i is missing from e then there is some
maximum shortest path that goes through e at step i. As i is missing it
cannot arrive sooner than time d(G) + 1 which violates the preservation
of the diameter. Additionally, the following trade-off for the particular
case of a ring can be proved [MMCS13]: If G is a directed ring and the
age is (n − 1) + k, then the temporality of preserving all paths is Θ(n/k),
when 1 ≤ k ≤ n − 1, and n − 1, when k = 0.

                                                                         v1



                                                                    v2
                         u2
                u3
                                 u1      v5

                                                             v3

       u4                                         v4



         u5


Fig. 7. In this example, restricting the maximum label to be at most equal to the
diameter d(G) forces the temporality to be at least d(G).




6   Temporal Versions of Other Standard Graph Problems:
    Complexity and Solutions

Though it is not yet clear how is the complexity of combinatorial optimiza-
tion problems affected by introducing to them a notion of time, still there
is evidence that complexity increases significantly and that totally novel
solutions have to be developed in several cases. In an early but serious
attempt to answer the above question, Orlin [Orl81] observed that many
dynamic languages derived from NP-complete languages can be shown
to be PSPACE-complete. This increase in complexity has been also re-
ported in [BF03, XFJ03]. For example, [BF03] studied the computation

                                       23
of multicast trees minimizing the overall transmission time and to this
end proved that it is NP-complete to compute strongly connected com-
ponents in temporal graphs. Important evidence to this direction comes
also from the rich literature on labeled graphs, a more general model
than temporal graphs, with different motivation, and usually interested
in different problems than those resulting when the labels are explicitly
regarded as time moments. Several papers in this direction have consid-
ered labeled versions of polynomial-time solvable problems, in which the
goal is to minimize/maximize the number of labels used by a solution. For
example, the first labeled problem introduced in the literature was the
Labeled Minimum Spanning Tree problem, which has several appli-
cations in communication network design. This problem is NP-hard and
many complexity and approximability results have been proposed (see e.g.
[BL97, KW98]). On the other hand, the Labeled Maximum Spanning
Tree problem has been shown polynomial in [BL97]. In [BLWZ05], the
authors proved that the Labeled Minimum Path problem is NP-hard
and provided some exact and approximation algorithms. In [Mon05], it
was proved that the Labeled Perfect Matching problem in bipartite
graphs is APX-complete (see also [TIR78] for a related problem).
    A primary example of this phenomenon, of significant increase in com-
plexity when extending a combinatorial optimization problem in time, is
the fundamental Maximum Matching problem. In its static version, we
are given a graph G = (V, E) and we must compute a maximum cardinal-
ity set of edges such that no two of them share an endpoint. Maximum
Matching can be solved in polynomial
                                 p       time by the famous Edmonds’ al-
gorithm [Edm65] (the time is O( |V | · |E|) by the algorithm of [MV80]).
Now consider the following temporal version of the problem, called Tem-
poral Matching in [MS14b]. In this problem, we are given a temporal
graph D = (V, A) and we are asked to decide whether there is a maxi-
mum matching M of the underlying static graph of D that can be made
temporal by selecting a single label l ∈ λ(e) for every edge e ∈ M . For a
single-labeled matching to be temporal it suffices to guarantee that no two
of its edges have the same label. Temporal Matching was proved in
[MS14b] to be NP-complete. Then the problem of computing a maximum
cardinality temporal matching is immediately NP-hard, because if we
could compute such a maximum temporal matching in polynomial time,
we could then compare its cardinality to the cardinality of a maximum
static matching and decide Temporal Matching in polynomial time.
NP-completeness of Temporal Matching can be proved by the se-
quence of polynomial-time reductions: Balanced 3SAT ≤P Balanced

                                    24
Union Labeled Matching ≤P Temporal Matching. In Balanced
3SAT, which is known to be NP-complete, every variable xi appears ni
times negated and ni times non-negated and in Balanced Union La-
beled Matching we are given a bipartite graph G = ((X, Y ), E), labels
L = {1, 2, ..., h}, and a labeling λ : E → 2L , every node ui ∈ X has pre-
cisely two neighbors vij ∈ Y , and additionally both edges of ui have the
same number of labels,Sand we must decide whether there is a maximum
matching M of G s.t. e∈M λ(e) = L [MS14b].

    Another interesting problem is the Temporal Exploration prob-
lem [MS14b]. In this problem, we are given a temporal graph and the
goal is to visit all nodes of the temporal graph by a temporal walk, that
possibly revisits nodes, minimizing the arrival time. The version of this
problem for static graphs is well-known as Graphic TSP. Though, in the
static case, the decision version of the problem, asking whether a given
graph is explorable, can be solved in linear time, in the temporal case it
becomes NP-complete. Additionally, in the static case, there is a (3/2−ε)-
approximation for undirected graphs [GSS11] and a O(log n/ log log n) for
directed [AGM+ 10].

    In contrast to these, it was proved in [MS14b] that there exists some
constant c > 0 such that Temporal Exploration cannot be approx-
imated within cn unless P = NP, by presenting a gap introducing re-
duction from Hampath. Additionally, it was proved that even the special
case in which every instance of the temporal graph is connected, cannot be
approximated within (2 − ε), for every constant ε > 0, unless P = NP.
The reduction is from Hampath (input graph G, source s). The con-
structed temporal graph D consists of three strongly connected static
graphs T1 , T2 , and T3 persisting for the intervals [1, n1 − 1], [n1 , n2 − 1],
and [n2 , 2n2 + n1 ], respectively (it will be helpful at this point to look at
Figure 8). We can restrict attention to instances of Hampath of order at
least 2/ε, without affecting its NP-completeness. We also set n2 = n21 +n1
(in fact, we can set n2 equal to any polynomial-time computable function
of n1 ). If G is hamiltonian, then for the arrival time, OPT, of an optimum
exploration it holds that OPT = n1 + n2 − 1 = n21 + 2n1 − 1 while if G
is not hamiltonian, then OPT ≥ 2n2 + 1 = 2(n21 + n1 ) + 1 > 2(n21 + n1 ),
which can be shown to introduce the desired (2 − ε) gap. This negative
result has been recently improved by Erlebach et al. [EHK15] to O(n1−ε )
for any ε > 0. In the same work, an explicit construction of continuously
connected temporal graphs that require Θ(n2 ) steps to be explored was
also given.

                                      25
                               steps [1, n1 − 1]
                        V2




    G1 = G


          s




                                       (a)

                               steps [n1 , n2 − 1]
          V2




               V1

                                       (b)

                               steps [n2 , 2n2 + n1 ]
          V2




               V1   s

                                      (c)

Fig. 8. The temporal graph constructed by the reduction. (a) T1 (b) T2 (c) T3




                                        26
    On the positive side, it is not hard to show that in continuously con-
nected temporal graphs, Temporal Exploration can be approximated
within the temporal diameter of the temporal graph [MS14b]. In [EHK15],
the authors additionally studied the Temporal Exploration problem
in other interesting restricted families of temporal graphs, like temporal
graphs in which the underlying graph has treewidth k (a work explicitly
concerned with the treewidth of temporal graphs and its relation to the
treewidth of static graphs is [MM13]), is a 2 × n grid, a cycle, a cycle with
a chord, or a bounded-degree planar graph, for which they provided upper
bounds on exploration time. See also [FMS09] for another study of the
exploration problem in temporal graphs with periodic edge-availabilities,
from a distributed computing perspective.
    Another demanding problem that becomes even more challenging in
its temporal version is the famous Traveling Salesman Problem, in
which a graph with non-negative costs on its edge is provided and the goal
is to find a tour visiting every node exactly once (called a TSP tour ), of
minimum total cost. In one version of the problem, introduced in [MS14b],
the digraph remains static and complete throughout its lifetime but now
each edge is assigned a cost that may change from instance to instance.
So, the dynamicity has now been transferred from the topology to the
costs of the edges. The goal is to find (by an offline centralized algorithm)
a temporal TSP tour of minimum total cost, where the cost of a tour
is the sum of the costs of the time-edges that it traverses. The authors
of [MS14b] introduced and studied the special case of this problem in
which the costs are chosen from the set {1, 2}. In particular, there is
a cost function c : A → {1, 2} assigning a cost to every time-edge of
the temporal graph (see Figure 9 for an illustration). This is called the
Temporal Traveling Salesman Problem with Costs One and
Two and abbreviated TTSP(1,2). Now observe that the famous (static)
ATSP(1,2) problem is a special case of TTSP(1,2) when the lifetime of
the temporal graph D = (V, A) is restricted to n and c(e, t) = c(e, t0 ) for
all edges e and times t, t0 . This immediately implies that TTSP(1,2) is
also APX-hard [PY93] and cannot be approximated within any factor
less than 207/206 [KS13] and the same holds for the interesting special
case of TTSP(1,2) with lifetime restricted to n, that we will also discuss.
   In the static case, one easily obtains a (3/2)-factor approximation for
ATSP(1,2) by computing a perfect matching maximizing the number of
ones and then patching the edges together arbitrarily. This works well,
because such a minimum cost perfect matching can be computed in poly-
nomial time in the static case by Edmonds’ algorithm [Edm65] and its

                                     27
cost is at most half the cost of an optimum TSP tour, as the latter consists
of two perfect matchings. The 3/2 factor follows because the remaining
n/2 edges that are added during the patching process cost at most n,
which, in turn, is another lower bound to the cost of the optimum TSP
tour. This was one of the first algorithms known for ATSP(1,2). Other
approaches have improved the factor to the best currently known 5/4
[Blä04]. Unfortunately, as we already discussed in the beginning of this
section, even the apparently simple task of computing a matching maxi-
mizing the number of ones is not that easy in temporal graphs. A simple
modification of those arguments yields that the problem remains NP-
hard if we require consecutive labels (in an increasing ordering) of the
matching to have a time difference of at least two. Such time-gaps are
necessary for constructing a time-respecting patching of the edges of the
matching. In particular, if two consecutive edges of the matching had a
smaller time difference, then the patching-edge would share time with at
least one of them and the resulting tour would not have strictly increasing
labels.



           u1          1     u2       u1         2     u2       u1          2     u2
                   1                         2                          2
            2                2         2               1         2                2

                   2                         1                          2
           u4          2    u3        u4         1     u3       u4          1     u3
                  t=1                        t=2                       t=3

           u1          1     u2      u1          1     u2       u1          2     u2
                   1                         1                          1
            2                1         2               2         1                1

                   1                         2                          2

           u4          1    u3       u4          1     u3       u4          1     u3
                  t=4                        t=5                       t=6

Fig. 9. An instance of TTSP(1,2) consisting of a complete temporal graph D = (V, A),
where V = {u1 , u2 , u3 , u4 }, and a cost function c : A → {1, 2} which is presented by the
corresponding costs on the edges. For simplicity, D is an undirected temporal graph.
Observe that the cost of an edge may change many times, e.g. the cost of u2 u3 changes
5 times while of u1 u4 changes only once. Here, the lifetime of the temporal graph is
6 and it is greater than |V |. The gray arcs and the nodes filled gray (meaning that
the tour does not make a move and remains on the same node for that step) represent
the TTSP tour (u1 , 1, u2 , 2, u3 , 3, u4 , 6, u1 ) that has cost 4 = |V | and therefore it is an
optimum TTSP tour.


                                                 28
     Our inability to compute a temporal matching in polynomial time,
still does not exclude the possibility to find good approximations for it
and then hope to be able to use them for obtaining good approximations
for TTSP(1,2). Two main approaches were followed in [MS14b]. One was
to reduce the problem to Maximum Independent Set (MIS) in (k +1)-
claw free graphs and the other was to reduce it to k 0 -Set Packing, for
some k and k 0 to be determined. The first approach gives a (7/4 + ε)-
approximation (= 1.75 + ε) for the generic TTSP(1,2) and a (12/7 + ε)-
approximation (≈ 1.71 + ε) for the special case of TTSP(1,2) in which
the lifetime is restricted to n (the latter is obtained by approximating
a temporal path packing instead of a matching). The second approach
improves these to 1.7 + ε for the general case and to 13/8 + ε = 1.625 + ε
when the lifetime is n. In all the above cases, ε > 0 is a small constant
(not necessarily the same in all cases) adopted from the factors of the
approximation algorithms for independent set and set packing.


    We summarize now how the first of these approximations works.
Consider the static expansion H = (S, E) of D and an edge e =
(u(i−1)j , uij 0 ) ∈ E. There are three types of conflicts, each defining a set of
edges that cannot be taken together with e in a temporal matching (with
only unit time differences): (i) Edges of the same row as e, because these
violate the unit time difference constraint (ii) edges of the same column
as u(i−1)j , because these share a node with e, thus violate the condition
of constructing a matching, and (iii) edges of the same column as uij 0 ,
for the same reason as (ii). Next consider the graph of edge conflicts
G = (E, K), where (e1 , e2 ) ∈ K iff e1 and e2 satisfy some of the above
constraints (observe that the node set of G is equal to the edge set of
the static expansion H). Observe that temporal matchings of D are now
equivalent to independent sets of G. Moreover, G is 4-claw free meaning
that there is no 4-independent set in the neighborhood of any node. To
see that it is 4-claw free, take any e ∈ E and any set {e1 , e2 , e3 , e4 } of four
neighbors of e in G. There are only 3 constraints thus at least two of the
neighbors, say ei and ej , must be connected to e by the same constraint.
But then ei and ej must also satisfy the same constraint with each other
thus they are also connected by an edge in G. Now, from [Hal95], there
is a factor of 3/5 for MIS in 4-claw free graphs, which implies a (3/5)-
approximation algorithm for temporal matchings. Simple modifications
                                      1
of the above arguments yield a 2+ε       -approximation algorithm for tempo-
ral matchings with time-differences at least two. Additionally, it can be
proved that a (1/c)-factor approximation for the latter problem implies

                                        29
        1
a (2 − 2c )-factor approximation for TTSP(1,2). All these together, yield
a (7/4 + ε)-approximation algorithm for TTSP(1, 2) [MS14b].
    An immediate question, which is currently open, is whether there is
a (3/2)-factor approximation algorithm either for the general TTSP(1,2)
or for its special case with lifetime restricted to n (the reader may have
observed that in the temporal case we have not yet achieved even the
simplest factor of the static case).


7   Linear Availabilities

An interesting family of temporal graphs consists of those temporal
graphs whose availability times are provided by some succinct represen-
tation. This could for example be a function, which we discuss here, or a
probability distribution, which we discuss in the next section.
     Such an example of a temporal graph in which a set of functions de-
scribes the availability times of the edges is the following (for other studies
on periodically varying temporal graphs the reader is encouraged to con-
sult [Orl81, FMS09, CFQS12] and references therein). The underlying
graph is a complete static graph G = (V, E). Each e ∈ E has an associ-
ated linear function of the form fe (x) = ae x + be , where x, ae , be ∈ IN≥0 .
For example, if an edge e has fe (x) = 3x + 4, then it is available at
times 4, 7, 10, 13, 16, . . .. Clearly, the temporal graph that we obtain in
this manner is D = (V, A) where A(r) = {e ∈ E : fe (x) = r for some
x ∈ IN}. If we are additionally provided with a lifetime l of the temporal
graph then we just restrict E(r) to r ≤ l.
     The above provides an immediate way for obtaining the rth instance
for any r. For every e ∈ E, the rth instance contains edge e iff (r −
be )/ae is integer. It is important to note that, in the above family of
temporal graphs, algorithmic solutions that depend at least linearly on
the lifetime l are not acceptable. The reason is that the lifetime l is
provided in binary so a linear dependence on l grows exponentially in the
binary representation of l. Foremost journeys in such graphs can be easily
computed by a variation of the algorithm discussed in Section 2.1.
     Now consider the following problem. We are given two edges e1 and
e2 with corresponding functions fe1 (x) = a1 x + b1 and fe2 (x) = a2 x + b2
and we are asked to determine whether there is some instance having
both edges, that is, to determine whether there exist x1 and x2 s.t.
fe1 (x1 ) = fe2 (x2 ) ⇔ a1 x1 + b1 = a2 x2 + b2 ⇔ a1 x1 = a2 x2 + (b2 − b1 ). So,
in fact, we are seeking for a x2 s.t. a1 | a2 x2 + (b2 − b1 ) (where ‘|’ reads as
“divides”) and we have reduced our problem to the problem of determin-

                                       30
ing whether c | ax + b for some x. Now imagine a right oriented ring of c
nodes numbered 0, 1, . . . , c − 1. Consider a process beginning from node b
(mod c) and making clockwise jumps of length a in each round (where a
round corresponds to an increment of x by 1). We have that the process
falls at some point on node 0 iff c | ax + b for some x. Viewed in this way,
our problem is equivalent to checking whether ax + b ≡ 0 (mod c) is solv-
able for the unknown x. This, in turn, may easily take the form ax ≡ b0
(mod c) (given that −b ≡ b0 (mod c)) for a > 0 and c > 0 (equalities to 0
correspond to trivial cases of our original problem). Clearly, we have re-
duced our problem to the problem of detecting whether a modular linear
equation admits a solution which is well-known to be solvable in polyno-
mial time. In particular, a modular linear equation ax ≡ b0 (mod c) has
a solution iff gcd(a, c) | b0 (see e.g. [CLRS01], Corollary 31.21, page 869).
Additionally, by solving the equation we can find all solutions modulo c in
O(log c + gcd(a, c)) arithmetic operations (see e.g. [CLRS01], page 871).
      Note that in the case where b1 = b2 = 0 then the answer to the
problem is always “yes” as a1 x1 = a2 x2 trivially holds for x1 = a2 and
x2 = a1 (provided that a1 a2 does not exceed the lifetime of the net-
work if a lifetime is specified). In particular, if we are asked to deter-
mine the foremost instance containing both edges then this reduces to
the computation of lcm(a1 , a2 ) (where lcm is the least common multiple)
which in turn reduces to the computation of gcd(a1 , a2 ) by the equation
lcm(a1 , a2 ) = |a1 a2 |/ gcd(a1 , a2 ).
      Now let us slightly simplify our model in order to obtain a solution to a
more generic version of the above problem. We restrict the edge functions
ai x + bi so that bi < ai , e.g. 7x + 4. Then clearly, each such function
corresponds to the whole equivalence subclass of IN modulo ai containing
bi , that is, [bi ]ai = {bi + xai : x ∈ IN}. So, for example, 7x + 4 corresponds
to {4, 11, 18, 25, . . .} in contrast to 7x + 11 that was allowed before and
would just give the subset {11, 18, 25, . . .} of the actual class. Consider
now the following problem: “We are given a subset E 0 of the edge set E
and we want to determine whether there is some instance of the temporal
graph containing all edges in E 0 ”. For simplicity, number the edges in E 0
from 1 to k. Formally, we want to determine the existence of some time t
s.t., for all i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , k}, there exists xi s.t. t = ai xi +bi , or equivalently,
t ≡ bi (mod ai ). Clearly, we have arrived at a set of simultaneous linear
congruences and we can now apply the following known results.

Theorem 3 (see e.g. [BS96], Theorem 5.5.5, pg 106). The system
of congruences t ≡ bi (mod ai ), 1 ≤ i ≤ k, has a solution iff bi ≡ bj

                                           31
(mod gcd(ai , aj )) for all i 6= j. If the solution exists, it is unique modulo
lcm(a1 , a2 , . . . , ak ).

Corollary 1 (see e.g. [BS96], Corollary 5.5.6, pg 106). Let
a1 , a2 , . . . , ak be integers, each ≥ 2, and define a = a1 a2 · · · ak , and
a0 = lcm(a1 , a2 , . . . , ak ). Given the system S of congruences t ≡ bi
(mod ai ), 1 ≤ i ≤ k, we can determine if S has a solution, using O(lg2 a)
bit operations, and if so, we can find the unique solution modulo a0 , using
O(lg2 a) bit operations.

    We may now return to the original formulation of our model in which
ai x + bi does not necessarily satisfy bi < ai . First keep in mind that
tmin = maxi∈E 0 {bi } is the minimum time for every edge from E 0 to appear
at least once (in fact, at that time, the last edge of E 0 appears). So we
cannot hope to have them all in one instance sooner than this. Now notice
that ai x+bi is equivalent to ai x0 +(bi mod ai ) for x0 ≥ bbi /ai c; for example,
7x + 15 is equivalent to 7x0 + 1 for x0 ≥ 2. In this manner, we obtain an
equivalent setting in which again bi < ai for all i but additionally for
every i we have a constraint on x of the form x ≥ qi . We may now ignore
the constraints and apply Theorem 3 to determine whether there is a
solution to the new set of congruences as there is a solution that satisfies
the constraints iff there is one if we ignore the constraints (the reason
being that the constraints together form a finite lower bound while there
is an infinite number of solutions). If there is a solution it will be a unique
solution modulo lcm(a1 , a2 , . . . , ak ) corresponding to an infinite number
of solutions if expanded. From these solutions we just have to keep those
that are not less than tmin (in case we want to find the actual solutions
to the system).

8   Random Temporal Graphs

Another model of temporal graphs with succinct representation, is the
model of random temporal graphs. Consider the case in which each edge
(of an underlying clique) just picks independently and uniformly at ran-
dom a single time-label from [r] = {1, 2, . . . , r}. So it gets label t ∈ [r]
with probability p = r−1 .
     We first calculate the probability that given a specific path
(u1 , u2 , . . . , uk+1 ) of length k a journey appears on this path. We be-
gin with the directed case. First, let us obtain a weak but elegant upper
bound. Partition [r] into R1 = {1, . . . , br/2c} and R2 = {br/2c+1, . . . , r}.
Clearly, P(journey) ≤ P(no R2 R1 occurs) as any journey assignment

                                       32
cannot have two consecutive selections s.t. the first one is from R2 and
the second from R1 . So, it suffices to calculate P(no R2 R1 occurs). Notice
that the assignments in which no R2 R1 occurs are of the form (R1 )i (R2 )j
for i+j = k, e.g. R1 R1 R2 R2 R2 and there are k+1 of them. In contrast, all
possible assignments are 2k corresponding to all possible ways to choose
k times with repetition from {R1 , R2 }. So, P(no R2 R1 occurs) = k/2k (as
all assignments are equiprobable, with probability 2−k ) and we conclude
that P(journey) ≤ k/2k , which, interestingly, is independent of r; e.g. for
k = 6 we get a probability of at most 0.09375 for a journey of length 6 to
appear.
     For any specific assignment of labels t1 , t2 , . . . , tk of this path, where
ti ∈ [r] ([r] = {1, 2, . . . , r}), the probability that this specific assignment
occurs is simply pk . So, all possible assignments are equiprobable and we
get
                                                                         r
                                                                           
                              # strictly increasing assignments          k
           P(journey) =                                             = k,
                                  # all possible assignments            r

where kr follows from the fact that any strictly increasing assignment
           

is just a unique selection of k labels from the r available and any such
selection corresponds to a unique strictly increasing assignment. So, for
example, for k = 2 and r = 10 we get a probability of 9/20 which is a
little smaller than 1/2 as expected, due to the fact that there is an equal
number of strictly increasing and strictly decreasing assignments but we
also loose all remaining assignments which in this case are only the ties
(that is, those for which t1 = t2 ).
     Now it is easy to compute the expected number of journeys of length k.
Let S be the set of all directed paths of length k and let Yp be an indicator
random variable which is 1 if a journey appears on a specific p ∈ S
and 0 otherwise. Let also Xk be a random variable    P          giving
                                                                     P the number
of journeys of length k. Clearly, E(Xk ) = E( p∈S Yp ) = p∈S E(Yp ) =
|S| · P(a journey appears on a specific path of length k) = n(n − 1) · · · (n −
                                                                 (1/k)
k) kr r−k ≥ (n − k)k kr r−k . Now, if we set n ≥ r/ kr
                             
                                                                        + k, we get
E(X) ≥ 1. A simpler, but weaker, formula        can be obtained by requiring
n ≥ r+k. In this case, we get E(X) ≥ kr . So, for example, a long journey
of size k = n/2 that uses all available labels is expected to appear provided
that n ≥ 2r (to see this, simply set k = r).
     We will now try to obtain bounds on the probability that a journey
of length k appears on a random temporal graph. Let us begin from a
simple case, namely the one in which k = 4, that is, we want to calculate
the probability that a journey of length 4 appears. Let the r.v. X be the

                                        33
number of journeys of length 4 and let Xp be an indicator for path p ∈ S,
                                        4. Denote n(n − 1) · · · (n − k) by
where S is the set of all paths of length
(n)k+1 First note that E(X) = (n)5 4r r−4 = Θ(n5 ) and clearly goes to ∞
for every r. However, we cannot yet conclude that P(4 − journey) is also
large. To show this we shall apply the second moment method. We will
make use of Chebyshev’s inequality P(X = 0) ≤ Var(X)/[E(X)]2 and of
the following well-known theorem:

Theorem 4. Suppose X = ni=1 Xi , where Xi is an indicator for event
                      P
Ai . Then,                 X          X
           Var(X) ≤ E(X) +     P[Ai ]    P(Aj | Ai ),
                                      i        j:j∼i
                                               |       {z     }
                                                       ∆i

where i ∼ j denotes that i depends on j. Moreover, if ∆i ≤ ∆ for all i,
then
                            Var(X) ≤ E(X)(1 + ∆).
                                                        P
    So, in our case, we need to estimate ∆p =              p0 ∼p P(Ap0 | Ap ). If
we show that ∆p ≤ ∆ for all p ∈ S then we will have that Var(X) ≤
E(X)(1 + ∆). If we additionally manage to show that ∆/E(X) = o(1),
then ∆ = o(E(X)) which tells us that Var(X) = o([E(X)]2 ). Putting this
back to Chebyshev’s inequality we get that P(X = 0) = o(1) as needed.
    So, let us try to bound ∆p appropriately. Clearly, p0 cannot be a
journey if it visits some edges of p in inverse order (than the one they
have on p). Intuitively, the two paths must have the same orientation.
We distinguish cases based on the number of edges shared by the two
paths. First of all, note that if p0 and p have precisely   i edges in common
                        r                            r
                                                        4−i
then P(Ap0 | Ap ) ≤ k−i     /rk−i which becomes 4−i      /r      in our case. The
reason is that the k − i edges of p0 that are not shared with p must at
least obtain an increasing labeling. If we also had taken into account that
that labeling should be consistent to the labels of the shared edges then
this would decrease the probability. So we just use an upper bound which
is sufficient for our purposes.
    Case 1: 1 shared edge. If a single edge is shared then there are
k k−1 (k − 1)!4 = 16 · 3! n−5
   n−k+1
                                3    different paths p0 achieving this as there
are k ways to choose the shared edge, n−k+1
                                                     
                                                 k−1    to choose the missing
nodes (nodes of p0 not shared with p), (k − 1)! ways to order those
nodes, and, in this particular example, 4 ways to arrange the nodes
w.r.t. the shared edge. In particular, we can put all nodes before the
shared edge, all nodes after, 2 nodes before and 1 node after, or 1

                                       34
node
P before and 2 nodes after.                We
                                             conclude   that the probability that
                                        n−5 r      3        3
   |p0 ∩p|=1 P(Ap0 | Ap ) ≤ 16 · 3! 3         3 /r = O(n ).
     Case 2: 2 shared edges. In this case, we can have all possible k2 = 42
                                                                                   

2-sharings. Let us denote by e1 , e2 , e3 , e4 the edges of p. For the sharings
(e1 , e2 ), (e2 , e3 ), and (e3 , e4 ) we get in total 3 n−k−1
                                                           k−2 (k − 2)!4 = 24 2
                                                                                 n−5

paths. For (e1 , e3 ), (e2 , e4 ) we get 2(n − k − 1) = 2(n − 5). For (e1 , e4 ) we
get (n − 5) in case we connect the 2 edges by an intermediate node (i.e. go
from the head of e1 to some u not in p and then form u to the tail of e4 )
and 2(n − 5) in case we connect e1 directly to e4 and use an external node
either before      or after, so in total 3(n − 5) paths. Putting these all together
                                             n−5               r
we get |p0 ∩p|=2 P(Ap0 | Ap ) ≤ [24 2 + 5(n − 5)] 2 /r = O(n2 ).    2
          P
     Case 3: 3 shared edges. Here there are just 2 choices for the 3 shared
edges, namely (e1 , e2 , e3 ) and (e2 , e3 , e4 ), the reason being that if the edges
are not consecutive then a fourth edge must be necessarily shared and the
2 paths would coincide. As there are (n−k−1) ways to choose the missing
node and 2 ways to       P arrange that node we get 2(n − k − 1)2 = 4(n − 5)
and consequently |p0 ∩p|=3 P(Ap0 | Ap ) ≤ 4(n − 5) 1r /r1 = O(n).
     So, we have ∆p ≤ ∆ = O(n3 ) and ∆/E(X) = O(n3 )/Θ(n5 ) = o(1)
which applied to Theorem 4 gives Var(X) ≤ E(X)(1 + ∆) = o([E(X)]2 )
and this in turn applied to Chebyshev’s inequality gives the desired
P(X = 0) ≤ Var(X)/[E(X)]2 = o(1). We conclude that:
Theorem 5. For all r ≥ 4, almost all random temporal graphs contain
a journey of length 4.
    Now let us turn back to our initial (n)k+1 kr r−k formula of E(X)
                                                     

(which holds for all k). This gives E(X) ≥ (n)k+1 /k k , which, for all k =
o(n) and all r ≥ k, goes to ∞ as n grows. We will now try to generalize
the ideas developed in the k = 4 case to show that for any not too large
k almost all random temporal graphs contain a journey of length k. Take
again a path p of length k and another path p0 of length k that shares i
edges with p. We will count rather crudely but in a sufficient way for our
purposes. As again the shared edges can be uniquely oriented in the order
they appear on p, there are at most ki ways to choose the shared edges
(at most because some selections force more than i sharings to occur).
Counting the tail of the first edge and the head of every edge, these i edges
occupy at least i + 1 nodes, so at most k + 1 − i − 1 = k − i nodes are
missing from p0 and thus there are at most n−k−1k−i    ways to choose those
nodes. Moreover there are at most (k − i)! ways to permute them on p0 .
Finally, we have to place those nodes relative to the i shared edges. In the
worst case, the i edges define i+1 slots that can be occupied by the nodes

                                         35
                                                     k 2 n−k−1
in k−i+(i+1)−1      k                                                    k
                                                                       
       (i+1)−1
                 =  i   ways. In total, we have N =  i    k−i   (k − i)! i
different paths and the corresponding probability is

                                                 2 
                                                      n−k−1
                                      
                                                          
         X                         r      k−i     k
                 P(A | Ap ) ≤ N
                      p0               /r     ≤
                                  k−i             i    k−i
       |p0 ∩p|=i
                               2 
                                     n−k−1
                                              
                               k
                            ≤                   .
                                i      k−i

So we have that

                  k−1 X                              k  2 
                                                              n−k−1
                                                                    
                  X                                  X  k
          ∆p =                    P(Ap0 | Ap ) ≤
                                                                i      k−i
                  i=1 |p0 ∩p|=i                      i=0

                      n + k2 − k − 1               n + k2
                                                         
              =                            ≤                    = ∆.
                            k                        k

The
Pk first  zequality   follows   from the Chu-Vandermonde identity
       m           m+z
                         by setting z = n − k − 1 and m = k 2 as needed
                      
   i=0 i   k−i =    k
in our case.
                              2
    Thus, we have ∆ = n+k   k    and for k 2 = o(n) we have ∆ ∼ (n)k /k!.
At the same time we have E(X) = (n)k+1 kr /rk ∼ (n)k+1 /k! (for large
r), thus ∆/E(X) ∼ (n)k /(n)k+1 = o(1) as needed. So we have Var(X) =
o([E(X)]2 ) and we again get that P(X = 0) ≤ Var(X)/[E(X)]2 = o(1).
Captured in a theorem:

                             √
Theorem 6. For all k = o( n) and all r = Ω(n), almost all random
temporal graphs contain a journey of length k.


However, there seems to be some room for improvements if one counts
more carefully.
    Now take any two nodes s and t in V . We want to estimate the
arrival time of a foremost journey from s to t. Let X be the random
variable of the arrival time of the foremost s-t journey. Let us focus on
P(X ≤ 2). Denote by l(u, v) the label chosen by edge (u, v). Given a
specific node u ∈ V \{s, t} we have that P(l(s, u) 6= 1 or l(u, t) 6= 2) =
1 − P(l(s, u) = 1 and l(u, t) = 2) = 1 − r−2 . Thus, P(∀u ∈ V \{s, t} :

                                           36
l(s, u) 6= 1 or l(u, t) 6= 2) = (1 − r−2 )n−2 We have:

P(X ≤ 2) = 1 − P(X > 2)
           = 1 − P(l(s, t) ∈
                           / {1, 2})P(∀u ∈ V \{s, t} : l(s, u) 6= 1 or l(u, t) 6= 2)
                  r−2
           =1−         (1 − r−2 )n−2
                    r
           ≥ 1 − (1 − r−2 )n−2
                           2                      √
           ≥ 1 − e−(n−2)/r , for n ≥ 2 and r > n − 1.
                       √
    So, even if r = Θ( n) we have that P(X ≤ 2) → 1 − 1/ec (for some
constant c ≤ 1) as n goes to infinity, so we have a constant probability
of arriving by time 2 at t. Clearly, for smaller values of r (smaller w.r.t.
n) we get even better chances of arriving early. For another example,
                       √
let n = 104 and r = n/ log n = 25. As P(X ≤ 2) is almost equal to
1 − (1 − r−2 )n−2 we get that it is almost equal to 1 in this particular case.
                              √
For even greater r, e.g. r = n = 100, we still go very close to 1.
    The following proposition gives a bound on the temporal diameter of
undirected random temporal graphs, by exploiting well known results of
the Erdös-Renyi (G(n, p)) model (cf. [Bol01]).

Proposition 1. Almost no temporal graph has temporal diameter less
than [(ln n + c + o(1))/n]r.

     To see this, observe that if k < [(ln n + c + o(1))/n]r then p = k/r <
(ln n+c+o(1))/n. Consider now the temporal subgraph consisting only of
the first k labels [k] = {1, 2, . . . , k}. By the connectivity threshold of the
static G(n, p) model this subgraph is almost surely disconnected implying
that almost surely the temporal diameter is greater than k.
     So, for example, if r = O(n) almost no temporal graph has temporal
diameter o(log n). Note, however, that the above argument is not sufficient
to show that a.e. temporal graph has temporal diameter at least [(ln n +
c + o(1))/n]r. Though it shows that in a.e. graph the subgraph consisting
of the labels [k], for k ≥ dr(ln n + c + o(1))/ne is connected, it does not
tell us whether that connectivity also implies temporal connectivity (that
is, the existence of journeys).
     We should also mention that [AGMS14] studied the temporal diame-
ter of the directed random temporal graph model for the case of r = n,
and proved that it is Θ(log n) w. and in expectation. In fact, they showed
that information dissemination is very fast w.h.p. even in this hostile net-
work with regard to availability. Moreover, they showed that the temporal
diameter of the clique is crucially affected by the clique’s lifetime, α, e.g.,

                                      37
when α is asymptotically larger than the number of vertices, n, then the
temporal diameter must be Ω( αn log n). They also defined the Price of
Randomness metric in order to capture the cost to pay per link and guar-
antee temporal reachability of all node-pairs by local random available
times w.h.p..
    The idea of [AGMS14] to establish that the temporal diameter is
O(log n) is as follows. Given an instance of such a random temporal clique,
the authors pick any source node s and any sink node t and present an
algorithm trying to construct a journey from s arriving at t at most by
time O(log n). The algorithm expands two fronts, one beginning from
s and moving forward (in fact, an out-tree rooted at s) and one from t
moving backward (an in-tree rooted at t). Beginning from s, all neighbors
that can be reached in one step in the interval (0, c1 log n], are visited.
Next the front moves on to all neighbors of the previous front that can
be reached in one step in the interval (c1 log n, c1 log n + c2 ]. The process
continues in the same way, every time replacing the current front by all
its neighbors that can be reached in the next c2 steps. A similar backward
process is executed from t. These processes are executed for d = Θ(log n)
steps resulting in the final front of s and the final front of t. Note that the
front of t begins from the interval (2c1 log n + (2d − 1)c2 , 2c1 log n + 2dc2 ]
and every time subtracts a c2 . Finally, the algorithm tries to find an edge
from the final front of s to the final front of t with the appropriate label
in order to connect the journey from s to the journey to t in a time-
respecting way and obtain the desired s-t journey of duration Θ(log n)
(determined by the interval of the first front of t, and in particular by
2c1 log n + 2dc2 ). Via probabilistic analysis it can be proved that, with
                                                                    √
probability at least 1 − 1/n3 , the final front of s consists of Θ( n) nodes
and that the same holds for the front of t. Moreover, it can be proved
that again with probability at least 1 − 1/n3 the desired edge for the final
front of s to the final front of t exists, and thus we can conclude that
there is a probability of at least 1 − 3/n3 of getting from s to t by a
journey arriving at most by time Θ(log n). Finally, it suffices to observe
that the probability that there exists a pair of nodes s, t ∈ V for which
the algorithm fails is less than n2 (3/n3 ) = 3/n, thus with probability at
least (1 − 3/n) the temporal diameter is O(log n), as required.

References
[AAD+ 06]    D. Angluin, J. Aspnes, Z. Diamadi, M. J. Fischer, and R. Peralta. Com-
             putation in networks of passively mobile finite-state sensors. Distributed
             Computing, pages 235–253, March 2006.


                                         38
[AGM+ 10]   A. Asadpour, M. X. Goemans, A. Madry, S. O. Gharan, and A. Saberi.
            An O(log n/ log log n)-approximation algorithm for the asymmetric trav-
            eling salesman problem. In Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual
            ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 379–
            389, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2010. Society for Industrial and Applied
            Mathematics.
[AGMS14]    E. C. Akrida, L. Gasieniec, G. B. Mertzios, and P. G. Spirakis.
            Ephemeral networks with random availability of links: Diameter and
            connectivity. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM symposium on Parallelism
            in algorithms and architectures (SPAA), pages 267–276. ACM, 2014.
[AKL08]     C. Avin, M. Koucký, and Z. Lotker. How to explore a fast-changing world
            (cover time of a simple random walk on evolving graphs). In Proceed-
            ings of the 35th international colloquium on Automata, Languages and
            Programming (ICALP), Part I, pages 121–132. Springer-Verlag, 2008.
[AKM14]     E. Aaron, D. Krizanc, and E. Meyerson. DMVP: foremost waypoint cov-
            erage of time-varying graphs. In Graph-Theoretic Concepts in Computer
            Science, pages 29–41. Springer, 2014.
[APRU12]    J. Augustine, G. Pandurangan, P. Robinson, and E. Upfal. Towards ro-
            bust and efficient computation in dynamic peer-to-peer networks. In Pro-
            ceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Dis-
            crete Algorithms (SODA), pages 551–569. SIAM, 2012.
[Ber96]     K. A. Berman. Vulnerability of scheduled networks and a generalization
            of Menger’s theorem. Networks, 28[3]:125–134, 1996.
[BF03]      S. Bhadra and A. Ferreira. Complexity of connected components in
            evolving graphs and the computation of multicast trees in dynamic net-
            works. In S. Pierre, M. Barbeau, and E. Kranakis, editors, Ad-Hoc, Mo-
            bile, and Wireless Networks, volume 2865 of Lecture Notes in Computer
            Science, pages 259–270. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2003.
[BL97]      H. Broersma and X. Li. Spanning trees with many or few colors in edge-
            colored graphs. Discussiones Mathematicae Graph Theory, 17[2]:259–
            269, 1997.
[Blä04]    M. Bläser. A 3/4-approximation algorithm for maximum atsp with
            weights zero and one. In Approximation, Randomization, and Combina-
            torial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques, pages 61–71. Springer,
            2004.
[BLWZ05]    H. Broersma, X. Li, G. Woeginger, and S. Zhang. Paths and cycles
            in colored graphs. Australasian Journal on Combinatorics, 31:299–311,
            2005.
[Bol98]     B. Bollobás. Modern Graph Theory. Graduate Texts in Mathematics.
            Springer; Corrected edition (July 1, 1998), 1998.
[Bol01]     B. Bollobás. Random graphs. Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathe-
            matics. Cambridge University Press; 2nd edition, 2001.
[BS72]      B. Baker and R. Shostak. Gossips and telephones. Discrete Mathematics,
            2[3]:191–193, 1972.
[BS96]      E. Bach and J. Shallit. Algorithmic number theory, volume 1: efficient
            algorithms, volume 1. MIT press, 1996.
[CFQS12]    A. Casteigts, P. Flocchini, W. Quattrociocchi, and N. Santoro. Time-
            varying graphs and dynamic networks. International Journal of Parallel,
            Emergent and Distributed Systems, 27[5]:387–408, 2012.


                                       39
[CLRS01]    T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, and C. Stein. Introduction
            to Algorithms, Second Edition. The MIT Press and McGraw-Hill Book
            Company, 2001.
[CMM+ 08]   A. E. Clementi, C. Macci, A. Monti, F. Pasquale, and R. Silvestri. Flood-
            ing time in edge-markovian dynamic graphs. In Proc. of the 27th ACM
            Symp. on Principles of distributed computing (PODC), pages 213–222,
            2008.
[CPMS07]    A. E. Clementi, F. Pasquale, A. Monti, and R. Silvestri. Communication
            in dynamic radio networks. In Proceedings of the twenty-sixth annual
            ACM symposium on Principles of distributed computing (PODC), pages
            205–214. ACM, 2007.
[DGH+ 87]   A. Demers, D. Greene, C. Hauser, W. Irish, J. Larson, S. Shenker,
            H. Sturgis, D. Swinehart, and D. Terry. Epidemic algorithms for repli-
            cated database maintenance. In Proceedings of the sixth annual ACM
            Symposium on Principles of distributed computing (PODC), pages 1–12.
            ACM, 1987.
[DPR+ 13]   C. Dutta, G. Pandurangan, R. Rajaraman, Z. Sun, and E. Viola. On the
            complexity of information spreading in dynamic networks. In Proceed-
            ings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
            Algorithms (SODA), pages 717–736. SIAM, 2013.
[Edm65]     J. Edmonds. Paths, trees, and flowers. Canadian Journal of mathemat-
            ics, 17[3]:449–467, 1965.
[EHK15]     T. Erlebach, M. Hoffmann, and F. Kammer. On temporal graph explo-
            ration. 2015. Yet unpublished work.
[Fer04]     A. Ferreira. Building a reference combinatorial model for manets. Net-
            work, IEEE, 18[5]:24–29, 2004.
[FMS09]     P. Flocchini, B. Mans, and N. Santoro. Exploration of periodically vary-
            ing graphs. In Y. Dong, D.-Z. Du, and O. Ibarra, editors, Algorithms
            and Computation, volume 5878 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
            pages 534–543. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009.
[FT98]      L. Fleischer and É. Tardos. Efficient continuous-time dynamic network
            flow algorithms. Operations Research Letters, 23[3]:71–80, 1998.
[GSS11]     S. O. Gharan, A. Saberi, and M. Singh. A randomized rounding approach
            to the traveling salesman problem. In Proceedings of the IEEE 52nd
            Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages
            550–559, Washington, DC, USA, 2011. IEEE Computer Society.
[Hal95]     M. M. Halldórsson. Approximating discrete collections via local im-
            provements. In Proceedings of the sixth annual ACM-SIAM symposium
            on Discrete algorithms, pages 160–169. Society for Industrial and Ap-
            plied Mathematics, 1995.
[HG97]      F. Harary and G. Gupta. Dynamic graph models. Mathematical and
            Computer Modelling, 25[7]:79–87, 1997.
[HHL88]     S. M. Hedetniemi, S. T. Hedetniemi, and A. L. Liestman. A survey
            of gossiping and broadcasting in communication networks. Networks,
            18[4]:319–349, 1988.
[HK12]      B. Haeupler and F. Kuhn. Lower bounds on information dissemination
            in dynamic networks. In Proceedings of the 26th International Sympo-
            sium on Distributed Computing (DISC), volume 7611 of Lecture Notes
            in Computer Science, pages 166–180. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012.


                                       40
[HS12]      P. Holme and J. Saramäki. Temporal networks. Physics reports,
            519[3]:97–125, 2012.
[KK02]      D. Kempe and J. Kleinberg. Protocols and impossibility results for
            gossip-based communication mechanisms. In Proceedings of the IEEE
            43rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
            pages 471–480. IEEE, 2002.
[KKK00]     D. Kempe, J. Kleinberg, and A. Kumar. Connectivity and inference
            problems for temporal networks. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM
            symposium on Theory of computing (STOC), pages 504–513, 2000.
[KLO10]     F. Kuhn, N. Lynch, and R. Oshman. Distributed computation in dy-
            namic networks. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM symposium on Theory
            of computing (STOC), pages 513–522, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.
[KMP+ 15]   S. Kontogiannis, G. Michalopoulos, G. Papastavrou, A. Paraskevopou-
            los, D. Wagner, and C. Zaroliagis. Analysis and experimental evaluation
            of time-dependent distance oracles. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth
            Workshop on Algorithm Engineering and Experiments (ALENEX),
            pages 147–158, 2015.
[KO11]      F. Kuhn and R. Oshman. Dynamic networks: models and algorithms.
            SIGACT News, 42:82–96, March 2011. Distributed Computing Column,
            Editor: Idit Keidar.
[Kos09]     V. Kostakos. Temporal graphs. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its
            Applications, 388[6]:1007–1023, 2009.
[KS13]      M. Karpinski and R. Schmied. On improved inapproximability results
            for the shortest superstring and related problems. Proc. 19th CATS,
            pages 27–36, 2013.
[KSSV00]    R. Karp, C. Schindelhauer, S. Shenker, and B. Vocking. Randomized
            rumor spreading. In Proceedings of the IEEE 41st Annual Symposium
            on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 565–574. IEEE,
            2000.
[KW98]      S. O. Krumke and H.-C. Wirth. On the minimum label spanning tree
            problem. Information Processing Letters, 66[2]:81–85, 1998.
[Lei92]     F. T. Leighton. Introduction to parallel algorithms and architectures,
            volume 188. Morgan Kaufmann San Francisco, 1992.
[MCS11a]    O. Michail, I. Chatzigiannakis, and P. G. Spirakis. Mediated population
            protocols. Theoretical Computer Science, 412[22]:2434–2450, May 2011.
[MCS11b]    O. Michail, I. Chatzigiannakis, and P. G. Spirakis. New Models for Pop-
            ulation Protocols. N. A. Lynch (Ed), Synthesis Lectures on Distributed
            Computing Theory. Morgan & Claypool, 2011.
[MCS13]     O. Michail, I. Chatzigiannakis, and P. G. Spirakis. Naming and count-
            ing in anonymous unknown dynamic networks. In 15th International
            Symposium on Stabilization, Safety, and Security of Distributed Systems
            (SSS), pages 281–295. Springer, 2013.
[MCS14]     O. Michail, I. Chatzigiannakis, and P. G. Spirakis. Causality, influ-
            ence, and computation in possibly disconnected synchronous dynamic
            networks. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 74[1]:2016–
            2026, 2014.
[Men27]     K. Menger. Zur allgemeinen kurventheorie. Fundamenta Mathematicae,
            10[1]:96–115, 1927.
[MM13]      B. Mans and L. Mathieson. On the treewidth of dynamic graphs. In
            D.-Z. Du and G. Zhang, editors, Computing and Combinatorics, volume


                                       41
           7936 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 349–360. Springer
           Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.
[MMCS13]   G. B. Mertzios, O. Michail, I. Chatzigiannakis, and P. G. Spirakis. Tem-
           poral network optimization subject to connectivity constraints. In 40th
           International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming
           (ICALP), volume 7966 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
           657–668. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.
[MMS15]    G. B. Mertzios, O. Michail, and P. G. Spirakis. Temporal network op-
           timization subject to connectivity constraints. CoRR, abs/1502.04382,
           2015. Full version of [MMCS13].
[Mon05]    J. Monnot. The labeled perfect matching in bipartite graphs. Informa-
           tion Processing Letters, 96[3]:81–88, 2005.
[MR02]     M. Molloy and B. Reed. Graph colouring and the probabilistic method,
           volume 23. Springer, 2002.
[MS14a]    O. Michail and P. G. Spirakis. Simple and efficient local codes for dis-
           tributed stable network construction. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM
           Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), PODC ’14,
           pages 76–85. ACM, 2014.
[MS14b]    O. Michail and P. G. Spirakis. Traveling salesman problems in temporal
           graphs. In 39th International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations
           of Computer Science (MFCS), pages 553–564.
                                                  p        Springer, 2014.
[MV80]     S. Micali and V. V. Vazirani. An O( |V | · |E|) algorithm for finding
           maximum matching in general graphs. In Proceedings of the IEEE 21st
           Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages
           17–27. IEEE, 1980.
[Orl81]    J. B. Orlin. The complexity of dynamic languages and dynamic opti-
           mization problems. In Proceedings of the 13th annual ACM symposium
           on Theory of computing (STOC), pages 218–227. ACM, 1981.
[OW05]     R. O’Dell and R. Wattenhofer. Information dissemination in highly dy-
           namic graphs. In Proceedings of the 2005 joint workshop on Foundations
           of mobile computing (DIALM-POMC), pages 104–110, 2005.
[Pel00]    D. Peleg. Distributed computing: A locality-sensitive approach. SIAM
           Monographs on discrete mathematics and applications, 5, 2000.
[Pit87]    B. Pittel. On spreading a rumor. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics,
           47[1]:213–223, 1987.
[PY93]     C. H. Papadimitriou and M. Yannakakis. The traveling salesman prob-
           lem with distances one and two. Mathematics of Operations Research,
           18[1]:1–11, 1993.
[Rav94]    R. Ravi. Rapid rumor ramification: Approximating the minimum broad-
           cast time. In Proceedings of the IEEE 35th Annual Symposium on Foun-
           dations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 202–213. IEEE, 1994.
[Sch02]    C. Scheideler. Models and techniques for communication in dynamic
           networks. In Proceedings of the 19th Annual Symposium on Theoretical
           Aspects of Computer Science (STACS), pages 27–49, 2002.
[TIR78]    S. L. Tanimoto, A. Itai, and M. Rodeh. Some matching problems for
           bipartite graphs. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 25[4]:517–525, 1978.
[XFJ03]    B. Xuan, A. Ferreira, and A. Jarry. Computing shortest, fastest, and
           foremost journeys in dynamic networks. International Journal of Foun-
           dations of Computer Science, 14[02]:267–285, 2003.



                                      42
