Volume 13, Issue 7, July 2023




Human in the (Process) Mines (Dagstuhl Seminar 23271)
  Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, and
  Giovanni Meroni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     1
Epistemic and Topological Reasoning in Distributed Systems (Dagstuhl Seminar 23272)
   Armando Castañeda, Hans van Ditmarsch, Roman Kuznets, Yoram Moses, and
  Ulrich Schmid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
Theoretical Advances and Emerging Applications in Abstract Interpretation (Dagstuhl
Seminar 23281)
   Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, Antoine Miné, Peter Müller, and Anna Becchi  66
Parameterized Approximation: Algorithms and Hardness (Dagstuhl Seminar 23291)
   Karthik C. S., Parinya Chalermsook, Joachim Spoerhase, and Meirav Zehavi . . . . .                                                               96
SportsHCI (Dagstuhl Seminar 23292)
  Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and
   Elise van den Hoven . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
Computational Proteomics (Dagstuhl Seminar 23301)
  Rebekah Gundry, Lennart Martens, and Magnus Palmblad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
Software Architecture and Machine Learning (Dagstuhl Seminar 23302)
   Grace A. Lewis, Henry Muccini, Ipek Ozkaya, Karthik Vaidhyanathan, Roland Weiss,
   and Liming Zhu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166




   D a g s t u h l R e p or t s , Vo l . 1 3 , I s s u e 7                                                                ISSN 2192-5283
ISSN 2192-5283

                                                       Aims and Scope
Published online and open access by
                                                       The periodical Dagstuhl Reports documents the
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik
                                                       program and the results of Dagstuhl Seminars and
GmbH, Dagstuhl Publishing, Saarbrücken/Wadern,
                                                       Dagstuhl Perspectives Workshops.
Germany. Online available at
                                                       In principal, for each Dagstuhl Seminar or Dagstuhl
https://www.dagstuhl.de/dagpub/2192-5283
                                                       Perspectives Workshop a report is published that
                                                       contains the following:
Publication date
                                                           an executive summary of the seminar program
March, 2024
                                                           and the fundamental results,

Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche        an overview of the talks given during the seminar
Nationalbibliothek                                         (summarized    as talk abstracts), and
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publica-        summaries from working groups (if applicable).
tion in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie; detailed This basic framework can be extended by suitable
bibliographic data are available in the Internet at contributions that are related to the program of the
https://dnb.d-nb.de.                                    seminar, e. g. summaries from panel discussions or
                                                        open problem sessions.
License
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Editorial Board
Attribution 4.0 International license (CC BY 4.0).         Elisabeth André
                 In brief, this license authorizes each    Franz Baader
                 and everybody to share (to copy,
                                                           Daniel Cremers
distribute and transmit) the work under the follow-
ing conditions, without impairing or restricting the       Goetz Graefe
authors’ moral rights:                                     Reiner Hähnle
    Attribution: The work must be attributed to its        Barbara Hammer
    authors.                                               Lynda Hardman

The copyright is retained by the corresponding au-         Oliver Kohlbacher
thors.                                                     Steve Kremer
                                                           Rupak Majumdar
                                                           Heiko Mantel
                                                           Albrecht Schmidt
                                                           Wolfgang Schröder-Preikschat
                                                           Raimund Seidel (Editor-in-Chief )
                                                           Heike Wehrheim
                                                           Verena Wolf
                                                           Martina Zitterbart

                                                       Editorial Office
                                                       Michael Wagner (Managing Editor)
                                                       Michael Didas (Managing Editor)
                                                       Jutka Gasiorowski (Editorial Assistance)
                                                       Dagmar Glaser (Editorial Assistance)
                                                       Thomas Schillo (Technical Assistance)
                                                       Contact
                                                       Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik
                                                       Dagstuhl Reports, Editorial Office
                                                       Oktavie-Allee, 66687 Wadern, Germany
                                                       reports@dagstuhl.de
Digital Object Identifier: 10.4230/DagRep.13.7.i       https://www.dagstuhl.de/dagrep
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 23271

Human in the (Process) Mines
Claudio Di Ciccio∗1 , Silvia Miksch∗2 , Pnina Soffer∗3 ,
Barbara Weber∗4 , and Giovanni Meroni†5
1       Sapienza University of Rome, IT. claudio.diciccio@uniroma1.it
2       TU Wien, AT. silvia.miksch@tuwien.ac.at
3       University of Haifa, IL. spnina@is.haifa.ac.il
4       Universität St. Gallen, CH. barbara.weber@unisg.ch
5       Technical University of Denmark – Lyngby, DK. giom@dtu.dk

        Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 23271, “Human in
the (process) mines”. The seminar dealt with topics that are at the intersection of process mining
and visual analytics, and can potentially contribute to both areas. Process mining is a discipline
blending data science concepts with business process management. It utilizes event data recorded
by IT systems for a variety of tasks, including the automated discovery of graphical process models,
conformance checking between data and models, enhancement of process models with additional
analytic information, run-time monitoring of processes and operational support. Ultimately, the
purpose of process mining is to make sense of event data and answer business and domain-related
questions to support domain-specific goals. Visual Analytics, defined as “the science of analytical
reasoning facilitated by interactive visual interfaces,” is a multidisciplinary approach, integrating
aspects of data mining and knowledge discovery, information visualization, human-computer
interaction, and cognitive science to support humans in making sense of various kinds of data.
While these two research disciplines face similar challenges in different contexts, there have been
few interactions and cross-fertilization efforts between the respective communities so far. This
Dagstuhl Seminar is intended to bring together researchers from both communities and foster
joint research efforts and collaborations to advance both fields and enrich future approaches to be
developed.
Seminar July 2–7, 2023 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/23271
2012 ACM Subject Classification Applied computing → Business process management; Human-
   centered computing → Visual analytics
Keywords and phrases human in the loop, process mining, visual analytics
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.13.7.1



    1    Executive Summary
Claudio Di Ciccio (Sapienza University of Rome, IT)
Silvia Miksch (TU Wien, AT)
Pnina Soffer (University of Haifa, IL)
Barbara Weber (Universität St. Gallen, CH)
        License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, and Barbara Weber


This summary provides an overview of the outcomes of our Dagstuhl Seminar Human in the
(Process) Mines. It began with a general introduction to the aim, scope and context of the
Dagstuhl Seminar. The preliminary presentation was followed by a sequence of two-minute


∗
    Editor / Organizer
†
    Editorial Assistant / Collector
            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Human in the (Process) Mines, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 13, Issue 7, pp. 1–33
Editors: Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, and Giovanni Meroni
                    Dagstuhl Reports
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
2   23271 – Human in the (Process) Mines




       Figure 1 Our brainstorming session.


    speeches, with which every participant could give a brief overview of their own background,
    expertise and personal expectations for the seminar. The seminar participants included
    experts from both the process mining and visual analytics communities, with industry
    representatives and researchers in academia at different levels of seniority. The following four
    talks then set the scene to establish a shared understanding of the two research areas’ core
    concepts, employed methods and pursued aims: “Process Mining and Visual Analytics: A
    Story of Twins separated at Birth,” by Jan Mendling; “Visual Analytics for Time-Oriented
    Data” by Wolfgang Aigner; “The Interaction Side of Visual Analytics” by Christian Tominski;
    “The Process of Process Mining: Looking into Process Mining through the Lens of Process
    Analysts,” by Francesca Zerbato. The reader can find the abstracts of those talks below.
    Thereupon, a plenary brainstorming session began, moderated by the seminar organizers.
    Every participant in the assembly could suggest a topic that they would like to investigate
    together with the other attendees. The whole assembly decided how to distill and join the
    topics together. Figure 1 shows the set of fourteen arguments gathered from the discussion,
    then merged into eleven points (see the right-top, left-top, and bottom-left quadrants in the
    figure). To form the working groups, every attendee was asked to write on a card their name
    and the top two topics they would like to discuss further, in order of priority (see Fig. 1 in
    the bottom-right corner). The organizers collected the cards and divided the participants
    into groups of five to six people based on the preferences declared on the cards while keeping
    the teams heterogeneous in terms of background, research interests and affiliation. To this
    end, the suggested topics underwent another merging round in order to draw out six key
    research questions at the intersection of process mining and visual analytics. The questions
    and the main results that were achieved follow.
    How to incorporate knowledge into an interactive analysis process of event data?
    Addressing this question resulted in a conceptual model of knowledge-assisted interactive
    visual process mining, which extends an established model in the area of visual analytics. To
    validate this model, it has been instantiated for an example process mining task.
    How to make sense of multi-faceted process data? This question has guided the devel-
    opment of an interactive framework called “Tiramisù”. Based upon the interconnection of
    multiple visual layers, it displays process information under different perspectives and projects
Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, and Giovanni Meroni                   3


them onto a domain-friendly representation of the context in which the process unfolds. The
feasibility of the framework was demonstrated through its application in use-case scenarios.
A paper summarizing these results has been submitted to a workshop co-located with the
5th International Conference on Process Mining (ICPM 2023).
What comprehension metrics can be used to evaluate visualizations for process mining
tasks? As a starting point for addressing this question, the ICE-T hierarchical evaluation
framework was selected to adapt its metrics for the process mining domain. Adapting
the methodological approach included the selection of process mining tasks and the use of
the ICE-T framework for evaluation. An initial evaluation using the Disco process mining
software and the road traffic fine management process data set was performed.
How to select appropriate visualizations for object-centric and multi-dimensional process
mining tasks? Addressing this question has focused on investigating and developing a
conceptual categorization that facilitates a structured design process of multidimensional
visual process mining artefacts grounded in multi-faceted visual analytics design. Existing
process mining visualizations have been mapped onto well-established visual analytics facets.
How to design visualizations for the task of conformance checking? This question deals
with providing visual support to a major process mining task, of assessing conformance
between a process model and the behaviour captured in event data, measuring it, spotting
deviations, and analyzing them. Addressing this question, gaps in existing conformance-
checking visualizations were analyzed. Then, using a visual analytics workflow, specific
application scenarios of conformance checking were analyzed.
How to support human-centred process mining by constructing a unified process mining
and visual analytics task taxonomy? Aiming to realize opportunities at the intersection
of human-centred process mining activities, the various cognitive aspects of these activities,
and visual ways of supporting them, a taxonomical approach was taken. The objective of
the proposed taxonomy was to establish a common vocabulary and shared understanding
across the three bodies of knowledge, serve as a point of reference, and inform measurements
for evaluating process visualizations.

    From the second day on, time was mostly devoted to working groups, each discussing one
of the research questions that were raised in breakout sessions. This activity was accompanied
by “lightning talks”, i.e., brief presentations on issues that emerged during the discussions:
“Process mining: A hands-on session” by Anti Alman, “Extended Cognition with Big Data
and AI” by Irit Hadar, “How Visual Analytics People Work: Design Study Methodology in
Practice” by Tatiana von Landesberger, and “Coping with Volume and Variety in Temporal
Event Sequences” by Jan Mendling. Periodic intermediate group presentations reported on
the advancement of the teams’ work. The final presentations of the results achieved by the
working groups and a discussion of the continuation of the freshly established collaborations
took place on the final day. The seminar was concluded with the plan for a follow-up Dagstuhl
Seminar, having Pnina Soffer, Katerina Vrotsou, Claudio Di Ciccio, and Christian Tominski
as the proponents and prospective organizers. In the remainder of this report, the talks
held on the first day of the Human in the (Process) Mines Dagstuhl Seminar and the final
working group reports follow.




                                                                                                 23271
4   23271 – Human in the (Process) Mines


     2       Table of Contents
    Executive Summary
      Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, and Barbara Weber . . . . . . . . .               1

    Overview of Talks
         Visual Analytics for Time-Oriented Data
         Wolfgang Aigner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     5
         Process Mining and Visual Analytics: A Story of Twins separated at Birth
         Jan Mendling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    5
         The Interaction Side of Visual Analytics
         Christian Tominski . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    5
         The Process of Process Mining: Looking into Process Mining through the Lens of
         Process Analysts
         Francesca Zerbato . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

    Working groups
         Visual Process Mining: from Interaction to Knowledge
         Wolfgang Aigner, Chiara Di Francescomarino, Daniel Schuster, Cagatay Turkay,
         and Francesca Zerbato . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     6
         Towards a visual analytics framework for sensemaking of multi-faceted process
         information
         Anti Alman, Alessio Arleo, Iris Beerepoot, Andrea Burattin, Claudio Di Ciccio, and
         Manuel Resinas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9
         Comprehension Metrics for Process Mining Visualizations
         Axel Buehler, Irit Hadar, Monika Malinova Mandelburger, Andrea Marrella, Silvia
         Miksch, and Shazia Sadiq . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      14
         Multi-Faceted Process Visual Analytics
         Stef Van den Elzen, Mieke Jans, Christian Tominski, Sebastiaan Johannes van
         Zelst, and Mari-Cruz Villa-Uriol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
         Visualization for Conformance Checking
         Tatiana von Landesberger, Jan Mendling, Giovanni Meroni, Luise Pufahl, and
         Jana-Rebecca Rehse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    24
         Milana – A Task Taxonomy for Supporting Human-Centered Process Mining with
         Visual Analytics
         Lisa Zimmermann, Philipp Koytek, Shazia Sadiq, Pnina Soffer, Katerina Vrotsou,
         and Barbara Weber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28

    Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, and Giovanni Meroni                           5


 3      Overview of Talks
3.1     Visual Analytics for Time-Oriented Data
Wolfgang Aigner (FH – St. Pölten, AT)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Wolfgang Aigner
Main reference Wolfgang Aigner, Silvia Miksch, Heidrun Schumann, Christian Tominski: “Visualization of
               Time-Oriented Data”, Springer, 2023
          URL https://browser.timeviz.net


Visual Analytics (VA) has been defined as the science of analytical reasoning supported by
interactive visual interfaces. This hints towards the goal of supporting human users in making
sense of large and complex data. In order to achieve that, VA intertwines computers and
humans by combining automated analysis with interactive visualization methods. Processes
and sequences are concepts inherently tied to the time dimension. Therefore, the focus of
this talk is on Visual Analytics for time-oriented data. In particular, this includes aspects of
modeling of time and time-oriented data, their visualization, as well as interactivity.



3.2     Process Mining and Visual Analytics: A Story of Twins separated at
        Birth
Jan Mendling (HU Berlin, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Jan Mendling
 Joint work of Jan Mendling, Anton Yeshchenko
Main reference Anton Yeshchenko, Jan Mendling: “A Survey of Approaches for Event Sequence Analysis and
               Visualization using the ESeVis Framework”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2202.07941, 2022.
          URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.07941


In this talk I elaborate on the relationship and intersection of process mining and visual
analytics research. Partially, I refer to a recent survey by Anton Yeshchenko and Jan
Mendling on Approaches for Event Sequence Analysis and Visualization using the ESeVis
Framework (https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.07941).



3.3     The Interaction Side of Visual Analytics
Christian Tominski (Universität Rostock, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Christian Tominski
Main reference Christian Tominski, Heidrun Schumann:: “Interactive Visual Data Analysis,” AK Peters
               Visualization Series, CRC Press 2020, ISBN 9781498753982.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1201/9781315152707


Visual Analytics combines computational, visual, and interactive methods to help users gain
insight into large and complex data. In this talk, I highlight the importance of interactivity
for the knowledge generation process. In the first part of the talk, I explain basic models
and notions of interaction, including Shneiderman’s information seeking mantra, Keim’s
visual analytics mantra, Norman’s action cycle, Yi’s interaction intents as well as direct
manipulation and fluid interaction as defined by Shneiderman and Elmqvist. The second part
of the talk showcases several techniques for interacting with graph structures, mostly from




                                                                                                         23271
6   23271 – Human in the (Process) Mines


    my own work, including responsive matrix cells for analyzing and editing multivariate graphs,
    interactive lenses for graph exploration, naturally-inspired visual comparison, and fluid in-situ
    unfolding of edges. I also briefly touch upon guidance in visual analytics, progressive visual
    analytics, and multi-modal interaction. I close with advocating human-data interaction as a
    key ingredient of visual analytics.



    3.4     The Process of Process Mining: Looking into Process Mining
            through the Lens of Process Analysts
    Francesca Zerbato (Universität St. Gallen, CH)
          License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                   © Francesca Zerbato
     Joint work of Francesca Zerbato, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, Lisa Zimmermann, Elizaveta Sorokina, Irit Hadar
    Main reference Francesca Zerbato, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber: “Process Mining Practices: Evidence from
                   Interviews”, in Proc. of the Business Process Management – 20th International Conference, BPM
                   2022, Münster, Germany, September 11-16, 2022, Proceedings, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
                   Vol. 13420, pp. 268–285, Springer, 2022.
              URL https://doi.org//10.1007/978-3-031-16103-2_19


    Over the years, process mining research has mainly emphasized the development of automated
    techniques, giving less attention to the crucial role of (human) analysts involved in the analysis
    process. Research on the Process of Process Mining (PPM) aims to uncover how process
    analysts do their work in practice, i.e., how they act in the process mining tools and how they
    reason as the analysis unfolds. This talk provides an overview of recent research on the PPM,
    describing how the combination of different modalities of data, such as interaction traces and
    verbal data, can be combined to gain insights into the behavior and work practices of process
    analysts. The talk concludes by presenting two illustrative examples of analyzing such data.
    The first example demonstrates a bottom-up analysis approach utilizing interaction trace
    data to reveal what visualizations are used during the analysis, how they are used and why.
    The second example introduces a novel cognitive model derived from the theory of Prediction
    Error Minimization, which offers a top-down analytical perspective on the behavior of process
    analysts and their cognitive processes.
    Acknowledgments. B. Weber, F. Zerbato and L. Zimmermann are supported by the
    ProMiSE project funded by the SNSF under Grant No.: 200021_197032.



     4      Working groups
    4.1     Visual Process Mining: from Interaction to Knowledge
    Wolfgang Aigner (FH – St. Pölten , AT), Chiara Di Francescomarino (University of Trento,
    IT), Daniel Schuster (Fraunhofer FIT – Sankt Augustin, DE), Cagatay Turkay (University
    of Warwick – Coventry, GB), and Francesca Zerbato (Universität St. Gallen, CH)
          License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Wolfgang Aigner, Chiara Di Francescomarino, Daniel Schuster, Cagatay Turkay, and Francesca
                    Zerbato


    Process mining (PM) techniques enable organizations to extract valuable insights and generate
    knowledge from the event data captured by their information systems. Visual analytics
    (VA) aims to intertwine analytical reasoning by humans based on visual perception with the
Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, and Giovanni Meroni                    7


processing power of computers for automated data analysis [5]. Both fields share the aim of
generating knowledge based on data, but have developed rather independently from each
other. Process mining research has emphasized the development of automated techniques,
giving less attention to the role of (human) process analysts involved in the analysis [6].
Visual analytics literature focuses mostly on event data [3] and have paid little attention to
the underlying process models and lack approaches to address some common tasks in process
mining. There is therefore significant potential for the two communities to learn from each
other and develop synergies across concepts, theories, methods, and artifacts.
    This working group focused on studying the role of the human together with the integra-
tion of knowledge in the overall process. Presently, only a few process mining techniques
incorporate knowledge alongside event data, which is the primary input for most tech-
niques [4, 2]. For instance, the work by Schuster et al. [4] reviews domain knowledge
utilization in process discovery. However, few knowledge-utilizing approaches exist compared
to automated discovery techniques, indicating the need for further research.
    Our group, comprising process mining and visualization researchers, started with exploring
existing process mining and visual analytics models and approaches to develop a shared
language across the team. We set out to bring together established models and techniques
from the visual analytics and process mining literature with an objective to explore an
interactive and visual approach to doing process mining that puts humans and domain
knowledge at its core. We narrowed down our emphasis to conceptual frameworks that
emphasize knowledge and how it is elicited and externalized through the use of visual analytics
and process mining techniques.
    Specifically, we based our work on a conceptual model of knowledge-assisted visual
analytics (KAVA) [1] that brings together visualization, automated analysis, analytical
reasoning of human users, and the knowledge created based on these. Central to the KAVA
model is the utilization of visualizations and interaction to extract knowledge from data.
    Building upon the KAVA model, we focused on adapting it to the process mining domain.
To this end, we evaluated various common process mining tasks such as process discovery,
conformance checking, temporal performance analysis, predictive process mining, comparative
process mining, and action-oriented process mining in the context of the model. As a result,
we derived a conceptual model that allows us to understand how different process mining
approaches involve and consider humans and how process analysts generate and externalize
knowledge through their interaction with process mining tools and techniques.
    Figure 2 reports the derived conceptual model.
    Going beyond the classical PM approaches that automatically learn from data, the model
focuses on the user-machine system, and especially on how the human user visualizes (V),
interacts (E), as well as generates (through perceptions and interactions) and externalizes
(X) tacit knowledge in PM tasks.
    We derived the model in several iterations. First, in dialogue with the process mining
literature, we started untangling and interrogating the different components of the KAVA
model. Our goal with this exercise was twofold: 1) to understand the model’s fit and
coverage for process mining, and 2) to revise the model as a descriptive framework for a
knowledge-centric interactive and visual process mining approach.
    Then, we explored the literature in both visual analytics and process mining to associate
techniques, concepts and terms to each of the components in the model, e.g., we listed
automated data processing techniques from both areas specifically designed for event-based
and process data. We then focused our attention on the transitions between these elements
and added new transitions and links to strengthen how well the model underpins our
envisioned knowledge-centric interactive and visual process mining approach.



                                                                                                  23271
8   23271 – Human in the (Process) Mines



     Machine                                                                         User
                                                                X


                                                   I
           !"           D              V
                                                 image
                                                                P               !!

                                                                                               process
                                                                                            stakeholders


                 A                     S                        E



        Figure 2 Our knowledge-assisted interactive visual process mining model (D...data;
    V...visualization; I...image; P...perception; Kτ ...tacit knowledge; E...exploration/manipulation;
    S...specification; A...automated analysis; X...knowledge externalization; Kϵ ...explicit knowledge).
    Boxes depict artifacts, while circles represent transformations. (Figure partly adapted from [1]).


        Once we established a first version of the model, our next exercise was to go over a
    range of process mining sessions as a case study and explore how comprehensively our model
    captures the process mining process. This enabled us to put our model to test. This exercise
    resulted in a number of revisions which led to the model we introduced in Figure 2. We
    concluded our working group activities by identifying a range of process mining tasks that
    will enable us to more systematically evaluate our model in the next steps.
        Summing up, the discussions of the working group resulted in two main outcomes: 1)
    a conceptual model for interactive visual process mining that takes a knowledge-centric
    perspective; 2) an instantiation of the model on a real PM task so as to validate the
    suitability of the model to the field, as well as to identify challenges and opportunities for
    both communities.
        Going forward, the working group will further refine the proposed model with a goal to
    better understand the role of tacit and explicit knowledge in the context of different process
    mining tasks. We will use the model as a vehicle to identify challenges, open problems and
    opportunities in supporting users in generating and externalizing knowledge during visual
    process mining. Through these we envision to bring the process mining and visual analytic
    communities together along a shared research agenda on advancing interactive and visual
    process mining.
    Acknowledgments. F. Zerbato is supported by the ProMiSE project funded by the SNSF
    under Grant No.: 200021_197032.
    References
    1    Paolo Federico, Markus Wagner, Alexander Rind, Albert Amor-Amoros, Silvia Miksch, and
         Wolfgang Aigner. The role of explicit knowledge: A conceptual model of knowledge-assisted
         visual analytics. In Brian D. Fisher, Shixia Liu, and Tobias Schreck, editors, 12th IEEE
         Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology, IEEE VAST 2017, Phoenix, AZ,
         USA, October 3-6, 2017, pages 92–103. IEEE Computer Society, 2017.
    2    Chiara Di Francescomarino, Chiara Ghidini, Fabrizio Maria Maggi, Giulio Petrucci, and
         Anton Yeshchenko. An eye into the future: Leveraging a-priori knowledge in predictive
         business process monitoring. In Josep Carmona, Gregor Engels, and Akhil Kumar, editors,
         Business Process Management – 15th International Conference, BPM 2017, Barcelona,
         Spain, September 10-15, 2017, Proceedings, volume 10445 of Lecture Notes in Computer
         Science, pages 252–268. Springer, 2017.
Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, and Giovanni Meroni                                  9


3     Phong H. Nguyen, Rafael Henkin, Siming Chen, Natalia V. Andrienko, Gennady L. An-
      drienko, Olivier Thonnard, and Cagatay Turkay. VASABI: hierarchical user profiles for
      interactive visual user behaviour analytics. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., 26(1):77–86,
      2020.
4     Daniel Schuster, Sebastiaan J. van Zelst, and Wil M. P. van der Aalst. Utilizing domain
      knowledge in data-driven process discovery: A literature review. Comput. Ind., 137:103612,
      2022.
5     James J. Thomas and Kristin A. Cook. A visual analytics agenda. IEEE Computer Graphics
      and Applications, 26(1):10–13, 2006.
6     Francesca Zerbato, Pnina Soffer, and Barbara Weber. Process mining practices: Evidence
      from interviews. In Claudio Di Ciccio, Remco M. Dijkman, Adela del-Río-Ortega, and
      Stefanie Rinderle-Ma, editors, Business Process Management – 20th International Confer-
      ence, BPM 2022, Münster, Germany, September 11-16, 2022, Proceedings, volume 13420 of
      Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 268–285. Springer, 2022.



4.2      Towards a visual analytics framework for sensemaking of
         multi-faceted process information
Anti Alman (University of Tartu, EE), Alessio Arleo (TU Wien, AT), Iris Beerepoot (Utrecht
University, NL), Andrea Burattin (Technical University of Denmark – Lyngby, DK), Claudio
Di Ciccio (Sapienza University of Rome, IT), and Manuel Resinas (University of Sevilla,
ES)
        License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © Anti Alman, Alessio Arleo, Iris Beerepoot, Andrea Burattin, Claudio Di Ciccio, and Manuel
                  Resinas


4.2.1      Introduction
Process mining (PM) is the discipline aimed at extracting information from events recorded
by information systems executing processes [22]. The operational context of process mining
is multi-variate in that data potentially stems from multiple sources and pertains to diverse
dimensions (control flow, time, resources, object lifecycle). As argued by the seminal work
of Beerepoot et al. [2], a critical, yet largely unaddressed, issue of process mining is the
fixed-granularity level of process analysis, namely the inability to navigate through distinct,
and possibly domain-specific, dimensions. This problem makes the investigation of process
improvement less effective, as studied by Kubrak et al. [13], as it entails a partial view over
an inherently complex search space, which is typical of knowledge-intensive processes [5, 6].
Visual Analytics (VA) is the discipline of supporting users’ analytical reasoning through the
use of interactive visual interfaces [12]. VA is intended to keep the user within the analysis
loop, so that human comprehension and perception actively contribute to generating new
insights and increasing confidence with the analysis results. VA has extensively studied the
problem of representing complex, multi-faceted phenomena (see, e.g., [11, 16]), which is also
the type of phenomena often encountered within real-life business processes.
    Thus far, there has been limited cooperation between PM and VA. In this paper, we
argue that VA can play a pivotal role in addressing the above limitation of fixed-granularity
in process mining. With a cross-pollinating effect, PM can equip VA with a collection
of established algorithms and techniques for the automated generation of process-oriented
representations of system dynamics.




                                                                                                                23271
10   23271 – Human in the (Process) Mines




        Figure 3 An exemplification of the Tiramisù framework. On the right, a tiramisù.


         During the seminar, we envisioned a novel framework that resorts to VA for the interactive
     investigation of factual evidence of process insights revolving around information mined from
     data sources that go under the name of sequence event data, to use VA’s terminology, or event
     logs, as per the PM nomenclature. Our framework will follow a multi-layer approach, providing
     end users with a context-aware visualization integrating classical PM representation elements
     (such as workflow nets [19], directly-follows graphs [21], or declarative process maps [7]) with
     additional diagrams and visual cues tailored for context-variable and metadata representations
     (e.g., timelines and calendars for time, geographical or building maps for space). We introduce
     a couple of use cases that could benefit from such a framework. The interconnection of
     the different layers and their anchorage to a backdrop onto which the representations are
     projected provides the user with means to foster explainability for process analysis and,
     eventually, enhancement.
         In the remainder of this section, Sec. 4.2.2 describes our framework, illustrating its
     key concepts and the interplay of its components. Section 4.2.3 showcases two use cases
     demonstrating the application of the Tiramisù approach in the area of knowledge-intensive
     processes. Section 4.2.4 acknowledges some known limitations of our work, paving the path
     for future work discussed in Sec. 4.2.5.

     4.2.2   The Tiramisù framework
     In Tiramisù we envision a visualization framework designed to support sensemaking when
     dealing with complex PM event sequences. Our goal is to augment existing process models
     with additional dimensions that can provide further context during the analysis, easing
     the generation of insights and generally providing a more comprehensive understanding
     of the process and phenomenon under investigation. With this goal in mind, we envision
     Tiramisù as a multi-level framework (see Fig. 3), reminiscent of the popular tiramisù cake.
     The framework will be structured with a “backdrop”, a main layer with the process model,
     and one or more dimension layers. These are meant to be superimposed on the first two, in
     a details-on-demand fashion, thus reminding the different layers of a tiramisù.

     4.2.3   Use-case scenarios
     In this section, we illustrate some scenarios that motivate our work. We focus on two classes
     of knowledge-intensive processes, pertaining to healthcare [15] and personal information
     management [4].
Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, and Giovanni Meroni                       11


4.2.3.1    Behavioral deviation analysis in healthcare
Healthcare is one of the most difficult, but at the same time, one of the most promising
domains to tackle both in the field of PM [15] as well as in the area of VA [3]. As such,
healthcare is a natural domain for applying the Tiramisù approach. To demonstrate this,
we have chosen the specific task of analyzing the sleeping routine of patients suffering from
dementia or other similar diseases. Naively applying the already existing process mining
approaches to this task can, for example, lead to relying on simple process maps where
the nodes represent various activities performed by the patients, and the arcs represent
dependencies or other temporal constraints among these activities [8]. While the above
models may be sufficient for a process mining expert to extrapolate meaningful process
insights, it can quickly become challenging for domain experts, who may lack training in
interpreting these formalisms: as discussed in [8, 10], the most likely users of such a system
would, in practice, not be a process expert, but the doctors and the nurses responsible for
the care of the specific patient.

4.2.3.2    Personal productivity analysis in work processes
Personal information management (PIM) pertains to the organization of one’s own activities,
contacts, etc., through the use of software on laptops and smart devices. Similarly, personal
informatics systems resort to one individual’s own information to pursue the objective of
aiding people to collect and reflect on their personal information [14]. Several techniques can
be used to collect personal information like non-participant observation, screen recording,
and timesheet techniques, each with their own advantages and disadvantages [17]. Regardless
of the technique used, collected personal information can be seen as an event log, which can
be analyzed using process mining techniques to discover personal work processes.
    Depending on the characteristics of the work, personal work processes can be knowledge-
intensive and significantly unstructured, which means they present the aforementioned
challenges. In this use case, we focus on the personal work processes performed by an
academic during her daily work, which involves conducting research, preparing lessons,
grading students or reviewing research papers, among many other activities.
    Specifically, our focus is on the retrospective analysis of the influence of the personal work
processes a person has followed during a certain period of time on the positive or negative
outcome of a task. For instance, an academic who has missed the deadline for submitting a
review to a conference might be interested in knowing what happened during the period of
time in which she was working in the review that caused the delay.

4.2.4     Limitations
Evidence-based discovery approaches suffer from the potential bias given that only a part of
processes (especially the knowledge-intensive ones) are recorded by computerized systems [9].
Our framework is in this sense no different. The injection of additional facts stemming from
domain experts and users is complementary to this investigation and paves the path for
future work (see Section 4.1 for further details in this regard).
    Also, we assume the user knows what visualizations best suit their needs, although this
may be a challenge on its own. Investigating this aspect goes beyond the scope of this report.
However, the interested reader is referred to the work of Sirgmets et al. [18], which presents
a framework aimed to guide design choices for the effective visualization of analytical data.
    Data-based process analysis tasks often involve a significant amount of time for extracting,
reformatting, and filtering event logs from information systems [20]. Our framework requires
these preliminary operations too, with the addition that oftentimes knowledge-intensive


                                                                                                     23271
12   23271 – Human in the (Process) Mines


     processes record executions over a heterogeneous set of applications and devices in partially
     structured or unstructured formats [6]. Furthermore, the notion of a process instance (case)
     tends to be less defined in such contexts, thus requiring a prior customizable reconciliation
     of shared events [1]. The emergence of the novel and event data meta-models that are less
     centered around the concept of case could be beneficial to the information processing we
     envision in Tiramisù [23].
         Finally, our framework covers the visualization aspects related to VA in PM. However,
     the interaction aspects are only partly discussed, leaving a gap which further iteration of this
     framework should address. This would be made easier and more effective if a task taxonomy
     about VA in PM were made available, opening a further research direction with the potential
     to bring together the two disciplines.

     4.2.5   Conclusions and future remarks
     In this report, we have envisioned Tiramisù, a framework based on the multi-layered
     representation of mined process information helping the user navigate the multi-faceted
     information at hand while keeping the data under the focus consistently linked and navigable
     across different dimensions.
         We foresee the following research endeavors in the future. A further elaboration of the
     framework and its application to the use case scenarios identified. An evaluation based on
     an empirical study involving users is in our plans to assess the efficacy and effectiveness of
     our solution. The implementation of a working prototype is crucial to this extent and is part
     of our agenda. We envision the customization and refactoring of layers, their aggregation
     rules, and backdrops as key challenges to be addressed in the future. Finally, we observe that
     stepping from a single-backdrop multi-layer design to a tree-like hierarchical structure of
     backdrops could initiate a new path toward a significant extension of the expressive richness
     guaranteed by our framework.
     Acknowledgments. The work of A. Alman was supported by the European Social Fund via
     “ICT programme” measure and by the Estonian Research Council grant PRG1226. The work
     of C. Di Ciccio was supported by the Italian Ministry of University and Research (MUR)
     under PRIN grant B87G22000450001 (PINPOINT) and by project SERICS (PE00000014)
     under the NRRP MUR program funded by the EU-NGEU. The work of M. Resinas was
     partially supported by projects PID2021-126227NB-C21/ AEI/10.13039/501100011033/
     FEDER, UE and TED2021-131023B-C22/ AEI/10.13039/501100011033/ Unión Europea
     NextGenerationEU/PRTR.
     References
      1 Dina Bayomie, Claudio Di Ciccio, and Jan Mendling. Event-case correlation for process
          mining using probabilistic optimization. Inf. Syst., 114:102167, 2023.
      2 Iris Beerepoot et al. The biggest business process management problems to solve before we
          die. Comput. Ind., 146:103837, 2023.
      3 Jesus J. Caban and David Gotz. Visual analytics in healthcare – opportunities and research
          challenges. J. Am. Medical Informatics Assoc., 22(2):260–262, 2015.
      4 Tiziana Catarci, A.J. Dix, Akrivi Katifori, Giorgos Lepouras, and Antonella Poggi. Task-
          centred information management. In DELOS Conference, volume 4877 of Lecture Notes in
          Computer Science, pages 197–206. Springer, 2007.
      5 Jochen De Weerdt, Annelies Schupp, An Vanderloock, and Bart Baesens. Process mining
          for the multi-faceted analysis of business processes - A case study in a financial services
          organization. Comput. Ind., 64(1):57–67, 2013.
Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, and Giovanni Meroni                     13


 6   Claudio Di Ciccio, Andrea Marrella, and Alessandro Russo. Knowledge-intensive processes:
     Characteristics, requirements and analysis of contemporary approaches. J. Data Semant.,
     4(1):29–57, 2015.
 7   Claudio Di Ciccio and Marco Montali. Declarative process specifications: Reasoning,
     discovery, monitoring. In Wil M. P. van der Aalst and Josep Carmona, editors, Process
     Mining Handbook, volume 448 of Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, pages
     108–152. Springer, 2022.
 8   Gemma Di Federico and Andrea Burattin. Do you behave always the same? In Marco
     Montali, Arik Senderovich, and Matthias Weidlich, editors, Process Mining Workshops,
     pages 5–17, Cham, 2023. Springer Nature Switzerland.
 9   Marlon Dumas, Marcello La Rosa, Jan Mendling, and Hajo A. Reijers. Fundamentals of
     Business Process Management, Second Edition. Springer, 2018.
10   Gemma Di Federico, Andrea Burattin, and Marco Montali. Human behavior as a process
     model: Which language to use? In Andrea Marrella and Daniele Theseider Dupré, editors,
     Proceedings of the 1st Italian Forum on Business Process Management co-located with
     the 19th International Conference of Business Process Management (BPM 2021), Rome,
     Italy, September 10th, 2021, volume 2952 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings, pages 18–25.
     CEUR-WS.org, 2021.
11   Steffen Hadlak, Heidrun Schumann, and Hans-Jörg Schulz. A survey of multi-faceted graph
     visualization. In EuroVis (STARs), pages 1–20, 2015.
12   Daniel Keim, Gennady Andrienko, Jean-Daniel Fekete, Carsten Görg, Jörn Kohlhammer,
     and Guy Melançon. Visual analytics: Definition, process, and challenges. Springer, 2008.
13   Kateryna Kubrak, Fredrik Milani, and Alexander Nolte. A visual approach to support
     process analysts in working with process improvement opportunities. Business Process
     Management Journal, 29(8):101–132, 2023.
14   Ian Li, Anind K. Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. A stage-based model of personal informatics
     systems. In CHI, pages 557–566. ACM, 2010.
15   Jorge Munoz-Gama, Niels Martin, et al. Process mining for healthcare: Characteristics and
     challenges. J. Biomed. Informatics, 127:103994, 2022.
16   Renata Georgia Raidou. Visual analytics for the representation, exploration, and analysis
     of high-dimensional, multi-faceted medical data. Biomedical Visualisation: Volume 2, pages
     137–162, 2019.
17   Tea Sinik, Iris Beerepoot, and Hajo A. Reijers. A peek into the working day: Comparing
     techniques for recording employee behaviour. In Research Challenges in Information Science:
     Information Science and the Connected World – 17th International Conference, RCIS 2023,
     volume 476 of Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, pages 343–359. Springer,
     2023.
18   Marit Sirgmets, Fredrik Milani, Alexander Nolte, and Taivo Pungas. Designing process
     diagrams – A framework for making design choices when visualizing process mining outputs.
     In Hervé Panetto, Christophe Debruyne, Henderik A. Proper, Claudio Agostino Ardagna,
     Dumitru Roman, and Robert Meersman, editors, OTM, volume 11229 of Lecture Notes in
     Computer Science, pages 463–480. Springer, 2018.
19   Wil M. P. van der Aalst. The application of petri nets to workflow management. Journal
     of Circuits, Systems, and Computers, 8(1):21–66, 1998.
20   Wil M. P. van der Aalst. Process Mining – Data Science in Action, Second Edition. Springer,
     2016.
21   Wil M. P. van der Aalst. Foundations of process discovery. In Wil M. P. van der Aalst
     and Josep Carmona, editors, Process Mining Handbook, volume 448 of Lecture Notes in
     Business Information Processing, pages 37–75. Springer, 2022.




                                                                                                   23271
14   23271 – Human in the (Process) Mines


     22    Wil M. P. van der Aalst and Josep Carmona, editors. Process Mining Handbook, volume
           448 of Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing. Springer, 2022.
     23    Moe Thandar Wynn, Julian Lebherz, et al. Rethinking the input for process mining: Insights
           from the XES survey and workshop. In Jorge Munoz-Gama and Xixi Lu, editors, ICPM
           workshops, volume 433 of Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, pages 3–16.
           Springer, 2021.



     4.3      Comprehension Metrics for Process Mining Visualizations
     Axel Buehler (Olympus – Hamburg, DE), Irit Hadar (University of Haifa, IL), Monika
     Malinova Mandelburger (Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, AT), Andrea Marrella (Sapienza
     University of Rome, IT), Silvia Miksch (TU Wien, AT), and Shazia Sadiq (University of
     Queensland – Brisbane, AU)
             License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Axel Buehler, Irit Hadar, Monika Malinova Mandelburger, Andrea Marrella, Silvia Miksch, and
                       Shazia Sadiq


     The working group explores the evaluation of visualizations in process mining. Process
     mining is a valuable tool for analyzing and improving business processes based on event
     logs (event sequences). Our approach emphasizes the cognitive load involved in the process
     of process mining and the need for effective visualizations to support analysts in solving
     process mining tasks. The research question addressed is: What comprehension metrics
     can be used to evaluate visualizations for process mining tasks? The ICE-T hierarchical
     evaluation framework is selected as a starting point towards adapting its metrics for the
     process mining domain. We outline the methodological approach, including the selection of
     process mining tasks and the use of the ICE-T framework for evaluation. We perform the
     evaluation using the Disco process mining software and the road traffic fine management
     process data set. We conclude with the first prototypical evaluation results, highlighting the
     need for customization and validation of the ICE-T metrics for the process mining domain
     and outlining future steps for this research.

     4.3.1      Motivation and Introduction
     Process mining enables process analysts to provide insights into the business processes of
     organizations. Process mining tools use event logs as data inputs in order to make sense of
     the organization’s processes. An event log includes data that has been generated by various
     systems within an organization. Process mining aims to discover, analyze, monitor and
     ultimately improve business processes, all based on the event log. The process of process
     mining is a highly interactive process. The general aim faced by analysts is to make sense
     of the process data, where the data serves as the input coming from the external world.
     This sense-making process entails an iterative cycle of data exploration toward revealing
     insights about the process investigated. This process entails a high cognitive load, and as
     such it requires high cognitive effort. Process analysts are supported by tools that enable
     the generalization of various visualizations of the business processes as they are executed
     in real time. Appropriate visualization can reduce cognitive load, and in fact serve as an
     extended cognition mechanism supporting and enhancing the cognitive process [11].
         However, for a visualization to enable this cognitive benefit, we need to ensure that it is
     a good fit for both the task and the user. We therefore ask the following research question:
     What comprehension metrics can be used for effectively evaluating visualizations for solving
     process mining tasks?
Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, and Giovanni Meroni                    15


    In order to answer this question, we looked for relevant metrics from the field of visu-
alization and visual analytics, and found the ICE-T hierarchical evaluation framework for
evaluating visualizations as a good starting point. Our aim is to adapt this framework for the
process mining domain and validate it as reliable metrics for evaluating the comprehension
of a process mining visualizations.

4.3.2     Methodological Approach
4.3.2.1    Selected Tasks in Process Mining
As one result of the co-operation between the process mining and visual analytics communities,
we require a reference evaluation framework for typical tasks performed in the context of
a process mining analysis to be available for general use. Our aim for the preliminarily
selected evaluation framework was therefore to adapt it to the context of process mining,
i.e., a process analyst solving specific process mining tasks. Accordingly, we needed to select
tasks suitable for initial testing of the suitability of the selected evaluation framework.
     As this reference framework is not yet available, we reviewed and brainstormed typical
tasks of a process analyst by walking through a prototypical analysis session, enriched by
typical visual analysis tasks performed while designing solutions for users applicable to the
process mining use case.
     Typical tasks we identified are:
     Check the quality of the event log during the generation and refinement thereof.
     Detect and communicate the core structure of the process, i.e. its most frequent paths,
     number of cases, events, and aggregated metrics for time passing between events.
     Detect potential issues in the process (e.g., loops, non-conformance, bottlenecks, long
     waiting times, outliers).
     Explore if the presence of a certain activity correlates with a change in throughput time.
     Identify differing process behavior within a given event log, e.g.,
        by clustering traces or variants by various case attributes or variant features
        by exploring the data set to detect attributes that potentially derive segmentation
     Detect, explore, understand causes and consequences of observed process behavior
   There are various existing theories and comprehension metrics for evaluating different
types of visualizations:
   Cognitive Load Theory: The construct representing the mental effort that, when a learner
   performs a particular task, imposes itself on the learner’s cognitive system.
   Cognitive Fit Theory: The visualization should fit the task at hand. It provides an
   explanation for performance differences among users across different presentation formats
   of information.
   Physics of Notation: Provides principles for modeling notations to be easily understood
   by their users. It highlights the semantic understanding of the symbols forming the
   notation.
   Representation Theory: Diagrams are better than sentential representations in terms of
   information comprehension and inferencing.
   Split-attention Effect: Split-source information can generate a heavy cognitive load in
   the process of information assimilation.
   The ICE-T: A Heuristic Approach to Value-Driven Evaluation of Visualizations/Visual
   Analytics approaches.
   As a starting point, we selected one of the tasks for prototypical evaluation using the
ICE-T framework, as detailed in Section 3.



                                                                                                  23271
16   23271 – Human in the (Process) Mines


     4.3.2.2   ICE-T Framework
     For our evaluation, we used a heuristic-based evaluation methodology, called ICE-T. ICE-T
     is a hierarchical value framework consisting of four components (i.e., metrics): insight, time,
     essence, and confidence. Each component includes a guideline, which describes important
     aspects of the high-level component. Each guideline is then comprised of a small set of
     low-level heuristics that are designed to be actionable, rate-able statements reflecting how a
     visualization achieves that guideline. Evaluators who have knowledge of visualization and
     visual analytics should assess the design with respect to these heuristics (using 7-point Likert
     scale: 1-strongly disagree to 7-strongly agree, or N/A-not applicable). The component scores
     are a simple average of the associated mid-level guideline scores, and the mid-level guideline
     scores are a simple average of the ratings for the low-level heuristics. According to the ICE-T
     guidelines, five experts are sufficient and a visualization design is successful when the mean
     score exceeds five.

     4.3.2.3   Data Set and Process Mining Tool: Analysis of the Road Traffic Fine
               Management Process in Disco
     The data set used to perform the prototypical evaluation is derived from the management of
     road-traffic violations by the Italian local police and the information system used for this
     purpose. The process begins with the “Create Fine” transition, and offenders can pay the
     fine partially or in full at different stages. If the entire amount is paid or overpaid, the fine
     management is closed. Notifications and penalties are involved if the offender fails to pay
     within a certain period. Appeals can be made, and if successful, the process ends. Otherwise,
     the case proceeds with the “Receive Result” step. If the offender still does not pay, the case
     may be handed over for credit collection. See [8] for a detailed discussion of the data set.
     The data set is publicly available (https://data.4tu.nl/articles/_/12683249/1)

     4.3.3     First Prototypical Evaluation of ICE-T
     To evaluate the effectiveness of process mining visualizations for solving process mining
     tasks, we first had to think of tasks that are typically solved by process analysts when
     using process mining, as well as the various visualizations generated by the different process
     mining tools. As one of the most typical uses of process mining is process discovery, we
     decided to take one of the most common process discovery tasks “Discover the most frequent
     process path” as a starting point. The process mining visualization that is mostly used
     by a process analyst to perform this task is the directly-follows graph (DFG). The DFG
     generated from the above-mentioned data set is shown in Fig. 4 and has been generated using
     the process mining tool Disco. We used the customized ICE-T comprehension metrics to
     evaluate the effectiveness of the DFG with regard to the task of discovering the most frequent
     process path. Five experts evaluated the DFG visualization using the four components of
     the ICE-T framework. From the five experts, one is a process mining practitioner, and four
     are researchers. The four researchers come from the process mining, conceptual modeling,
     and visual analytics disciplines.
         As a first step, each expert evaluated the DFG from Figure 4 individually. The ICE-T
     framework uses a 7-point Likert scale. After the individual evaluations were done, the
     five experts discussed their perceived understanding of the heuristics listed for each ICE-T
     component, as well as the difficulty to evaluate each of the heuristics against the DFG. As
     a result, we were able to identify two aspects that should be modified in order to fit the
     purpose of evaluating process mining visualizations for solving process mining tasks. The
Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, and Giovanni Meroni                    17




   Figure 4 The Road Traffic Fine Management Process visualization using DFG generated by
Disco.


first aspect is with regard to the terminology used to describe the heuristics. Certain terms
from the visual analytics community share the same semantics but are referred to differently
in the process mining community. For example, “data case” in visual analytics is referred to
a “process trace” in the process mining community. Therefore, we had to reformulate the
terminology into the terminology used and understood by process mining analysts. Second,
we found that some heuristics should be split into two heuristics, because the heuristic
includes two different concepts that might lead to different evaluations of the same heuristic.
We split such composed heuristics into two separate heuristics.

4.3.4   Next Steps
The next steps for continuing this research stream are:
   Fully customize the ICE-T metrics for the process mining domain
  Validate the customized ICE-T (prototypical)
     Select existing process mining tasks




                                                                                                  23271
18   23271 – Human in the (Process) Mines




        Figure 5 Our lovely group.


          Select existing and emerging visualizations from the other Working Groups of the
          Dagstuhl seminar to support the process mining tasks
          Conduct the ICE-T survey for each task and visualization with 5 process mining
          experts
        Prepare a vision/research paper
        Generalize the customized ICE-T (experiment)

     References
     1    Palash Bera. Does cognitive overload matter in understanding bpmn models? J. Comput.
          Inf. Syst., 52(4):59–69, 2012.
     2    Christian Bors. Facilitating data quality assessment utilizing visual analytics: tackling time,
          metrics, uncertainty, and provenance. PhD thesis, Wien, 2019.
     3    Matthew Brehmer and Tamara Munzner. A multi-level typology of abstract visualization
          tasks. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., 19(12):2376–2385, 2013.
     4    Davide Ceneda, Natalia V. Andrienko, Gennady L. Andrienko, Theresia Gschwandtner,
          Silvia Miksch, Nikolaus Piccolotto, Tobias Schreck, Marc Streit, Josef Suschnigg, and
          Christian Tominski. Guide me in analysis: A framework for guidance designers. Comput.
          Graph. Forum, 39(6):269–288, 2020.
     5    Tianwa Chen, Shazia W. Sadiq, and Marta Indulska. Sensemaking in dual artefact tasks –
          the case of business process models and business rules. In Gillian Dobbie, Ulrich Frank,
          Gerti Kappel, Stephen W. Liddle, and Heinrich C. Mayr, editors, Conceptual Modeling –
          39th International Conference, ER 2020, Vienna, Austria, November 3-6, 2020, Proceedings,
          volume 12400 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 105–118. Springer, 2020.
     6    Lei Han, Tianwa Chen, Gianluca Demartini, Marta Indulska, and Shazia W. Sadiq. On
          understanding data worker interaction behaviors. In Jimmy X. Huang, Yi Chang, Xueqi
          Cheng, Jaap Kamps, Vanessa Murdock, Ji-Rong Wen, and Yiqun Liu, editors, Proceedings of
          the 43rd International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in Information
          Retrieval, SIGIR 2020, Virtual Event, China, July 25-30, 2020, pages 269–278. ACM, 2020.
     7    Monika Malinova and Jan Mendling. Cognitive diagram understanding and task performance
          in systems analysis and design. MIS Q., 45(4):2101–2158, 2021.
Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, and Giovanni Meroni                             19


8     Felix Mannhardt, Massimiliano de Leoni, Hajo A. Reijers, and Wil M. P. van der Aalst.
      Balanced multi-perspective checking of process conformance. Computing, 98(4):407–437,
      2016.
9     Jan Mendling, Mark Strembeck, and Jan Recker. Factors of process model comprehension –
      findings from a series of experiments. Decis. Support Syst., 53(1):195–206, 2012.
10      Daniel L. Moody. The “physics” of notations: Toward a scientific basis for constructing
      visual notations in software engineering. IEEE Trans. Software Eng., 35(6):756–779, 2009.
11      Albert Newen, Shaun Gallagher, and Leon De Bruin. 4e cognition: Historical roots, key
      concepts, and central issues. 2018.
12      Jan Recker and Alexander Dreiling. Does it matter which process modelling language we
      teach or use? an experimental study on understanding process modelling languages without
      formal education. ACIS 2007 Proceedings, page 45, 2007.
13      Hajo A. Reijers, Jan Mendling, and Remco M. Dijkman. Human and automatic modu-
      larizations of process models to enhance their comprehension. Inf. Syst., 36(5):881–897,
      2011.
14      Emily Wall, Meeshu Agnihotri, Laura E. Matzen, Kristin Divis, Michael Haass, Alex Endert,
      and John T. Stasko. A heuristic approach to value-driven evaluation of visualizations. IEEE
      Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., 25(1):491–500, 2019.
15      Wei Wang, Tianwa Chen, Marta Indulska, Shazia Wasim Sadiq, and Barbara Weber. Busi-
      ness process and rule integration approaches – an empirical analysis of model understanding.
      Inf. Syst., 104:101901, 2022.
16      Shaochen Yu, Tianwa Chen, Lei Han, Gianluca Demartini, and Shazia Sadiq. Dataops-
      4g: On supporting generalists in data quality discovery. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
      35(5):4668–4681, 2023.



4.4    Multi-Faceted Process Visual Analytics
Stef Van den Elzen (TU Eindhoven, NL), Mieke Jans (Hasselt University, BE), Christian
Tominski (Universität Rostock, DE), Sebastiaan Johannes van Zelst (Celonis Labs GmbH –
München, DE), and Mari-Cruz Villa-Uriol (University of Sheffield, GB)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Stef Van den Elzen, Mieke Jans, Christian Tominski, Sebastiaan Johannes van Zelst, and
                Mari-Cruz Villa-Uriol


As the application of process mining is becoming more relevant and is being used in a broader
context, there is a need for new interactive visual representations that are better focused and
use-case specific. For example, the recent object-focused refinement of event data, i.e., often
referred to as object-centric process mining, defines a multi-dimensional process perspective,
requiring corresponding interactive multi-dimensional visual representations. However, the
design process of existing process mining visualizations is relatively unstructured and not
well-studied. As such, the working group has focused on investigating and developing a
conceptual categorization that facilitates a structured design process of multidimensional
visual process mining artifacts grounded in multi-faceted visual analytics design [4, 3]. The
working group has mapped existing process mining visualizations onto well-established facets
from the domain of visual analytics. Correspondingly, blind-spots and opportunities (e.g.,
by means of combining novel facets) have been identified. Furthermore, the categorization
enables a more structured approach to exploring and designing new visual representations.




                                                                                                           23271
20   23271 – Human in the (Process) Mines


     4.4.1   Multi-Faceted Visual Analytics
     In order to arrive at a well-balanced multi-faceted representation, it makes sense to follow
     a two-step design procedure [9]. First, a base representation has to be defined for the
     primary data facet whose depiction will govern the overall display. In alignment with the
     effectiveness principle [5], the most powerful visual variables should be used for the primary
     facet (usually, this means mapping the primary facet to the visual variable of position).
     Second, the additional data facet(s) will be incorporated into the base representation using
     further visual channels (e.g., color, size, orientation, or shape). In the next section, we
     describe the categorization of data facets applicable to process mining artifacts.

     4.4.2   Data Facets
     A wide variety of facets is identifiable in process mining, where the relevance of a facet as a
     driving force for a visual design largely depends on the perspective from which users need
     to look at their data. In general, there are key facets to be considered (in some cases to be
     refined hierarchically) according to the visual analytics literature. We mostly discussed the
     following facets inspired by [3] and [9] (see Figure 6):
         Note that some entities, e.g., activities and objects, can also act as a given attribute. To
     distinguish between these roles in existing visual representations of process mining data and
     models, we studied the use of marks and visual channels, as the information-bearing building
     blocks in visualization idioms. Data that are explicitly represented as marks are interpreted
     as entities. If data are encoded using visual channels, we interpret them as attributes.

     4.4.3   A Faceted View on Existing PM Visualizations
     To develop a common understanding of existing process mining visualizations, we worked
     on a categorization that assigns to commonly used visual designs the data facets that they
     represent. In addition to the visualization-facet mapping, we also cover the marks and visual
     channels for selected examples:
        Dotted chart (scatter plot)
           Primary facet: Time
           Additional facets: Topology (entities – events) and Attributes
           Mark: Event 7→ dot
           Visual channel: Activity 7→ color
        Performance spectrum (Marey’s diagram)
           Primary facet: Time (temporal order)
           Additional facets: Time (temporal distance) and Attributes
           Mark: Derived Attributes (temporal distance of two events) 7→ line
           Visual channel: end-point positioning 7→ color
        Maps
           Primary facet: Space
           Additional facets: Attribute
        Frequency diagrams (basic charts)
           Primary facet: Attribute
           Additional facets: anything
        Variant diagrams
           Primary facet: Time (temporal order)
           Additional facets: Topology (entities – activities) and Attributes
        Process matrix
           Primary facet: Topology (relations)
           Additional facets: Attribute
Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, and Giovanni Meroni                          21




   Figure 6 Overview of facets and their combination relevant to the visual representation of process
mining artifacts. Adapted from [9] under CC-BY licence.


   Directly-Follow Graphs
     Primary facet: Time (temporal order)
     Additional facets: Topology (relations – activities) and Attributes
   BPMN
     Primary facet: Time (temporal order)
     Additional facets: Topology (relations – activities and operators) and Attributes
   Petri Nets
     Primary facet: Time (temporal order)
     Additional facets: Topology (relations – activities and operators) and Attributes
   Process Trees
     Primary facet: Time (temporal order)
     Additional facets: Topology (relations – activities and operators) and Attributes
   Object-Centric Petri Nets
     Primary facet: Time (temporal order)




                                                                                                        23271
22   23271 – Human in the (Process) Mines


             Additional facets: Topology (relations – activities and operators) and Attributes
             (objects)




        Figure 7 Overview of automatic computational methods to support interactive visual data
     analysis by reducing the complexity of the data and their visual representations. Taken from [9]
     under CC-BY licence.



     4.4.4     Discussion
     From the existing process mining visual representations classified according to the earlier
     defined categorization, we observed the following:
         Time tends to be the primary facet, mostly focusing on temporal order.
         Space is rarely included in visual representations as a data facet.
         Attribute as a primary facet is only used in basic charts; more complex advanced
         multivariate visualizations are not used (e.g., scatterplot-matrix, parallel-coordinate plot,
         glyph-based approaches).
         BPMN, Petri Nets, and Process trees all use the same facets from a data visualization
         point of view, although they use different semantics.
         In contrast to the other process modeling languages, DFGs do not have operators that
         can be used as a mark.
         Current object-centric process mining maps use the most important element, object, only
         as a visual channel: if color is removed, it can be considered a traditional Petri Net.

        Based on the identified facets and observations, we plan to condense our work into a
     journal publication. The publication is intended to present the following contributions.
     1. Propose a multi-faceted framework for the categorization of PM visualizations
     2. Categorization of existing process mining visualizations
     3. Identification of blind spots and challenges in PM visualizations
     4. Outline opportunities how to enhance PM with interactivity and analytical abstractions

        As defined in Munzner [5], visual idioms are described with Data, Marks, Visual Channels,
     and Tasks. With the Facets from the categorization, we cover the Data element. Furthermore,
     we identify for each of the existing visual process mining representations the Marks and
     Visual Channels. We did not cover the Tasks in our working group as this was the topic
Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, and Giovanni Meroni                    23


of working group Group 6: Task taxonomies in process mining and visual analytics. By
combining the results of both working groups, we can ultimately construct novel visual
representations for specific process mining tasks.
    The working group also discussed the importance of analytical abstractions and inter-
activity for advancing existing process mining practices. The visual analytics community
provides helpful categorizations of analytical abstractions (see Figure 7), which basically can
be applied to each data facet. This would be something to be considered in future work.
Similarly, interaction techniques such as view coordination [1], focus+context [2], interactive
lenses [8], interactive comparison [7], or dynamic view adaptations [6] would be helpful to
integrate into existing process mining tools.




   Figure 8 Members of the working group: Mieke, Bas, Stef, Mari-Cruz, Christian.


References
 1 Michelle Q. Wang Baldonado, Allison Woodruff, and Allan Kuchinsky. Guidelines for using
     multiple views in information visualization. In Vito Di Gesù, Stefano Levialdi, and Laura
     Tarantino, editors, Proceedings of the working conference on Advanced visual interfaces,
     AVI 2000, Palermo, Italy, May 23-26, 2000, pages 110–119. ACM Press, 2000.
 2 Andy Cockburn, Amy K. Karlson, and Benjamin B. Bederson. A review of overview+detail,
     zooming, and focus+context interfaces. ACM Comput. Surv., 41(1):2:1–2:31, 2008.
 3 Steffen Hadlak, Heidrun Schumann, and Hans-Jörg Schulz. A Survey of Multi-faceted Graph
     Visualization. In EuroVis State of the Art Reports, pages 1–20. Eurographics Association,
     2015.
 4 Johannes Kehrer and Helwig Hauser. Visualization and visual analysis of multifaceted
     scientific data: A survey. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., 19(3):495–513, 2013.
 5 Tamara Munzner. Visualization Analysis and Design. A K Peters/CRC Press, 2014.
 6 Christian Tominski, Gennady Andrienko, Natalia Andrienko, Susanne Bleisch, Sara Irina
     Fabrikant, Eva Mayr, Silvia Miksch, Margit Pohl, and André Skupin. Toward Flexible
     Visual Analytics Augmented through Smooth Display Transitions. Visual Informatics,
     5(3):28–38, 2021.




                                                                                                  23271
24   23271 – Human in the (Process) Mines


      7    Christian Tominski, Camilla Forsell, and Jimmy Johansson. Interaction Support for Visual
           Comparison Inspired by Natural Behavior. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Com-
           puter Graphics, 18(12):2719–2728, 2012.
      8    Christian Tominski, Stefan Gladisch, Ulrike Kister, Raimund Dachselt, and Heidrun Schu-
           mann. Interactive Lenses for Visualization: An Extended Survey. Computer Graphics
           Forum, 36(6):173–200, 2017.
      9    Christian Tominski and Heidrun Schumann. Interactive Visual Data Analysis. AK Peters
           Visualization Series. CRC Press, 2020.



     4.5      Visualization for Conformance Checking
     Tatiana von Landesberger (Universität Köln, DE), Jan Mendling (HU Berlin, DE), Giovanni
     Meroni (Technical University of Denmark – Lyngby, DK), Luise Pufahl (TU München –
     Heilbronn, DE), and Jana-Rebecca Rehse (Universität Mannheim, DE)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Tatiana von Landesberger, Jan Mendling, Giovanni Meroni, Luise Pufahl, and Jana-Rebecca
                       Rehse


     4.5.1      Introduction
     Process mining defines a set of techniques that take event sequence data in the form of
     event logs as an input in order to produce evidence-based insights into the execution of
     business processes. Different groups of techniques are distinguished, including automatic
     process discovery, conformance checking, enhancement, performance analysis, or deviance
     analysis [10, 3]. Conformance checking is of particular importance in this context. It allows
     analysts to investigate to which extent observed event sequences deviate from normative
     process models and which behavior constraints are violated. This can for example be used
     for compliance checking to check how far the execution of business processes complies with
     certain regulations, such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) or clinical
     guidelines.
         The current practice of conformance checking builds on functionality implemented in
     professional process mining tools. These tools, in essence, support basic conformance
     checking tasks: They allow users to (i) quantify the conformance of a process, (ii) compare
     the conformance values of, e.g., different locations, (iii) localize the specific deviations in a
     process [6], and (iv) explaining those deviations by means of external factors [8]. Hence, we
     observe that support for conformance checking has been implemented in various ways. So far,
     research has not investigated which of the various approaches are most effective for analysts
     in order to fulfill their tasks. Overall, much of conformance checking research has been driven
     by technical challenges of efficiently calculating alignments between event sequences and
     process models [2], defining precision and fitness measures with sound formal properties [7],
     and providing feedback to business users who are not familiar with formal concepts [4].
         In general, research on process mining can be framed at different levels [11]. Empirical
     research has been conducted at the level of organizational anchoring and impact [1] but
     mostly abstracted from the analyst as a user. What is by and large missing is a research
     strategy that considers the tasks and user characteristics as a focus of conformance checking
     research [5]. More specifically, several research questions miss specific answers from empirical
     and engineering research on process conformance checking, including the following.
         What kind of characteristics do the users have?
         Which are the conformance checking tasks?
         What data is required for each of the tasks?
Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, and Giovanni Meroni                      25


   Which techniques can be used for specific tasks? What is missing?
   What are the functional/non-functional requirements of the systems?
   Which are effective conformance checking algorithms for the tasks?
   Which are effective visualizations for the conformance checking tasks?
   How to design an effective interaction between the conformance checking algorithms and
   visualizations?
   How to support annotations and editing to the original data?
   How to support decision-making and actions (i.e., implement interventions) in the real
   world?
   How to cope with updates of the real world in the conformance checking visualization
   system?

   This report presents the discussion of the working group on conformance checking of the
Dagstuhl Seminar 23271 on “Human in the (Process) Mines”, held at Schloss Dagstuhl on
2–7 July 2023. We conclude by summarizing a set of action points that our working group
identified.

4.5.2   Discussions of the Working Group
As a first step, the working group identified the limitations of current visualization techniques
adopted by conformance checking tools. It emerged that deviations are often not represented
in an effective way that stands out from the normal execution flow. This is typically caused
by a gap between visualization producers, users who create the graphical notations, and
visualization consumers, users who have to interpret the graphical notation.
    The working group then discussed the typical workflow that visual analytics researchers
adopt to address these issues [9]. This typically consists in involving domain experts to
identify what kind of tasks (actions) that they need to perform to obtain insights. Then
conformance checking techniques able to address these tasks are adopted or developed, which
then produce output data. Models and visuals will then be built to effectively represent
output data. Finally, the visual representation will be checked by domain experts to see if
they are effective for accomplishing their tasks, what is missing, and what can be improved.
    Following this workflow, the working group analyzed different application domains in
which they had direct experience (e.g., by previous research projects) in order to identify
the tasks (actions) that the user need to perform to obtain insights on the compliance of its
processes. From this analysis, it emerged that, for auditing purposes, it is more relevant to
produce a list of cases that caused a deviation and see their impact. If one has a large number
of deviations, these need to be grouped into classes. The hypothesis in conformance checking
is that if the trace is the same, then they have the same meaning. However, information on
resources, data, etc, is currently missing.
    This lead to the definition of which information should be the input for a system combining
visual analytics with conformance checking, and which interactions with the domain expert
this system should support (see Fig. 9).
    To apply conformance checking one needs to create a model from regulations and norms,
and an event log from information on a database or other data sources. The model can use
different formalisms (DFG, BPMN, Declare, etc.), and the logs can be at different levels (task
execution, task start/complete, changes in data, etc). Then, the outcome of conformance
checking would be deviations. Deviations are grouped in harmful/not harmful, variants, or
having additional or missing activities. They are then typically qualified based on risk by
domain experts, and quantified by computing measures from the types. Then, deviations are
explained. Qualifying, Quantifying and Grouping can be performed multiple times.



                                                                                                    23271
26   23271 – Human in the (Process) Mines



                          Visualization System
                Conformance                      Visualizations    Insights
             Checking Algorithms                                                            Actions
                                                                                                      Real
        id    deviation     trace
                                                                                                      World
                                                                    Change



                                                                  Editing     Annotations
           Pre
        processed
          Data

        Figure 9 Usage of a conformance checking visualization system.


         Thank to conformance checking, one can perceive how the actual process is performed,
     then make sense of process-related information, which leads to data-driven decision making,
     that can eventually lead to implementing interventions on the process.
         VA can 1) apply an algorithm and then visualize the results: you choose the algorithm
     and visualize/interact only with the output. 2) Interact in a cyclic behavior: after observing
     the result, parameters are changed and the algorithm is rerun. 3) computational steering:
     while the algorithm is running one changes the parameters and adjusts on-the-fly what is
     happening.
         One can also edit VA results with annotations and corrections. Corrections directly
     change the data sources (e.g., fixing a wrong timestamp). Annotations highlight relevant
     behaviors in the data, without changing the data sources (e.g., noting that a regulation has
     changed, explaining why a trace is non-conformant).
         Next, we discussed what input data is available and needed for proper and useful
     conformance checking. We identified, on the one hand, the event log or a stream of events
     that represents the process execution. On the other hand, we discussed that the business
     analyst usually does not provide a standard process model, but rather a set of rules to which
     the process needs to comply. This can be control flow (activity A must be followed by B),
     time (activity A must complete within 30 minutes), resource (activity A must be executed by
     the financial department), and data-related rules (activity A must produce an invoice with a
     fee not higher than 5000 EUR). These rules need to be formalized, such that conformance
     checking techniques can automatically identify deviations in the traces of an event log, the
     individual process executions. Sometimes, business analyst has no rules at hand, but they
     have hypotheses in mind about how their process should be executed and what should not
     happen. For such a case, the business analyst needs support in formulating hypotheses and
     confirming them.

     4.5.3     Next steps
     Our discussions this week have led us to believe that visual analytics can provide a completely
     new angle on process conformance, with a much stronger emphasis on the needs of the user
     and the tasks that conformance checking is supposed to fulfill. The working group has agreed
     on two immediate next steps. First, we would like to gather our newly established insights
Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, and Giovanni Meroni                       27


into the potential of visual analytics for the advancement of conformance checking into a
workshop paper, outlining the ideas and concepts already presented in this report. Second,
we would like to further develop, substantiate, and structure these ideas, with the goal of
submitting a joint research proposal.
    Concretely, the next steps that we want to take for the substantiation of our ideas are
the following:
    Identify additional application scenarios, such as healthcare, purchasing, infection control,
    ambient assisted living, or logistics, and characterize them with regard to their similarities
    and differences to obtain a clear set of objectives
    Conduct an design study [9] with process analysts or process managers to verify and
    extend the preliminary list of tasks that conformance checking should fulfill
    Collect and analyze process-related regulations to develop a better understanding of the
    different types of rules that business processes are subject to
   Analyze existing visualizations of timed event sequence data, such as [12], from the VA
    domain to find out which functionalities they already provide

References
 1 Peyman Badakhshan, Bastian Wurm, Thomas Grisold, Jerome Geyer-Klingeberg, Jan
     Mendling, and Jan Vom Brocke. Creating business value with process mining. The Journal
     of Strategic Information Systems, 31(4):101745, 2022.
 2 Josep Carmona, Boudewijn van Dongen, Andreas Solti, and Matthias Weidlich. Conformance
     checking. Switzerland: Springer.[Google Scholar], 56, 2018.
 3 Marlon Dumas, Marcello La Rosa, Jan Mendling, Hajo A Reijers, et al. Fundamentals of
     business process management, volume 2. Springer, 2018.
 4 Luciano García-Bañuelos, Nick RTP Van Beest, Marlon Dumas, Marcello La Rosa, and
     Willem Mertens. Complete and interpretable conformance checking of business processes.
     IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 44(3):262–290, 2017.
 5 Jan Mendling, Djordje Djurica, and Monika Malinova. Cognitive effectiveness of representa-
     tions for process mining. In International Conference on Business Process Management,
     pages 17–22. Springer, 2021.
 6 Giovanni Meroni. Artifact-Driven Business Process Monitoring – A Novel Approach to
     Transparently Monitor Business Processes, Supported by Methods, Tools, and Real-World
     Applications, volume 368 of Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing. Springer,
     2019.
 7 Artem Polyvyanyy, Andreas Solti, Matthias Weidlich, Claudio Di Ciccio, and Jan Mendling.
     Monotone precision and recall measures for comparing executions and specifications of
     dynamic systems. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM),
     29(3):1–41, 2020.
 8 Jana-Rebecca Rehse, Luise Pufahl, Michael Grohs, and Lisa-Marie Klein. Process mining
     meets visual analytics: the case of conformance checking. In Hawaii International Conference
     on System Sciences, 2023.
 9 Michael Sedlmair, Miriah Meyer, and Tamara Munzner. Design study methodology: Reflec-
     tions from the trenches and the stacks. IEEE transactions on visualization and computer
     graphics, 18(12):2431–2440, 2012.
10 Wil van der Aalst. Data science in action. Springer, 2016.
11 Jan vom Brocke, Mieke Jans, Jan Mendling, and Hajo A Reijers. A five-level framework for
     research on process mining. Business & Information Systems Engineering, 63(5):483–490,
     2021.




                                                                                                     23271
28   23271 – Human in the (Process) Mines


     12    Marcel Wunderlich, Kathrin Ballweg, Georg Fuchs, and Tatiana von Landesberger. Visu-
           alization of delay uncertainty and its impact on train trip planning: A design study. In
           Computer Graphics Forum, volume 36, pages 317–328. Wiley Online Library, 2017.



     4.6      Milana – A Task Taxonomy for Supporting Human-Centered
              Process Mining with Visual Analytics
     Lisa Zimmermann (Universität St. Gallen, CH), Philipp Koytek (Celonis Labs GmbH –
     München, DE), Shazia Sadiq (University of Queensland – Brisbane, AU), Pnina Soffer
     (University of Haifa, IL), Katerina Vrotsou (Linköping University, SE), and Barbara Weber
     (Universität St. Gallen, CH)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Lisa Zimmermann, Philipp Koytek, Shazia Sadiq, Pnina Soffer, Katerina Vrotsou, and Barbara
                       Weber


     Process Mining is an activity that can significantly benefit from human-in-the-loop approaches.
     The current body of knowledge is lacking a full exploitation of opportunities that sit at
     the intersection of human-centered process mining activities, the various cognitive aspects
     of these activities, and visual ways of supporting them. To realize these opportunities we
     undertake a taxonomical approach to identify the key concepts and relationships across the
     three bodies of knowledge. The objective of the proposed taxonomy, namely Milana, is to
     establish a common vocabulary and shared understanding, serve as a point of reference, and
     inform measurements for evaluating process visualizations.

     4.6.1      Introduction
     Over the last two decades, process mining has developed into a collection of techniques
     and tools that have the potential to provide immense value to business users. Although
     the techniques have gained a significant level of sophistication in terms of their algorithmic
     approaches and outcomes, supporting the human within the process of process mining [7]
     has so far received little attention.
         Therefore, the goal of this work is to develop a task taxonomy for supporting
     human-centered process mining with visual analytics.
         We argue that the development of such a taxonomy, which we call Milana, needs to be
     guided by multiple perspectives that include process mining, visual analytics and cognitive
     underpinnings. The current body of knowledge is lacking a full exploitation of opportunities
     that sit at the intersection of human-centered process mining activities, the various cognitive
     aspects of these activities, and visual ways of supporting them.
         We envision that Milana can provide a reference to apply a three-way mapping between
     analytical tasks in process mining, cognitive tasks, and visualization tasks. Such a mapping
     will establish a common vocabulary and contribute to a shared understanding between the
     different communities. Moreover, it can be leveraged to justify design choices of process
     visualizations, identify gaps to inform future work, and be used to inform the measurements
     for evaluating process visualizations.

     4.6.2      Description of the theme
     A taxonomy (or taxonomic classification) is a scheme of classification, especially a hierarch-
     ical classification, in which things are organized into groups or types [8]. Typically, the
     development of a taxonomy involves a number of steps including (i) identifying the concepts
Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, and Giovanni Meroni                        29




   Figure 10 Taxonomy Development Approach.


and relationships within the domain(s) of interest, (ii) establishing a nomenclature for the
representation of the concepts, (iii) constructing the taxonomy using established notation
(usually hierarchical), (iv) evaluating or validating it against its intended goal, and (v) setting
up a mechanism for its continued maintenance.
    During the seminar, we derived an approach to develop Milana. As shown in Fig 10, it
consists of three steps to identify concepts and relationships of the taxonomy:
1. Elicit process mining tasks (PMT) (Sec. 4.6.2.1)
2. Mapping process mining tasks to cognitive tasks (CT) (Sec. 4.6.2.2)
3. Mapping combinations of process mining tasks and cognitive tasks to visualization tasks
   (VT) (Sec. 4.6.2.3)

    Taking these steps as a starting point, we can build on the large body of knowledge on
visualization and visual analytics that gives us a proven link on relevant and most suited
visual representations which is the main goal of developing Milana.
    Considering that the concepts will be derived from three different bodies of knowledge,
namely process mining, visual analytics and cognitive theories, establishing the nomenclature
is a critical and non-trivial step and will continue to be refined as the taxonomy is further
developed. The work on the taxonomy construction, validation and plan for maintenance is
yet to be undertaken.

4.6.2.1   Elicit Process Mining Tasks (PMT)
The first step of our work is to elicit a comprehensive overview of process mining tasks.
This requires choosing a valid source for identifying such tasks and to align on a suitable
abstraction level for these tasks.
    To identify tasks, we evaluated different approaches, of which the elicitation from questions
seems to be the most promising one. In visual analytics literature, questions and tasks are
often used as synonyms [1] and also in the process mining literature, for example Zerbato et
al. [10], identified the analysis question as an important factor that determines the analysis
approach (task).
    As a source for process mining questions, we plan to start from the business process
intelligence challenges (BPIC) published by the IEEE Task Force on Process Mining of
which ten editions, dating back to 2011, exist [3]. These challenges contain real-world event
logs and business questions posted by different organizations. Moreover, we can leverage
out-of-the-box analyses for questions commonly asked by customers in existing process mining
tools (e.g., Celonis Business Miner). These questions serve as an additional source and
complement the BPIC questions.



                                                                                                      23271
30   23271 – Human in the (Process) Mines




        Figure 11 The PEM4PPM model (Prediction Error Minimization for the Process of Process
     Mining [7]).


         Exemplary questions are “Are there cases that spend a very short time at Service Line 1
     before being escalated?”(Source: BPIC 2013), or “How many unwanted activities are in my
     process?” (Source: Celonis Business Miner).
         Depending on the complexity of the question it might manifest in several process mining
     tasks (low level of abstraction). For the first question, for example, one would need to (i)
     identify cases processed by service line 1, (ii) calculate the throughput time for the respective
     sub-process, (iii) identify what “short” refers to and derive a threshold, and (iv) count the
     remaining cases.
         As part of the taxonomy development we aim to harmonize the tasks over the available
     questions until we reach saturation. For this purpose, we plan to identify the (main)
     operations performed to answer the question, the process mining entity that is the subject of
     interest (e.g. case, activity, . . . ), its respective cardinality, and the attribute of the event log
     that is required to execute that operation.

     4.6.2.2   Mapping to Cognitive Tasks (CT)
     At this step we consider the cognitive tasks that are involved in the process of process
     mining [7], depicted in Fig. 11. This model relates to the individual process of process mining
     from a cognitive perspective where different process mining tasks may be performed iteratively.
     For example, conducting one or many process mining tasks may entail focusing on a part of
     the log, creating a process model (an artifact), exploring the model to identify “interesting”
     patterns, generating hypotheses which explain these patterns, applying additional analysis
     algorithms for testing these hypotheses, and assessing whether the result is as expected and
     can be used for completing the task.
         Our premise is that the cognitive tasks that underpin various process mining tasks provide
     an important perspective on the information needs of the process analyst and are therefore
     relevant for the identification of suited visualizations supporting these tasks. Hence, we
     propose to include this perspective in the taxonomy which requires a mapping of the process
     mining tasks identified in the previous step (cf. Sec 4.6.2.1) to the cognitive tasks.

     4.6.2.3   Mapping to Visualization Tasks (VT)
     The final perspective we consider for Milana, is the mapping to the visualization task that
     links to the combination process mining task and cognitive task. As a starting point for
     this third mapping step, we surveyed the currently available taxonomies in the field of
Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, and Giovanni Meroni                     31


visualization and visual analytics and identified that they vary with respect to their focus
and levels of abstraction. Examples include users’ interactions intents [9] and visualization
usage [2, 4].
    Brehmer & Munzner [2] proposed a multi-level typology of visualization tasks that
attempts to specify the WHY and HOW of a visualization task that is performed. The aim
of their taxonomy is to enable the expression of complex sequences of activities in terms of
simpler tasks. Moreover, its focus is on a high abstraction level that is not tied to specific
application domains. This allows the freedom to make comparisons between domains but
also provides the opportunity to customize it for the purpose of a specific domain; which is
the ambition of this working group.
    To derive our approach, we draw inspiration from Rind et al. [5] who introduced a
three-dimensional conceptual space for user tasks in visualization, called TaskCube. The
three considered dimensions are perspective, composition, and abstraction. Perspective is
concerned with the objectives of the user, corresponding to the “why” of the taxonomy by
Brehmer & Munzner [2], and actions which correspond to the “how”. Composition relates to
the break-down of the task from low-level, including small and concise steps, to high-level
steps concerned with broader tasks. Finally, abstraction classifies tasks according to their
level of abstraction from concrete to abstract.
    In their work, Rind et al. [5] have classified a number of previously related taxonomies in
terms of the dimensions of the TaskCube. This classification provides further motivation and
guidance for our work towards a taxonomy. To this end, we intend to extend the generic
visualization tasks defined by Brehmer & Munzner [2] to a more concrete abstraction level
by applying it to the formulated process mining tasks (PMTs) (Sec. 4.6.2.1). In terms of the
TaskCube classification this would place our proposed taxonomy on a concrete abstraction
level with respect to data type (i.e. process data) and potentially also domain (e.g., “Business
Processes”).
    We envision to follow an approach comparable to Rind et al. [6] which extends the
proposed taxonomy of interaction intents by Yi et al. [9] by concretizing the intents with
sub-intents specific to the healthcare domain.

4.6.3   Outline of the Next Steps
In the future we plan to continue our work as follows.
1. Concerning the identification of process mining tasks, we will continue to apply the
    approach to more questions that are collected from the BPICs until we reach saturation
   (cf. Sec. 4.6.2.1).
2. For mapping the identified process mining tasks to the cognitive tasks that would
    be required, a critical evaluation of the relevant cognitive tasks that could guide the
    identification of visual representations is outstanding (cf. Sec. 4.6.2.2).
3. After the process mining tasks are mapped to cognitive tasks, visualization tasks will
    be linked to these. Starting from the taxonomy by Brehmer & Munzner [2] appropriate
    options will be identified (cf. Sec. 4.6.2.3).
4. Finally, Milana will be validated (e.g., case studies, user studies, and experiments).

   Milana will pave the way for both evaluating existing process analysis visualizations in
terms of their appropriateness for the tasks as well as provide a blueprint for the design of
novel visual representations.
Acknowledgments. B. Weber and L. Zimmermann are supported by the ProMiSE project
funded by the SNSF under Grant No.: 200021_197032.




                                                                                                   23271
32   23271 – Human in the (Process) Mines


     References
      1 Natalia V. Andrienko and Gennady L. Andrienko. Exploratory analysis of spatial and
          temporal data – a systematic approach. Springer, 2006.
      2 Matthew Brehmer and Tamara Munzner. A multi-level typology of abstract visualization
          tasks. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., 19(12):2376–2385, 2013.
      3 BPI Challenge.         BPI Challenge.      https://www.tf-pm.org/competitions-awards/
          bpi-challenge, 2023. [Online; accessed 25-July-2023].
      4 Jeffrey Heer and Ben Shneiderman. Interactive dynamics for visual analysis: A taxonomy
          of tools that support the fluent and flexible use of visualizations. Queue, 10(2):30–55, 2012.
      5 Alexander Rind, Wolfgang Aigner, Markus Wagner, Silvia Miksch, and Tim Lammarsch.
          Task cube: A three-dimensional conceptual space of user tasks in visualization design and
          evaluation. Inf. Vis., 15(4):288–300, 2016.
      6 Alexander Rind, Taowei David Wang, Wolfgang Aigner, Silvia Miksch, Krist Wongsuphas-
          awat, Catherine Plaisant, and Ben Shneiderman. Interactive information visualization
          to explore and query electronic health records. Found. Trends Hum. Comput. Interact.,
          5(3):207–298, 2013.
      7 Elizaveta Sorokina, Pnina Soffer, Irit Hadar, Uri Leron, Francesca Zerbato, and Barbara
          Weber. Pem4ppm: A cognitive perspective on the process of process mining. In Business
          Process Management – 21th International Conference, BPM 2023. Accepted for publication.
      8 Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. Taxonomy. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taxonomy,
          2023. [Online; accessed 25-July-2023].
      9 Ji Soo Yi, Youn ah Kang, John T. Stasko, and Julie A. Jacko. Toward a deeper understanding
          of the role of interaction in information visualization. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph.,
          13(6):1224–1231, 2007.
     10 Francesca Zerbato, Pnina Soffer, and Barbara Weber. Process mining practices: Evidence
          from interviews. In Claudio Di Ciccio, Remco M. Dijkman, Adela del-Río-Ortega, and
          Stefanie Rinderle-Ma, editors, Business Process Management – 20th International Confer-
          ence, BPM 2022, Münster, Germany, September 11-16, 2022, Proceedings, volume 13420 of
          Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 268–285. Springer, 2022.
Claudio Di Ciccio, Silvia Miksch, Pnina Soffer, Barbara Weber, and Giovanni Meroni                        33


        Participants
   Wolfgang Aigner                 Monika Malinova                    Pnina Soffer
FH – St. Pölten , AT              Mandelburger                      University of Haifa, IL
   Anti Alman                     Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, AT     Christian Tominski
University of Tartu, EE             Andrea Marrella                 Universität Rostock, DE
   Alessio Arleo                  Sapienza University of Rome, IT     Cagatay Turkay
TU Wien, AT                        Jan Mendling                     University of Warwick –
   Iris Beerepoot                 HU Berlin, DE                     Coventry, GB
Utrecht University, NL               Giovanni Meroni                  Stef Van den Elzen
   Axel Buehler                   Technical University of Denmark   TU Eindhoven, NL
Olympus – Hamburg, DE             – Lyngby, DK                        Sebastiaan Johannes van Zelst
   Andrea Burattin                 Silvia Miksch                    Celonis Labs GmbH –
Technical University of Denmark   TU Wien, AT                       München, DE
– Lyngby, DK                       Luise Pufahl                       Mari-Cruz Villa-Uriol
   Claudio Di Ciccio              TU München – Heilbronn, DE        University of Sheffield, GB
Sapienza University of Rome, IT    Jana-Rebecca Rehse                 Tatiana von Landesberger
   Chiara Di Francescomarino      Universität Mannheim, DE          Universität Köln, DE
University of Trento, IT           Manuel Resinas                     Katerina Vrotsou
   Irit Hadar                     University of Sevilla, ES         Linköping University, SE
University of Haifa, IL             Shazia Sadiq                      Barbara Weber
   Mieke Jans                     University of Queensland –        Universität St. Gallen, CH
Hasselt University, BE            Brisbane, AU                        Francesca Zerbato
   Philipp Koytek                   Daniel Schuster                 Universität St. Gallen, CH
Celonis Labs GmbH –               Fraunhofer FIT – Sankt              Lisa Zimmermann
München, DE                       Augustin, DE                      Universität St. Gallen, CH




                                                                                                      23271
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 23272

Epistemic and Topological Reasoning
in Distributed Systems
Armando Castañeda∗1 , Hans van Ditmarsch∗2 , Roman Kuznets†3 ,
Yoram Moses∗4 , and Ulrich Schmid∗5
1       National Autonomous University of Mexico, MX. armando.castaneda@im.unam.mx
2       CNRS – Toulouse, FR & Université de Toulouse, FR.
        hans.van-ditmarsch@irit.fr
3       TU Wien, AT. roman@logic.at
4       Technion – Haifa, IL. yoram.moses@gmail.com
5       TU Wien, AT. s@ecs.tuwien.ac.at

        Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 23272 “Epistemic
and Topological Reasoning in Distributed Systems.” The seminar brought together experts in
combinatorial topology and epistemic logic interested in distributed systems, with the aim of
exploring the directions that the recent interaction between those approaches can take, identifying
challenges and opportunities.
Seminar July 2–7, 2023 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/23272
2012 ACM Subject Classification Computing methodologies → Distributed algorithms; Math-
   ematics of computing → Graph theory; Mathematics of computing → Topology; Software
   and its engineering → Distributed systems organizing principles; Software and its engineering
   → Formal methods; Theory of computation → Distributed computing models; Theory of
   computation → Data structures design and analysis; Theory of computation → Logic
Keywords and phrases combinatorial topology, distributed systems, epistemic logic, multi-agent
   systems, interpreted systems, dynamic epistemic logic, simplicial semantics, knowledge-based
   approach, distributed computing
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.13.7.34



    1    Executive Summary
Armando Castañeda (National Autonomous University of Mexico, MX)
Hans van Ditmarsch (CNRS – Toulouse, FR & Université de Toulouse, FR)
Yoram Moses (Technion – Haifa, IL)
Ulrich Schmid (TU Wien, AT)
        License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © Armando Castañeda, Hans van Ditmarsch, Yoram Moses, and Ulrich Schmid


Distributed services cover a wide range of our everyday activities. Examples of such services
include cloud storage, cryptocurrencies, and collaborative editing, as well as concurrent
software that governs modern multicore computers. Reasoning about distributed systems
that provide these services is notoriously difficult, however, due to the many sources of
uncertainty that can occur: varying execution speeds, unpredictable transmission delays, and


∗
    Editor / Organizer
†
    Editorial Assistant / Collector



            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Epistemic and Topological Reasoning in Distributed Systems, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 13, Issue 7, pp. 34–65
Editors: Armando Castañeda, Hans van Ditmarsch, Roman Kuznets, Yoram Moses, and Ulrich Schmid
                   Dagstuhl Reports
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
A. Castañeda, H. van Ditmarsch, R. Kuznets, Y. Moses, and U. Schmid                                    35


partial failures. The design and analysis of protocols and algorithms for distributed systems
is, hence, a difficult and error-prone task.
    Two approaches have proved to be successful in raising the level of abstraction in the
modeling, design, and analysis of distributed systems: combinatorial topology and the
epistemic (or knowledge-based) approach for multi-agent systems. It is also worth noting
that several different flavors of topology have been successfully applied in general modal logic
and related fields as well.
    In the context of distributed systems, the epistemic and the topological approach have
evolved fairly independently for over more than three decades. In the last few years, however,
researchers have started to combine the two approaches in productive ways. In particular,
this is true for both of the two main variants of epistemic reasoning in such systems, the
more traditional interpreted systems (IS) modeling and dynamic epistemic logics (DEL),
where approaches and/or methods from combinatorial topology have been used successfully
already. This is primarily due to a duality between the Kripke models, which underlie
epistemic reasoning, and simplicial complexes, which are central to the analysis of distributed
protocols using combinatorial topology. And indeed, meanwhile, there are encouraging
relations and options for cross-fertilization with the communities of dynamic epistemic logic,
knowledge-based analysis, and topological modal logics. This development makes a new level
of abstraction possible, based on mutual incorporation of the extensive results established
independently by all these approaches.



Seminar Goals and Structure
The main purpose of this Dagstuhl Seminar was to further stimulate the process of making
this integration happening: Whereas there are researchers with expertise in more than one
of the above fields, a majority of them is firmly grounded in only one of those. Consequently,
we brought together 28 experts from the respective scientific communities, in an attempt to:
(A) Introduce the core topics, methods and accomplishments obtained in some field to the
    others.
(B) Stimulate discussions among members from different fields, to identify possible cross-
    fertilization opportunities.
(C) Further explore particularly interesting/promising/challenging cross-fertilization oppor-
    tunities and shape collaborations on these.

    The cornerstones of the seminar program were:
(i) 5 tutorials (90 min) by experts in the following specific areas:
       Alexandru Baltag
       Epistemics and Topology
       Hans van Ditmarsch
       Dynamic Epistemic Logic
       Guy Goren
       Knowledge and Action
       Jérémy Ledent
       Simplicial Models: From Global States to Local States, and What Lies In-between
       Sergio Rajsbaum
       An Overview of Combinatorial Topology and Its Distributed Computing Perspective
(ii) 17 presentations (20 min) devoted to specific research topics, from all areas.




                                                                                                   23272
36   23272 – Epistemic and Topological Reasoning in Distributed Systems


     (iii) 3 short presentations (5 min) in a rump session, devoted to research topics that were
          identified in the course of the seminar.
     (iv) Public sessions devoted to identifying particularly promising cross-fertilization opportu-
          nities.
     (v) 3 focused discussion groups, devoted to the following cross-fertilization opportunities:
             Extending Topology to Handle Data Structures
             Interpreted Systems and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
             Representing Epistemic Attitudes via Simplicial Complexes
          Multiple discussion sessions of these groups were run in parallel, with two public reporting
          sessions. Seminar participants could join/swap the discussion groups freely.
A. Castañeda, H. van Ditmarsch, R. Kuznets, Y. Moses, and U. Schmid                                        37


 2      Table of Contents
Executive Summary
  Armando Castañeda, Hans van Ditmarsch, Yoram Moses, and Ulrich Schmid . . .                     34

Overview of Talks
     Coalgebraic Modal Logic and Fibrations
     Henning Basold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
     Asynchronous Speedup Theorems and FLP-Style Proofs
     Pierre Fraigniaud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
     Epistemic Analysis of the FRR Problem
     Krisztina Fruzsa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
     Semitopology and (Paraconsistent) Logic
     Murdoch James Gabbay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       41
     Optimal Eventual Byzantine Agreement Protocols with Omission Failures
     Joseph Y. Halpern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
     Hypergraphs for Knowledge
     Roman Kniazev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
     Domain-theoretical Constraint Systems for Knowledge and Belief in Multi-agent
     Systems
     Sophia Knight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
     Impure Simplicial Complexes: Local View
     Roman Kuznets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
     The Impossibility of Approximate Agreement on a Larger Class of Graphs
     Shihao (Jason) Liu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   44
     Product Updates for Partial Epistemic Models and Logical Obstruction to Task
     Solvability
     Susumu Nishimura . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     44
     Mixing Combinatorial and Point-set Topology
     Thomas Nowak . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
     A Speedup Theorem for Asynchronous Computation
     Ami Paz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
     On Simplicial Semantics
     Rojo Randrianomentsoa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
     Do Genes Argue? Abstract Argumentation and Boolean Networks
     David A. Rosenblueth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
     Logics for Data Exchange
     Sonja Smets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
     Synergistic Knowledge
     Thomas Studer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    47
     Pattern Models and Consensus
     Diego A. Velázquez . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   47




                                                                                                       23272
38   23272 – Epistemic and Topological Reasoning in Distributed Systems


     Working Groups
        Extending Topology to Handle Data Structures
        Henning Basold, Armando Castañeda, Faith Ellen, Guy Goren, Shihao (Jason) Liu,
        Susumu Nishimura, Thomas Nowak, Sergio Rajsbaum, Ulrich Schmid . . . . . . . . 48
        Interpreted Systems and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
        Alexandru Baltag, Hans van Ditmarsch, Krisztina Fruzsa, Joseph Y. Halpern,
        Yoram Moses, Hugo Rincón Galeana, Ulrich Schmid, Sonja Smets, Diego A. Velázquez 50
        Representing Epistemic Attitudes via Simplicial Complexes
        Alexandru Baltag, Henning Basold, Hans van Ditmarsch, Roman Kniazev, Sophia
        Knight, Roman Kuznets, Jérémy Ledent, David Lehnherr, Rojo Randrianomentsoa,
        Sonja Smets, Thomas Studer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53

     Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
A. Castañeda, H. van Ditmarsch, R. Kuznets, Y. Moses, and U. Schmid                                     39


 3     Overview of Talks
3.1    Coalgebraic Modal Logic and Fibrations
Henning Basold (Leiden University, NL)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Henning Basold


In this talk, I provide an overview over coalgebraic modal logic and how it can be abstractly
viewed through fibrations. The idea of coalgebras is that they provide an abstraction of
state-based systems and enable a category-theoretical study of behaviour, just like (universal)
algebra provides tools to reason about different algebraic structures. While in algebra we are
interested in structures with operations on them, such as monoids, groups, etc., in coalgebra
we consider observations as the fundamental building block. In the talk, we discuss labelled
transitions systems as a particular example, in which we can observe for every state the
propositional atoms that are true at that state and the outgoing labelled transitions [1]. These
can represent epistemic models, linear dynamical systems, Kripke frames, neighbourhood
frames, descriptive frames [2], and even proofs of coinductive predicates. To reason about
the behaviour induced by coalgebras, we discuss predicates that arise via so-called liftings [3]
and rely on the theory of fibrations [4]. We will see the theory illustrated on the labelled box
modality for labelled transition systems and we will show how a modal logic with conjunction
and box can be given semantics over a coalgebra by interpreting the conjunction via the
algebraic structure of meet-semilattices and the modality via a so-called distributive law that
is induced by the previously defined lifting. I will present the basic principles of coalgebraic
modal logic and how the approach of fibrations can be used to give semantics to modal logic
in quite general coalgebras, and to prove soundness and completeness results that extend
those of Kupke and Rot [5].
References
 1 Lawrence S. Moss. Coalgebraic logic. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 96(1–3):277–317,
     March 1999. doi:10.1016/S0168-0072(98)00042-6.
 2 Guram Bezhanishvili, Luca Carai, and Patrick J. Morandi. The Vietoris functor and modal
     operators on rings of continuous functions. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 173(1):103029,
     January 2022. doi:10.1016/j.apal.2021.103029.
 3 Ichiro Hasuo, Kenta Cho, Toshiki Kataoka, and Bart Jacobs. Coinductive predicates and
     final sequences in a fibration. In Dexter Kozen and Michael Mislove, editors, Proceedings of
     the Twenty-ninth Conference on the Mathematical Foundations of Programming Semantics,
     MFPS XXIX, volume 298 of Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, pages
     197–214. Elsevier, 2013. doi:10.1016/j.entcs.2013.09.014.
 4 Bart Jacobs. Categorical Logic and Type Theory. Number 141 in Studies in Logic and the
     Foundations of Mathematics. Elsevier, 1999.
 5 Clemens Kupke and Jurriaan Rot. Expressive logics for coinductive predicates. Logical
     Methods in Computer Science, 17(4):19:1–19:30, 2021. doi:10.46298/lmcs-17(4:19)2021.




                                                                                                    23272
40   23272 – Epistemic and Topological Reasoning in Distributed Systems


     3.2     Asynchronous Speedup Theorems and FLP-Style Proofs
     Pierre Fraigniaud (CNRS – Paris, FR & Université Paris Cité, FR)
           License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Pierre Fraigniaud
      Joint work of Hagit Attiya, Pierre Fraigniaud, Ami Paz, Sergio Rajsbaum


     The talk compares two generic techniques for deriving lower bounds or impossibility results in
     distributed computing. First, we formalize the notion of FLP-style proofs, aiming at capturing
     the essence of the seminal consensus-impossibility proof [1] and using forward induction.
     Second, we prove a speedup theorem à la [2], but for wait-free colorless algorithms, aiming
     at capturing the essence of the seminal round-reduction proof establishing a lower bound
     on the number of rounds for 3-coloring a cycle [3], and going by backward induction. We
     show that despite their very different natures, these two forms of proof are tightly connected.
     In particular, we show that for every colorless task Π, if there is a round-reduction proof
     establishing the impossibility of solving Π using wait-free colorless algorithms, then there is
     an FLP-style proof establishing the same impossibility. For 1-dimensional colorless tasks (but
     for an arbitrarily large number n ≥ 2 of processes), we prove that the two proof techniques
     have exactly the same power, and more importantly, both are complete: if a 1-dimensional
     colorless task is not wait-free solvable by n ≥ 2 processes, then the impossibility can be
     proved by both proof techniques. Moreover, a round-reduction proof can be automatically
     derived, and an FLP-style proof can be automatically generated from it. Finally, we illustrate
     the use of these two techniques by establishing the impossibility of solving any colorless
     covering task of arbitrary dimension by wait-free algorithms.
     References
      1 Michael J. Fischer, Nancy A. Lynch, and Michael S. Paterson. Impossibility of distributed
          consensus with one faulty process. Journal of the ACM, 32(2):374–382, April 1985. doi:
          10.1145/3149.214121.
      2 Sebastian Brandt. An automatic speedup theorem for distributed problems. In PODC’19:
          Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, pages
          379–388. Association for Computing Machinery, 2019. doi:10.1145/3293611.3331611.
      3 Nathan Linial. Locality in distributed graph algorithms. SIAM Journal on Computing,
          21(1):193–201, February 1992. doi:10.1137/0221015.



     3.3     Epistemic Analysis of the FRR Problem
     Krisztina Fruzsa (TU Wien, AT)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Krisztina Fruzsa
      Joint work of Krisztina Fruzsa, Roman Kuznets, Ulrich Schmid
     Main reference Krisztina Fruzsa, Roman Kuznets, Ulrich Schmid: “Fire!”, in Proc. of the Eighteenth Conference on
                    Theoretical Aspects of Rationality and Knowledge, TARK 2021, Beijing, China, June 25-27, 2021,
                    EPTCS, Vol. 335, pp. 139–153, Open Publishing Association, 2021.
               URL https://doi.org//10.4204/EPTCS.335.13


     We present an epistemic analysis of a fundamental distributed computing problem called the
     Firing Rebels with Relay (FRR) within the asynchronous byzantine fault-tolerant model of
     distributed systems. Essentially, the FRR problem requires all correct agents to perform an
     action (FIRE) in an all-or-nothing fashion, however, not necessarily at the same time. By
     using our framework for modeling asynchronous byzantine fault-tolerant distributed systems,
A. Castañeda, H. van Ditmarsch, R. Kuznets, Y. Moses, and U. Schmid                                            41


we establish the necessary level of knowledge that needs to be acquired by any correct agent
in order to perform FIRE in every protocol that meets the requirements of the FRR problem
specification. The corresponding level of knowledge involves the so-called common eventual
hope modality, which plays a crucial role in reaching (eventual) agreement among agents.



3.4     Semitopology and (Paraconsistent) Logic
Murdoch James Gabbay (Heriot-Watt University – Edinburgh, GB)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Murdoch James Gabbay
 Joint work of Murdoch James Gabbay, Giuliano Losa
Main reference Murdoch J. Gabbay, Giuliano Losa: “Semitopology: a new topological model of heterogeneous
               consensus”, CoRR abs/2303.09287, 2023. [1]
          URL https://doi.org//10.48550/ARXIV.2303.09287


A semitopology is like a topology, but without the constraint that intersections of open sets
be open. This models an idea in distributed consensus that participants can progress locally
if they reach agreement amongst a local quorum (= open neighbourhood) of trusted peers.
    Semitopologies are related to Horn clause theories: just fix some predicate atoms, write
any Horn clause theory over those atoms that you like, and consider the set of assignments
of truth values to the atoms that satisfy the clauses. These assignments generate the closed
sets of a semitopology as their corresponding answer sets (the set of atoms to which the
assignment assigns “true”). It is very easy to see that this is a semitopology.
    But now we want to assert and reason about semitopological properties, by applying
techniques from logic (such as derivability) to the semitopology as represented as a Horn
clause theory. In essence, we have converted safety properties of distributed consensus into
derivability (or non-derivability) questions about a simple logical theory.
    For this, we require a paraconsistent modal logic (over three values: T, B, and F), with a
modality K asserting validity in all valuations.
    Time permitting, I will sketch the maths above and show the logic in action on some
simple examples.
    Some parts of the material described above are in a draft journal paper [1] online.
References
1    Murdoch J. Gabbay and Giuliano Losa. Semitopology: a new topological model of hetero-
     geneous consensus. Eprint 2303.09287, arXiv, 2023. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2303.09287.




                                                                                                           23272
42   23272 – Epistemic and Topological Reasoning in Distributed Systems


     3.5     Optimal Eventual Byzantine Agreement Protocols with Omission
             Failures
     Joseph Y. Halpern (Cornell University – Ithaca, NY, US)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Joseph Y. Halpern
      Joint work of Kaya Alpturer, Joseph Y. Halpern, Ron van der Meyden
     Main reference Kaya Alpturer, Joseph Y. Halpern, Ron van der Meyden: “Optimal Eventual Byzantine Agreement
                    Protocols with Omission Failures”, in Proc. of the 2023 ACM Symposium on Principles of
                    Distributed Computing, PODC 2023, Orlando, FL, USA, June 19-23, 2023, pp. 244–252, ACM, 2023.
               URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3583668.3594573


     Work on optimal protocols for Eventual Byzantine Agreement (EBA) – protocols that, in
     a precise sense, decide as soon as possible in every run and guarantee that all nonfaulty
     agents decide on the same value – has focused on full-information protocols (FIPs), where
     agents repeatedly send messages that completely describe their past observations to every
     other agent. While it can be shown that, without loss of generality, we can take an optimal
     protocol to be an FIP, full information exchange is impractical to implement for many
     applications due to the required message size. We separate protocols into two parts, the
     information-exchange protocol and the action protocol, so as to be able to examine the
     effects of more limited information exchange. We then define a notion of optimality with
     respect to an information-exchange protocol. Roughly speaking, an action protocol P is
     optimal with respect to an information-exchange protocol E, if with P, agents decide as
     soon as possible among action protocols that exchange information according to E. We
     present a knowledge-based EBA program for omission failures all of whose implementations
     are guaranteed to be correct and are optimal if the information exchange satisfies a certain
     safety condition. We then construct concrete programs that implement this knowledge-based
     program in two settings of interest that are shown to satisfy the safety condition. Finally, we
     show that a small modification of our program results in an FIP that is both optimal and
     efficiently implementable, settling an open problem posed by Halpern, Moses, and Waarts [1].
     References
     1    Joseph Y. Halpern, Yoram Moses, and Orli Waarts. A characterization of eventual
          Byzantine agreement. SIAM Journal on Computing, 31(3):838–865, 2001. doi:10.1137/
          S0097539798340217.



     3.6     Hypergraphs for Knowledge
     Roman Kniazev (École Polytechnique – Palaiseau, FR)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Roman Kniazev
     Main reference Éric Goubault, Roman Kniazev, Jérémy Ledent: “A Many-Sorted Epistemic Logic for Chromatic
                    Hypergraphs”, in Proc. of the 32nd EACSL Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic, CSL
                    2024, February 19-23, 2024, Naples, Italy, LIPIcs, Vol. 288, pp. 30:1–30:18, Schloss Dagstuhl -
                    Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.
               URL https://doi.org//10.4230/LIPICS.CSL.2024.30


     After recalling semantics of epistemic logic in epistemic coverings, we discuss how chromatic
     hypergraphs generalize them and can resolve some inconveniences appearing in practice.
A. Castañeda, H. van Ditmarsch, R. Kuznets, Y. Moses, and U. Schmid                                                   43


3.7     Domain-theoretical Constraint Systems for Knowledge and Belief in
        Multi-agent Systems
Sophia Knight (University of Minnesota – Duluth, MN, US)
      License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Sophia Knight
 Joint work of Michell Guzmán, Stefan Haar, Sophia Knight, Catuscia Palamidessi, Prakash Panangaden, Salim
               Perchy, Santiago Quintero, Sergio Ramírez, Camilo Rueda, Frank Valencia
Main reference Michell Guzmán, Sophia Knight, Santiago Quintero, Sergio Ramírez, Camilo Rueda, Frank Valencia:
               “Reasoning About Distributed Knowledge of Groups with Infinitely Many Agents”, in Proc. of the
               30th International Conference on Concurrency Theory, CONCUR 2019, August 27-30, 2019,
               Amsterdam, the Netherlands, LIPIcs, Vol. 140, pp. 29:1–29:15, Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum
               für Informatik, 2019.
          URL https://doi.org//10.4230/LIPICS.CONCUR.2019.29


We begin by reviewing the connection between topology and domain theory. We discuss the
importance and difficulties in representing knowledge, belief, and information in multi-agent
distributed systems, especially systems with fallible agents. Then we explain how to generalize
concurrent constraint programming (CCP) with an underlying epistemic constraint system,
representing agents’ knowledge and information. We discuss some of the details of epistemic
constraint systems and the more general multi-agent spatial constraint systems. We present
a new semantics for CCP extended with epistemic and spatial constraint systems and an
agent space operator. We discuss how to extend these systems to infinite groups of agents.
In a purely logical setting, representing group, common, and distributed knowledge of infinite
groups of agents presents difficulties, but in the domain-theoretic constraint system setting,
these knowledge operators can be represented in a natural way. Finally, we discuss epistemic
and spatial information systems, and their correspondence to constraint systems.



3.8     Impure Simplicial Complexes: Local View
Roman Kuznets (TU Wien, AT)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Roman Kuznets
 Joint work of Hans van Ditmarsch, Roman Kuznets, Rojo Randrianomentsoa
Main reference Rojo Randrianomentsoa, Hans van Ditmarsch, Roman Kuznets: “Impure Simplicial Complexes:
               Complete Axiomatization”, Logical Methods in Computer Science, Vol. 19(4), October 2023.
          URL https://doi.org//10.46298/LMCS-19(4:3)2023


We discuss the choices that the local view suggests for impure simplicial complexes, i.e., com-
plexes where some of the agents may have crashed. We settle on a three-valued semantics
with the third value being “undefined” and provide a sound and complete axiomatization by
means of a novel canonical simplicial model construction.




                                                                                                                  23272
44   23272 – Epistemic and Topological Reasoning in Distributed Systems


     3.9     The Impossibility of Approximate Agreement on a Larger Class of
             Graphs
     Shihao (Jason) Liu (University of Toronto, CA)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Shihao (Jason) Liu
     Main reference Shihao Liu: “The Impossibility of Approximate Agreement on a Larger Class of Graphs”, in Proc. of
                    the 26th International Conference on Principles of Distributed Systems, OPODIS 2022, December
                    13-15, 2022, Brussels, Belgium, LIPIcs, Vol. 253, pp. 22:1–22:20, Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum
                    für Informatik, 2023.
               URL https://doi.org//10.4230/LIPICS.OPODIS.2022.22


     Approximate agreement is a variant of consensus in which processes receive input values
     from a domain and must output values in that domain that are sufficiently close to one
     another. We study the problem when the input domain is the vertex set of a connected
     graph. In asynchronous systems where processes communicate using shared registers, there
     are wait-free approximate agreement algorithms when the graph is a path or a tree, but not
     when the graph is a cycle of length at least 4. For many graphs, it is unknown whether a
     wait-free solution for approximate agreement exists.
         We introduce a set of impossibility conditions and prove that approximate agreement on
     graphs satisfying these conditions cannot be solved in a wait-free manner. In particular, the
     graphs of all triangulated d-dimensional spheres that are not cliques satisfy these conditions.
     The vertices and edges of an octahedron are an example of such a graph. We also present a
     reduction from approximate agreement on one graph to another graph. This enables us to
     extend known impossibility results to even more graphs. Finally, we show that extension-
     based proofs cannot be used to prove the impossibility of wait-free approximate agreement
     on any connected graph, which demonstrates the necessity of using combinatorial arguments.



     3.10      Product Updates for Partial Epistemic Models and Logical
               Obstruction to Task Solvability
     Susumu Nishimura (Kyoto University, JP)
            License   Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Susumu Nishimura
      Joint work of Masaki Muramatsu, Daisuke Nakai, Susumu Nishimura


     We introduce the notion of partial product update. This refines the original notion of
     product update to encompass distributed tasks and protocols modeled by impure simplicial
     complexes. With this refined notion, we obtain a logical method that is generalized to
     allow the application of logical obstruction to show unsolvability results in a distributed
     environment where the failure of agents is detectable. We demonstrate the use of the logical
     method by giving a concrete logical obstruction and showing that the consensus task is
     unsolvable by single-round synchronous message-passing protocol.
A. Castañeda, H. van Ditmarsch, R. Kuznets, Y. Moses, and U. Schmid                                                   45


3.11      Mixing Combinatorial and Point-set Topology
Thomas Nowak (ENS – Gif-sur-Yvette, FR)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Thomas Nowak
 Joint work of Hagit Attiya, Armando Castañeda, Thomas Nowak
Main reference Hagit Attiya, Armando Castañeda, Thomas Nowak: “Topological Characterization of Task
               Solvability in General Models of Computation”, CoRR abs/2301.13837, 2023.
          URL https://doi.org//10.48550/ARXIV.2301.13837


The famous asynchronous computability theorem (ACT) relates the existence of an asyn-
chronous wait-free shared-memory protocol for solving a task with the existence of a simplicial
map from a subdivision of the simplicial complex representing the inputs to the simplicial
complex representing the allowable outputs. The original theorem relies on a correspondence
between protocols and simplicial maps in finite models of computation that induce a compact
topology. This correspondence, however, is far from obvious for computational models that
induce a non-compact topology, and indeed previous attempts to extend the ACT have failed.
    We show first that in every non-compact model, protocols solving tasks correspond to
simplicial maps that need to be continuous. This correspondence is then used to prove that
the approach used in ACT that equates protocols and simplicial complexes actually works
for every compact model, and to show a generalized ACT that applies also to non-compact
computation models.
    Our study combines combinatorial and point-set topological aspects of the executions
admitted by the computational model.



3.12      A Speedup Theorem for Asynchronous Computation
Ami Paz (CNRS – Gif-sur-Yvette, FR)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Ami Paz
 Joint work of Pierre Fraigniaud, Ami Paz, Sergio Rajsbaum
Main reference Pierre Fraigniaud, Ami Paz, Sergio Rajsbaum: “A Speedup Theorem for Asynchronous Computation
               with Applications to Consensus and Approximate Agreement”, in Proc. of the 2022 ACM
               Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC 2022, Salerno, Italy, July 25 – 29, 2022,
               pp. 460–470, ACM, 2022.
          URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3519270.3538422


Speedup theorems have recently gained increasing attention in studying distributed graph
algorithms in synchronous systems. Using topological tools, we present a variant of this
technique that applies to asynchronous shared-memory systems. At the core of our technique
is a round reduction theorem: given a distributed task Π, we define a new task called the
closure of Π, such that if Π is solvable in t rounds, then its closure is solvable in t − 1 rounds.
    We illustrate the power of our speedup theorem by providing new proof of the wait-free
impossibility of consensus using read/write registers. This is done merely by showing that
the closure of consensus is consensus itself. The simplicity of our technique allows us to study
additional communication objects, namely test&set and binary consensus. We analyze the
approximate agreement task in systems augmented with the two objects and show that while
these objects are more powerful than read/write registers from the computability perspective,
they do not help to reduce the time complexity of solving approximate agreement.




                                                                                                                  23272
46   23272 – Epistemic and Topological Reasoning in Distributed Systems


     3.13      On Simplicial Semantics
     Rojo Randrianomentsoa (TU Wien, AT)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Rojo Randrianomentsoa
      Joint work of Hans van Ditmarsch, Roman Kuznets, Rojo Randrianomentsoa
     Main reference Hans van Ditmarsch, Roman Kuznets, Rojo Randrianomentsoa: “On Two- and Three-valued
                    Semantics for Impure Simplicial Complexes”, in Proc. of the Fourteenth International Symposium on
                    Games, Automata, Logics, and Formal Verification, GandALF 2023, Udine, Italy, 18-20th September
                    2023, EPTCS, Vol. 390, pp. 50–66, Open Publishing Association, 2023.
               URL https://doi.org//10.4204/EPTCS.390.4


     Impure simplicial complexes are used to model distributed systems with crashing agents. We
     discuss language extension for three-valued semantics, and provide the translations from that
     semantics to the two-valued facet semantics. In my talk, I present some of our results as well
     as some of the challenges we face in our current work.



     3.14      Do Genes Argue? Abstract Argumentation and Boolean Networks
     David A. Rosenblueth (National Autonomous University of Mexico, MX)
            License   Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © David A. Rosenblueth
      Joint work of Eugenio Azpeitia, Stalin Muñoz, David A. Rosenblueth, Octavio Zapata


     Stemming from the work by Phan Minh Dung in the 90s, there is a plethora of formalisms
     of abstract argumentation, from Dung’s original work to abstract dialectical frameworks.
     Stemming from the work by François Jacob and Jacques Monod in the 60s, there are numerous
     mathematical models of gene regulation, from differential equations to Boolean networks.
     These two areas resemble each other: synchronous Boolean networks are reminiscent of
     abstract dialectical frameworks. The question is whether or not there is more than this
     resemblance. We will explore possibilities of bridging these two areas.



     3.15      Logics for Data Exchange
     Sonja Smets (University of Amsterdam, NL)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Sonja Smets
      Joint work of Alexandru Baltag, Sonja Smets


     We present a new family of dynamic logics that can model complex acts of data exchange and
     communication between different systems or agents. In the context of multi-agent systems,
     these are acts by which individual agents, as well as groups of agents, can publicly or privately
     access and transmit all the information stored at specific locations. In addition to having
     the full power of standard dynamic epistemic logics (DEL) to model acts of propositional
     communication, our logics can handle the type of communication protocols in which the data
     that is being communicated cannot be explicitly captured by a proposition.
A. Castañeda, H. van Ditmarsch, R. Kuznets, Y. Moses, and U. Schmid                                                   47


3.16      Synergistic Knowledge
Thomas Studer (Universität Bern, CH)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Thomas Studer
 Joint work of Christian Cachin, David Lehnherr, Thomas Studer
Main reference Christian Cachin, David Lehnherr, Thomas Studer: “Synergistic Knowledge”, in Proc. of the 25th
               International Symposium on Stabilization, Safety, and Security of Distributed Systems, SSS 2023,
               Jersey City, NJ, USA, October 2-4, 2023, LNCS, Vol. 14310, pp. 552–567, Springer, 2023.
          URL https://doi.org//10.1007/978-3-031-44274-2_41


In formal epistemology, group knowledge is often modeled as the knowledge that the group
would have if the agents shared all their individual knowledge. However, this interpretation
does not account for relations between agents. In this work, we propose the notion of
synergistic knowledge, which makes it possible to model those relationships. As an example,
we investigate the use of consensus objects.



3.17      Pattern Models and Consensus
Diego A. Velázquez (National Autonomous University of Mexico, MX)
       License   Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Diego A. Velázquez
 Joint work of Armando Castañeda, Hans van Ditmarsch, David A. Rosenblueth, Diego A. Velázquez


Recently, dynamic epistemic logic has started to be exploited for analyzing distributed
systems. Pattern model logic was designed to that end. We present a simple-to-test sufficient
condition that ensures consensus unsolvability for a given oblivious dynamic-network model.



 4      Working Groups
The presentations and discussions in the unique setting of Dagstuhl, with its relaxed and
stimulating atmosphere, fully achieved their purpose: Long discussions took place during
the official seminar, and many fruitful cross-community interactions spontaneously occurred
during the free times, which even exceeded the amount of available time.
    As a conclusion, we are convinced that our seminar will contribute to the further
development of epistemic reasoning and topology in distributed computing, and the integration
of the respective approaches.




                                                                                                                  23272
48   23272 – Epistemic and Topological Reasoning in Distributed Systems


     4.1      Extending Topology to Handle Data Structures
     Henning Basold, Armando Castañeda, Faith Ellen, Guy Goren, Shihao (Jason) Liu, Susumu
     Nishimura, Thomas Nowak, Sergio Rajsbaum, Ulrich Schmid
             License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Henning Basold, Armando Castañeda, Faith Ellen, Guy Goren, Shihao (Jason) Liu, Susumu
                       Nishimura, Thomas Nowak, Sergio Rajsbaum, Ulrich Schmid


     4.1.1      Context
     The combinatorial topology approach to distributed computing has been shown to be powerful
     for studying solvability of fundamental distributed problems such a consensus, set agreement
     and renaming [42]. However, the current approach has a clear limitation as it can be applied
     only to distributed problems that can be modeled as (distributed) tasks. A task models a
     one-shot distributed problem where each process starts with a private input, and the processes
     are required to communicate with each other in order to decide private outputs that satisfy
     the task’s specification. Nonetheless, there are fundamental distributed problems that cannot
     be specified as tasks [17, 18]. An important class of such problems are concurrent objects (or
     data structures), e.g., queues, stacks, trees and dictionaries. One seeks for implementations
     of them that are linearizable [43]. Roughly speaking, in a concurrent object, a process can
     perform an unbounded number of the operations provided by the object (differently from
     tasks where there is a single operation) and, in a linearizable implementation, responses to
     operations must be valid for the object that is implemented, somehow respecting the order
     operations are performed in a given execution.

     4.1.2      Known results
     Formally, a task is a triple T = ⟨I, O, ∆⟩, where I and O are input and output complexes
     specifying the input and output domains of the task, and ∆ is a carrier map specifying the
     complex ∆(σ) ⊆ O with valid outputs for each input simplex σ ∈ I. An execution E is valid
     for the task if τ ∈ ∆(σ), where σ and τ are the simplexes with inputs and outputs in E,
     respectively.
         Our discussion centered around finding a topological specification for concurrent objects.
     It first centered on previous work [17, 18], which already showed that tasks are too weak
     to even represent a one-shot queue, where each process can only access once by performing
     a fixed operation. The main problem is that carrier maps of tasks have limited ability to
     specify the order in which operations are performed in an execution.
         The aforementioned work defined refined tasks (called long-lived task in [17]), where
     a vertex in the input complex represents a specific invocation to the object by a specific
     process. When using a simplex to represent an input configuration, multiple invocations
     of the same operation by the same process are represented by multiple distinct vertices in
     the simplex. Starting from any simplex in the input complex, each execution E specifies a
     simplex τE where each vertex of τE consists of a process identifier, an invocation to the object
     by this process, the response to this invocation in E, and the set-view when the response
     was returned. A set-view is the set of all invocations (by all processes) on the object up to a
     particular point in the execution. The set of set-views in τE fully captures the interleaving
     of operations in the execution E. The output complex consists of simplexes τE specified by
     all possible executions (concurrent and sequential) E whose operations appear in simplexes
     of the input complex. A refined task is a triple T = ⟨I, O, ∆⟩ where ∆(σ) ⊆ O contains
     simplexes τE specified by all possible sequential E where processes perform the operations in
A. Castañeda, H. van Ditmarsch, R. Kuznets, Y. Moses, and U. Schmid                                       49


a simplex σ ∈ I, in some order. A concurrent execution E ′ with operations in a simplex σ ∈ I
is considered valid for the refined task if there exists a simplex τE ∈ ∆(σ) such that (1) the
outputs to operations in E ′ and E agree, and (2) the set-view of each vertex in τE ′ contains
the set-view of its corresponding vertex in τE .
    Refined tasks have been shown to be expressive enough to model any linearizable concur-
rent object. However, this does not seem to resolve the limitation mentioned above because
the notion of solvability for refined tasks is based on two components: outputs and set-views.
The problem is that set-views are features of the execution, i.e., they are not produced or
implied by processes’ states. It is not clear how set-views can be captured by simplicial
maps in a way that the combinatorial topology approach can be applied to study solvability
of refined tasks. Let us recall that in the combinatorial topology approach protocols are
modeled as simplicial maps that specify outputs as function on only process states, and
the main question that needs to be answered is whether there exists a simplicial map from
the protocol complex to the output complex, respecting the specification of the task in
question. It may be possible that refined tasks can be used to study solvability of linearizable
concurrent object S in an indirect manner as suggested in [33], where a task T is constructed
such that if there is a linearizable implementation of S then T is solvable.

4.1.3     Proposed approaches
The group discussed two possible alternative approaches to specify concurrent objects that
may be more suitable for the combinatorial topology approach. Applications of these
approaches remain to be seen.

4.1.3.1    Approach I: using a simplicial set to represent the possible outputs instead of
           an simplicial complex.
Here each vertex in the input complex I is defined by a process and a sequence of operations to
be performed by the process. Each vertex in the output simplicial set O is defined by a process,
a sequence of operations performed by the process, and the sequence of responses to these
operations. Each facet of the simplicial set is labelled by a linearization, which is a total order
of the operations in all of its vertices. The linearization labelling each facet needs to respect
the order of operations within each of its vertices. A map ∆ specifies the subset of allowed
output simplexes for each input simplex. Starting from any simplex σ ∈ I, an execution E
with inputs described by σ is correct if there exists a linearization of the operations in E and
a simplex τ ∈ O labelled by this linearization such that, for each process, p, there is a vertex
in τ with process identifier p, the sequence of operations performed by p during E, and the
sequence of responses p obtained during E.

4.1.3.2    Approach II: modifying ∆ so that it depends on the partial order of operations.
For simplicity, we first consider only one-shot objects. To represent the order in which
operations are performed on a one-shot object, we can use a partial order on the set of
processes. Specifically, if the operation by process p finishes before the operation by process q
begins, then p ≺ q. If the operation by process p is concurrent with the operation by process q,
then p and q are incomparable.
   Here a one-shot object is represented by a tuple (I, Π, O, ∆). I is the input complex.
Each vertex in I is of the form (id, op), where id is a process identifier and op is an operation
to be performed by this process. Π is the set of all possible partial orders on the set of
processes. O is the output complex. Each vertex in O is of the form (id, op, resp), where




                                                                                                      23272
50   23272 – Epistemic and Topological Reasoning in Distributed Systems


     (id, op) is a vertex in I and resp is a possible response to the operation op performed by the
     process with identifier id. ∆ : I × Π → 2O is a chromatic map which maps a simplex σ ∈ I
     and a partial order π ∈ Π to a subcomplex of O. If the object has a sequential specification,
     then each simplex in this subcomplex describes an output configuration resulting from a
     sequential execution whose order of operations respects the given partial order. An algorithm
     correctly implements an object if, for every execution E, there exists a simplex of ∆(σ, π)
     that describes the response to each operation performed during E, where σ is the simplex
     of I describing the operation each process performs during the execution and π ∈ Π describes
     the partial order of these operations.
          Now, consider any execution in which each process may access the object multiple times.
     For each process p, let np denote the number of operations performed by p during this execu-
     tion. We can use a partial order on the set {(p, i) | p is a process and 1 ≤ i ≤ np } to describe
     the relevant information about the operations performed during the execution. Specifically,
     if the ith operation by process p finishes before the jth operation by process q begins, then
     (p, i) ≺ (q, j). If the ith operation by process p is concurrent with the jth operation by
     process q, then (p, i) and (q, j) are incomparable.
          Vertices in the input complex I are now of the form (p, seqp ), where seqp is a sequence
     of operations to be performed by the process p. Likewise, vertices in the output com-
     plex O are now of the form (p, seqp , resp), where resp is a sequence of possible responses
     to the operations in seqp . ∆ now maps a simplex in I and a partial order on the set
     {(p, i) | p is a process and 1 ≤ i ≤ |seqp |} to a subcomplex of O.
          Finally, it was also briefly discussed that the order of operations in the two proposed
     approaches could be captured through higher-dimensional automata (HDA) [53], which have
     an inherent geometric nature that may facilitate the use of combinatorial topology techniques.



     4.2      Interpreted Systems and Dynamic Epistemic Logic
     Alexandru Baltag, Hans van Ditmarsch, Krisztina Fruzsa, Joseph Y. Halpern, Yoram Moses,
     Hugo Rincón Galeana, Ulrich Schmid, Sonja Smets, Diego A. Velázquez
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Alexandru Baltag, Hans van Ditmarsch, Krisztina Fruzsa, Joseph Y. Halpern, Yoram Moses,
                       Hugo Rincón Galeana, Ulrich Schmid, Sonja Smets, Diego A. Velázquez


     The Interpreted Systems (IS) approach ([31]) has, over the last four decades, been used to
     study distributed systems and has served as a tool in the design and analysis of distributed
     and multi-agent protocols and systems. The discussion began in this with the question of
     whether and how Dynamic Epistemic Logic (DEL) can contribute in a similar fashion.
        Broadly speaking, we thus considered the following specific questions:
        What are the main differences between IS and DEL modeling?
        What could DEL add to IS modeling?
        What could IS add to DEL modeling?

        The (partial) answers developed in this discussion group will be summarized in dedicated
     subsections below.

     4.2.1      What are the main differences between the IS and DEL modeling?
     While both DEL and IS provide means to track the manner in which knowledge and belief
     change over time in a multi-agent system, the two approaches differ dramatically in the
     way that they model the effect that actions have. In DEL, actions operate directly on the
A. Castañeda, H. van Ditmarsch, R. Kuznets, Y. Moses, and U. Schmid                                  51


epistemic state of the system (this epistemic state is represented by a Kripke structure). For
every action, the framework must provide an action model, which maps a Kripke structure and
an action to a new Kripke structure, thereby describing the manner in which the epistemic
state changes when the action is performed. In IS actions are taken to modify the physical
configuration (or global state) of the system. As in automata theory, this is modeled by way
of a transition function, mapping a configuration and an action to the configuration that
results from performing the action. The epistemic state of the system in IS is also modeled
using a Kripke structure, but this structure is induced by the system configurations, where
each agent’s indistinguishability relation is determined by its local state.
    In the IS way of modeling of distributed systems, based on the runs-and-systems frame-
work [31], agent protocols and the environment are outside of the formal logic used for
epistemic reasoning. In fact, they are represented using transition systems (TS) which are
the primary objects of study. Since the executions of a distributed protocol can typically be
described in terms of a transition system (see [47]), the IS approach can readily be applied
to a broad range of distributed systems problems.
    In DEL [26], agent protocols (as well as the environment) can be expressed in the
formal logic used for epistemic reasoning. In particular, action models enable one to model
many forms of communication between the agents while focusing on capturing the resulting
knowledge evolution of the involved agents. Moreover, precondition formulas can be used to
tie communication actions to particular epistemic states of the agents (that are necessary to
hold when communicating). Works such as [37], which even connect DEL and combinatorial
topology, show that the idea of using DEL to help with topological reasoning about distributed
systems is promising.
    DEL and IS have been used for the analysis of communication protocols. Specific features
of the protocols themselves indicate which framework fits best. The features we are looking at
are a) temporal aspects (synchronous versus asynchronous communications) and b) the private
versus public nature of the information contained in the events or actions that happen as part
of the protocol. Here, we note that in DEL, time is not explicitly represented. Embeddings
from DEL into IS (or rather into temporal epistemic logics) have been proposed. This
includes both synchronous embeddings [10], wherein the execution of an action corresponds
to a clock tick, and asynchronous embeddings [21], wherein histories of actions of variable
length correspond to time in some way. While some believe that DEL and IS can be extended
with ingredients so they can model the same kind of protocols, the starting base of these
frameworks does differ. The built-in features of the starting base (such as the temporal
aspects in IS and the action models in DEL) will make the application of one or the other
framework a more straightforward choice for a given type of protocol. For instance when we
focus on cryptographic protocols with complex cryptographic primitives as part of the actions
or events that happen in the protocol, we see an added advantage of starting with DEL which
offers us the expressive power of modeling the security aspects in the actions separately and
allows us to automatically compute the state-transitions via its product update mechanism.
DEL is used in the study of cryptographic protocols in works like [44, 20, 23, 30].
    An advantageous feature of DEL is the fact that its built-in model update mechanism
makes it immediately well-suited for automated model checking tasks. The implementation
was done in different programming languages, but the most elaborate tool uses Haskell in
DEMO [29]. The power of DEMO for model checking tasks has been illustrated on a small
number of well-known sample protocols including comparison to temporal epistemic model
checkers like MCK [27], which is based on IS modeling.




                                                                                                 23272
52   23272 – Epistemic and Topological Reasoning in Distributed Systems


         A disadvantage of DEL in general is the potential blowup of the model (or the precondition
     formulas). There are various reasons for such a blowup. As the models used in DEL are small
     (updates, and their temporal interpretation, are computable from an initial model and the
     sequence of actions), complexities with respect to model size are high [3]. Another reason is
     the iteration of action models, which leads to exponential growth of the size with each model
     update. This can be addressed with symmetry reductions [34], restriction to point-generated
     submodels [12], dedicated tools for specific frame classes (such as models with equivalence
     relations) instead of arbitrary binary relations [29], and bisimulation contraction [12].
         A feature of DEL often forgotten is that such logics and frameworks are essentially logics
     of observation, not of action. One can investigate the consequence of actions if they were to
     happen, but one cannot state “let this action happen now”. This is of course very different
     from IS. Once we add factual change to the DEL framework, this drawback is somewhat
     overcome. Now there are actions such as turning on and off the light, setting values of keys,
     etcetera. But agency remains lacking.

     4.2.2   What could DEL add to IS modeling?
     Operationalizing the implicit Kripke model construction resulting from executing the system
     primarily requires the construction of action models for typical communication protocols
     considered in epistemic analysis via IS. The challenge here is to develop action models
     that avoid state explosion. One promising starting point could be communication patterns,
     updates that compare in interesting ways to action models [55, 15, 14]. The availability of
     such action models would open up some interesting avenues such as:
        Could correctness proofs of protocols formulated via suitable precondition formulas of
        such action models be automated, via analyzing the Kripke model obtained by the product
        updates w.r.t. satisfying the desired properties? This would replace the translation of
        knowledge-based protocols obtained via IS to TS, and the obligatory proof that the
        resulting protocol guarantees that the agents attain their respective necessary level of
        knowledge.
        Good target practice will be to model the consensus protocol for processes with send-
        omission faults from [1] in DEL, by (i) defining an action model for send-omission
        faults, (ii) modeling the protocol implementations via suitable precondition formulas,
        and (iii) generating and analyzing the Kripke model after suitably many rounds. We
        were optimistically thinking of including these results already in the report, however that
        was a bridge too far. Still, we are committed to this and other benchmarks to compare
        DEL and IS.
        An area in DEL that is highly targeted towards protocols and automation is that of
        epistemic planning [13, 6, 48], and in particular concerning decidability of epistemic
        planning problems [2, 46]. Could epistemic planning techniques be used for synthesizing
        protocols in a distributed setting?

     4.2.3   What could IS add to DEL modeling?
     The IS approach has been used to provide insights into the interaction between knowledge
     and communication in distributed systems ([39, 19, 7]), has allowed to generalize existing
     protocols ([40]), and to design optimal and state-of-the-art protocols solving well-known
     problems ([28, 50, 35, 16, 1]). These works provide insight into the role of synchrony and
     partial synchrony, refine our analysis of achievable types of optimality in different models
     of distributed computation, and into various aspects of fault-tolerance. The Knowledge of
A. Castañeda, H. van Ditmarsch, R. Kuznets, Y. Moses, and U. Schmid                                               53


Preconditions principle [49], which is naturally formulated in IS, provides model-independent
theorem capturing the connection between knowledge and action in multi-agent systems. It
has been shown to facilitate the design and analysis of efficient distributed systems protocols.
Although protocols are not explicitly represented in the IS framework, it is possible to
consider high-level “knowledge-based programs” in this setting, in which actions depend
on tests for knowledge. In general, however, such programs are specifications and do not
always uniquely determine the agents’ behavior. Finding ways to implement them may
be challenging. The more developed literature applying IS for the study of distributed
computing can serve as an example and inspiration for directions in which DEL may be
expanded. Fundamentally, DEL can be viewed as a subclass of IS. Its added declarative
nature described above comes at a cost, however. Modeling and studying aspects of timing,
including the role of synchrony, asynchrony and partial synchrony have been carried out
successfully using the IS framework, while handling asynchrony, and partial synchrony appear
to pose significant challenges for DEL. Similarly, incorporating failures, which have been
studied in many IS settings, seems likely to give rise to cumbersome DEL models.
    In order to be able to apply the IS framework, one only needs a description of the
set of possible histories of a system, and a clear definition of the local states of agents in
every configuration. As mentioned above, the fact that systems are often described by way
of a transition system obviates the need to translate a given system into the formalism.
Treating, say, an existing internet protocol using DEL would typically require a significant
reformulation effort. Making DEL more flexible in this sense seems to be a considerable albeit
worthwhile challenge. Finally, while the IS framework has given rise to new and improved
protocols as well as tight bounds and impossibility results in different models of distributed
computing, this has not been a focus of DEL works. It will be very interesting to see how
well DEL can match such tasks, in light of the results obtained using IS.



4.3    Representing Epistemic Attitudes via Simplicial Complexes
Alexandru Baltag, Henning Basold, Hans van Ditmarsch, Roman Kniazev, Sophia Knight,
Roman Kuznets, Jérémy Ledent, David Lehnherr, Rojo Randrianomentsoa, Sonja Smets,
Thomas Studer
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Alexandru Baltag, Henning Basold, Hans van Ditmarsch, Roman Kniazev, Sophia Knight, Roman
                Kuznets, Jérémy Ledent, David Lehnherr, Rojo Randrianomentsoa, Sonja Smets, Thomas Studer


The general header ‘Epistemic Attitudes via Simplicial Complexes’ permits a wealth of topics,
also involving group epistemics such as distributed knowledge and common knowledge, and
generalizations of simplicial complexes such as simplicial sets. However, the overall focus of
the discussions turned towards a single issue: how to model belief on simplicial complexes,
and, to a somewhat lesser extent, how to model dynamic epistemic attitudes such as deceit
and Byzantine behaviour in general. In this report we focus on belief, the structures needed to
encode it, their further generalization to polychromatic simplicial complexes (where simplexes
can contain multiple vertices with the same colour), and the use of those for neighbourhood
(epistemic) semantics on complexes.
    The discussion was very much example driven. We therefore give a minimum of formal
precision concerning complexes and their epistemic semantics. A simplicial complex C is
a set of subsets of a set V of vertices that is downward closed, and a simplicial model is
a triple (C, χ, ℓ) where C is a simplicial complex, χ is a chromatic map assigning an agent




                                                                                                              23272
54   23272 – Epistemic and Topological Reasoning in Distributed Systems


     (or a colour) to each vertex and such that different vertices in a face are assigned different
     colours, and ℓ is a valuation of propositional variables to vertices (or, alternatively, to faces).
     A maximal face is a facet. Intuitively a vertex represents the local state of an agent and a
     facet represents a global state. In a simplicial set there can be multiple occurrences of a
     simplex (thus it is a multi-set of subsets and not a set).
         The semantics of knowledge on simplicial complexes replaces the usual Kripke model
     semantics with equivalence classes for agents a, given binary (equivalence) relations, with
     adjacency of facets (or faces) to a vertex with colour a. The basic definition is as follows,
     where we refer to works like [45, 37, 24, 36] for details. Let X be a facet in C (X ∈ F(C)) of
     simplicial model C = (C, χ, ℓ). We consider formulas in a standard epistemic logical language.
     Then:

          C, X |= Ka φ iff C, Y |= φ for all Y ∈ F(C) such that a ∈ χ(X ∩ Y ).

     In fact we can interpret formulas in arbitrary faces of a complex1 where the case of a vertex,
     a singleton face, captures the knowledge semantics as follows, where χ(v) = a:

          C, v |= Ka φ iff C, Y |= φ for all Y ∈ C with v ∈ Y

     We will use a running example to demonstrate all semantics for knowledge, belief, and other
     epistemic attitudes. And we start by explaining the knowledge semantics. Hopefully, this
     will suffice for the reader to prepare the ground for the subsequent different belief semantics.
         Consider a simplicial model C as above for three agents (colours) a, b, c, where for
     convenience the vertices are named xy for x = a, b, c and y = 0, 1, 2 and where these numbers
     simultaneously represent local values, formalized as propositional variables yx only true there.
     (So in facet X variables 0a , 0c , and 1b are true and 1a , 2a , 1c , 0b , 2b are false.) We also assume
     that variables are local for vertices but that does not seem to be of prime importance (one
     could think of assigning variables to facets).

     b0               a0             a1              a2
              W
                      X               Y              Z                                                         Ci

               c0             b1             c1               b2

        We now have that in facet X agent a knows that the value of c is 0, because in the
     facets W and X intersecting with X in vertex a0 the value of c is 0. However, agent b is
                                                                    b b to abbreviate ¬Kb ¬):
     uncertain there whether the value of c is 0 or 1 (where we use K

          C, X |= Ka 0c             C, X |= K
                                            b b 0c ∧ K
                                                     b b 1c

     4.3.1      Irrevocable Belief
     Let us now model belief (Ba ) instead of knowledge (Ka ). Unlike knowledge, belief may be
     incorrect. A common way to model belief in modal logic, interpreted on Kripke models, is
     by way of relations that are serial, transitive, and Euclidean, for which the logic is KD45.
     That is, it satisfies:


     1
         To interpret formulas in arbitrary faces we use the multi-pointed semantics of [24], section ‘Local
         semantics for simplicial complexes’, wherein C, X |= φ for a set of faces X iff C, X |= φ for all X ∈ X .
         In particular, C, v |= φ then means that C, star(v) |= φ, where star(v) = {Y ∈ C | v ∈ Y }.
A. Castañeda, H. van Ditmarsch, R. Kuznets, Y. Moses, and U. Schmid                                      55


   Ba φ → B ba φ (consistency)
   Ba → Ba Ba φ (positive introspection)
   Bba φ → Ba Bba φ (negative introspection)
This is known as consistent belief [25] and also as irrevocable belief (or as conviction) [54].
Recalling the KD45 “balloons” (clusters of indistinguishable worlds) with “ropes” (asymmetric
pairs in the accessibility relation) from isolated worlds pointing to these clusters, a way to
model belief on complexes is with a belief function f : V(C) → V(C) that is an idempotent
and color-preserving vertex map. It is not a chromatic map as it may not preserve other
simplices. Let Xa be the vertex of color a that belongs to a facet X. Belief is now defined as

     C, X |= Ba φ iff C, Y |= φ for all Y ∈ F(C) with f (Xa ) ∈ Y

If, for a world v, f (v) = v, belief becomes knowledge. The map needs to be idempotent to
ensure that the properties of belief hold, we can see the map f as “pointing” vertex v to a
cluster of f (v) adjoining facets, in words referring to a corresponding Kripke model, to a set
of b-indistinguishable worlds.
     As an example, we reconsider the model above but now enriched with a belief function
that maps vertex a0 to vertex a2 and otherwise maps all vertices to themselves, as below.



b0             a0           a1            a2
        W
               X             Y            Z                                                   C ii

        c0            b1            c1           b2

   This represents that in local state a0 agent a believes that her local state is a2 and that
the global state is Z. Observe that this also implies that a incorrectly believes that the
value of her local state is 2 and not 0. However, a reasonable assumption may be that an
agent correctly knows its local state, and may only be mistaken about what it believes to
be the local states of other agents. (This assumption underlies some of our later epistemic
explorations, wherein different vertices of the same colour jointly represent an agent’s beliefs.)
We now have that, for example,

   C, X |= 1b ∧ ¬Bba 1b ∧ Ba 2b   agent a incorrectly believes that the local state of b is 2
   C, Z |= 2b ∧ Ba 2b             but a knows that the local state of b is 2 in global state Z
   C, X |= Bb 1b ∧ Bb Ba 2b       agent b knows that agent a has incorrect beliefs about him

and so forth . . . Note that we only have one modality in the logical language here, the
informal “agent a knows” and “agent b knows” above are only written because in the facets
(global states) where these formulas are interpreted the agents’ beliefs are correct.
    As a side issue, let us now consider the belief function g such that g(a0) = a2, g(c0) = c1,
and otherwise the identity. In the model C i , the distributed knowledge of agents a and c
in facet W is represented by the edge {c0, a0}. Whereas in the model C ii but with belief
function g, agents a and c have distributed belief embodied in the edge {c1, a2}. Group
epistemic notions other than for knowledge were not discussed, but might worth to be
investigated later.
    The belief function is an enrichment of the simplicial model. It does not, on first sight,
seem very topological in nature, and therefore not very simplicial. It rather looks like an
accessibility relation between the worlds of a Kripke model. In fact, taken as a relation, a



                                                                                                     23272
56   23272 – Epistemic and Topological Reasoning in Distributed Systems


     belief function is serial, transitive, and Euclidean, just as required for belief. Let us see how
     we can stretch this analogy a bit further before we return to more topological interpretations,
     in Subsection 4.3.3.

     4.3.2    Revocable Belief, Safe Belief, and Knowledge
     Now assume any function that is a transitive relation. Consider the belief function f that
     maps vertex a0 to a1 and vertex a1 to a2, and therefore, by transitivity, a0 to a2. As follows
     (transitivity is implicit):

     b0             a0             a1           a2
             W
                     X              Y           Z                                                  C iii

             c0              b1           c1          b2

         This induces a (strict) total order on the a vertices such that a0 > a1 > a2, with an
     associated weak total order ≥. We can now interpret this total order as sorting comparable
     a-vertices into more and less plausible, where in this case a2 is most plausible, a1 somewhat
     less, and a0 least, by analogy of the plausibility models of [4] (and not dissimilar to [8, 22],
     see also [11]). Let us additionally write a0 ≧ a2 to indicate that a2 is the most plausible
     local state for a in this total order (or, dually, ≤ and ≦), ≡ for equally plausible, and ∼ for
     comparable.
         We now can assume a multi-modal language and define notions of belief (revocable/defea-
     sible belief), safe belief (strong belief), and knowledge. Depending on one’s preferred dialect
     this can be done in different ways. In the semantics for a-adjoining facets we would get,
     where X ∈ F(C):

          C, X |= Ba φ      iff   C, Y |= φ for all Y ∈ F(C) and v ≦ Xa with v ∈ X
          C, X |= □a φ      iff   C, Y |= φ for all Y ∈ F(C) and v ≤ Xa with v ∈ X
          C, X |= Ka φ      iff   C, Y |= φ for all Y ∈ F(C) and v ∼ Xa with v ∈ X

         The relation ≥ between a-vertices induces a relation ≥a between facets, namely such that
     X ≥a Y if Xa ≥ Ya , and analogously we can induce relations ≧a , ≡a and ∼a . Note that as a
     consequence all facets containing a given local state for agent a are equally plausible for her.
     Using this relation between facets, for the semantics of defeasible belief Ba we would now
     get (where those for □a and Ka are analogous) the following equivalent semantics, where
     for good measure we have added two more equivalent formulations. Which one looks most
     simplicial?

          C, X |= Ba φ      iff   C, Y |= φ for all Y ∈ F(C) with Y ≦a X
          C, x |= Ba φ      iff   C, Y |= φ for all Y ∈ C with v ≦ x and v ∈ Y
          C, x |= Ba φ      iff   C, v |= φ for all v ∈ V(C) with v ≦ x

        As an example of the semantics above we can easily determine in the simplicial model C iii
     that
          C iii , X |= Ba 2b          Note a2 ≦ a0 = Xa , and Z is the only facet containing a2.
          C iii , Y |= □a B
                          bc 1b       Belief in B
                                                bc 1b is safe for a in Y
                                           as Y, Z ≤ Y and both satisfy B  bc 1b .
            iii
          C , Y ̸|= □a 2b             But belief in 2b is not safe for a as Y ̸|= 2b .
          C iii , X ̸|= Ka (0b ∨ 1b ) This is because Z ≤a X and Z ̸|= 0b ∨ 1b .
A. Castañeda, H. van Ditmarsch, R. Kuznets, Y. Moses, and U. Schmid                                             57


    This notion of knowledge is different from the standard notion of simplicial knowledge
applied in model C i . We recall that C i , X |= Ka (0b ∨ 1b ), as knowledge in X means truth
in W and X. Whereas C iii , X ̸|= Ka (0b ∨ 1b ), as this ‘novel’ knowledge in X means truth
in W, X, Y, Z, and 0b ∨ 1b is false in Z.
    This can be adjusted by tentatively proposing a belief quotient of a simplicial model
with respect to a belief function inducing a total order ≤ as above. As we will see this
may not always be a simplicial model, but it seems it always will be a simplicial set. The
belief quotient of a complex C = (C, χ, ℓ) would be C≤ = (C≤ , χ≤ , ℓ≤ ) as follows. Let for
any v ∈ V(C) vertex v≤ be defined as {w ∈ V(C) | w ∼ v}, then V(C≤ ) := {v≤ | v ∈ V(C)}.
Note that the choice of vertex determines its colour, so v≤ is the equivalence class of all
vertices w that are more or less plausible then v for agent χ(v), so there is no need for an ‘a’
as in ≤a . The faces of C≤ now are Y for which there is a Z ∈ C with Y = {v≤ | v ∈ Z}.
As comparable vertices may have different labelings of propositional variables, proposing
               S
ℓ≤ (v≤ ) := {ℓ(v) | w ∼a v} may not be very useful. However, we recall that requiring
labelings to be the same for comparable vertices was already mentioned as a reasonable
assumption for belief functions. Let us therefore assume that all ≤-comparable vertices have
the same labeling. We now can produce some nice examples.
    In C i , the variables 0a , 1a , 2a were only true in a0, a1, a2, respectively. Let us now, instead,
assume that they are true in all three a0, a1, a2 so that 0a ↔ 1a and 1a ↔ 2a on the model.
We now simply take a0≤ to be a0 itself. Given that, and some visual trickery, the belief
quotient of C ii is C iv below.
                                                                                  b2


                                                                                  Z
  b0            a0           a1           a2                     b0          a0         c1
         W                                                             W
                X            Y            Z                  ⇒               X          Y            C iv

         c0           b1            c1             b2                  c0         b1           a1

    Similarly, the belief quotient of C iii is C v below, where we note that this is a simplicial set,
as the edges {a0, b1} and {a0, c1} occur twice in the complex (denoted by the double-lined
edge).

                                                                                        b2


                                                                                         Z
b0             a0             a1              a2                      b0          a0            c1
       W                                                                    W            Y
               X              Y                Z             ⇒                    X                    Cv

        c0            b1             c1                 b2                  c0          b1

    This representation does not make any difference for the semantics, but we are now
back to a possible more pleasing, and familiar, notation for more and less plausible facets
adjoining a vertex. In C iv we have that vertex a0 intersects with W, X, Z where W and X
are equally plausible and Z is more (and most) plausible. In C v we have that vertex a0
intersects with W, X, Y, Z where W and X are equally plausible, both are more plausible
than Y , which is more plausible than Z.



                                                                                                            23272
58   23272 – Epistemic and Topological Reasoning in Distributed Systems


     4.3.3   Polychromatic Simplicial Complexes
     A simple belief function for irrevocable belief, or a more complex belief function to model
     defeasible or strong belief, or even knowledge in a different way, is not a very topological tool.
     Nor is ordering the different facets intersecting in a vertex in the belief quotient version. It
     was widely discussed how to make such ideas into something more topological. Reconsidering
     the simplicial model C ii once more, instead of considering pairs (a0, a1), (a1, a2) (and (a0, a2))
     in a relation, we can also consider such a pair as an edge, which is topology.
         A structure where both vertices of an edge have the same colour would no longer be a
     chromatic simplicial complex, where in any simplex all vertices must have different colours.
     We tentatively call complexes where the χ map may assign the same colour to more than
     one vertex in a simplex a polychromatic simplicial complex.
         Starting out with edges {a0, a1} and {a0, a1} in the model C iii we would get the model C vi
     as below.

     b0            a0            a1            a2
             W
                   X              Y             Z                                                   C vi

             c0           b1            c1            b2

          This model C vi allows for additional epistemic notions, using the novel topological
     information. For example, reminiscent of the plausibility order (but also essentially different,
     as we will see) consider the shortest a-path linking vertices. Given a0, a1 is one step away,
     and a2 is two steps away. Based on that, and somewhat dual to the prior C iii , we can
     interpret this as agent a considering a0 its most plausible local state, a1 less, and a2 least
     (the dual where a2 is most and a0 least plausible from the perspective of a0 seems less
     intuitive in this interpretation). Similarly we can order facets that way, from the perspective
     of a given agent a, where the distance between facets is the length of the shortest a-path
     between them. We now interpret Ba φ as before, as truth in the most plausible facet or
     vertex.
          Note that there is a difference with the previous semantics for total ≤ (and ≤a ) orders:
     the truth of Ba φ depends on the actual facet. This is unlike the notions of belief and
     knowledge employing plausibility models in the previous subsection. These are subjective
     notions that do not depend on the actual point of evaluation (however, unlike strong belief,
     that is an ‘objective’ notion as well, that is, a notion depending on the point of evaluation
     given an equivalence class for an agent).
          In model C vi we would now have that C vi , X |= Ba 0c , whereas C vi , Y |= Ba 1b , and
       vi
     C , Z |= Ba 2b (where all these are distinguishing formulas in the model, that is, only true in
     those facets and in none other).
          If we let pair (a0, a2) in (relation induced by) the belief function count as well, we get
     this model C vii and there seems nothing against considering them as the three edges of a
     triangle, as in C viii :

     b0            a0                          a2
             W                   a1
                   X                            Z                                                  C vii
                                  Y
             c0           b1            c1            b2
A. Castañeda, H. van Ditmarsch, R. Kuznets, Y. Moses, and U. Schmid                                      59


b0            a0                          a2
                            U
        W                   a1
              X                           Z                                                 C viii
                            Y
        c0           b1            c1            b2

    In this more topological interpretation involving simplexes (edges or triangles, here) of
vertices with the same colour, we can maybe somehow interpret this as different mental
states of the same agent, a structured form of the beliefs the agent considers possible. The
representation clearly allows agent a to reason about what her beliefs are in vertex a0 as
different from what her beliefs are in vertex a1, or a2. Relations and generalizations to
(semi-simplicial sets and) simplicial sets are again conceivable. So far, only semi-simplicial
sets have been studied.
    It would also be interesting to investigate what happens if we allow higher-dimensional
paths, such as the chaining in order to obtain common distributed knowledge [5, 24].
    Finally, how can we interpret formulas on simplexes where some but not all vertices are
of the same colour, such as the one below?

        b0

                                                                                              C ix

a0            a1

    Another surely fertile direction of research would be to consider models like C vii and C viii
in a neighbourhood semantics [41, 51], a common framework in modal logical semantics
although infrequently applied to epistemic notions [9]. Exploring neighbourhood semantics
might lead to new insights on coalition logic which found recent application to the specification
and verification of smart contracts [52].
    In neighbourhood semantics, going into simplicial mode, we would have that C, X |= Ka φ
if there is a neighbourhood (a set of facets) of X for agent a such that φ is true in all the
facets in that neighbourhood. Or, possibly more intuitively, given a vertex v with colour a,
Ka φ is true in v if there is an a-neighbourhood of v where φ is true.
    In C vii (or C viii ) facet W has three neighbourhoods for a: {W, X}, {Z}, and {Y }.
Agents b and c only have a singleton neighbourhood in these structures, we revert to
the standard knowledge semantics here. Therefore true in W are: Ka 0c (in {W, X}),
Ka 1b , and Ka 2b . Observe that these three neighbourhoods do not intersect (there are not
any two such that their intersection contains a facet), which, in Kripke semantics, is common
fare for neighbourhoods. (In this sort of interpretation, it seems even impossible.) Although
all this is crying for an intuitive interpretation, we will leave this as such in this report and
instead relay it to further research.

4.3.4   Simplicial Structures for Byzantine Actions
It was agreed upon that before modelling Byzantine agents (that is, unreliable information or
malicious intentions), we needed to have a fitting notion of belief. And indeed that occupied
the main part of this report. It is clear that, as usual in action model logic, similar structures
as presented above for the static notion of belief can be employed to encode dynamic notions
involving deceit, error, and Byzantine conduct in general. Indeed, in simplicial semantics the
“Kripke-style action models” have natural counterparts as simplicial action models [45, 24].



                                                                                                     23272
60   23272 – Epistemic and Topological Reasoning in Distributed Systems


     However, asymmetric versions of that needed for Byzantine communication have not yet
     been investigated. Additionally, novel update mechanisms such as communication patterns
     and related [5, 14] could also be contemplated to model Byzantine conduct. The update
     of simplicial models with communication patterns has been described in [14], including
     summary suggestions how to represent them as “simplicial communication patterns”. All
     these horizons seem currently pretty far away, although mouth-watering in their presumed
     modelling features.
         Let us close this far too short subsection on dynamics with a simplicial action model C x
     representing that agent c dies (that process c crashes), although agents a and b only partially
     observe that, they remain uncertain about this. The preconditions of all three vertices
     are ⊤ (the always true proposition). As before, there are two a–b edges, the lower edge
     is a maximal simplex (the complex is an impure simplicial set). If we update a simplicial
     model with this simplicial action model, any simplex is duplicated into one where c is alive
     and a for a and b indistinguishable one where c is dead. Even more elementary, simplicial
     action model C xi consists of the a–b edge part of C x and models that c is dying, pure and
     simple. And then, finally, to have at least some Byzantine in the picture, the action C xii
     where a incorrectly believes c to be dying, to the despair of b and, obviously, c who both
     observe that.
             c                                                    c

                       Cx                         C xi                                          C xii

      a            b             a            b             a            b     a            b

     References
      1 Kaya Alpturer, Joseph Y. Halpern, and Ron van der Meyden. Optimal eventual Byzantine
          agreement protocols with omission failures. In PODC’23: Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Sym-
          posium on Principles of Distributed Computing, pages 244–252. Association for Computing
          Machinery, 2023. doi:10.1145/3583668.3594573.
      2 Guillaume Aucher and Thomas Bolander. Undecidability in epistemic planning. In Francesca
          Rossi, editor, IJCAI-13, Proceedings of the Twenty-Third International Joint Conference
          on Artificial Intelligence: Beijing, China, 3–9 August 2013, pages 27–33. AAAI Press, 2013.
          Available from: https://www.ijcai.org/Abstract/13/015.
      3 Guillaume Aucher and François Schwarzentruber. On the complexity of dynamic epistemic
          logic. In Burkhard C. Schipper, editor, TARK 2013: Theoretical Aspects of Rationality and
          Knowledge, Proceedings of the 14th Conference – Chennai, India, pages 19–28. University of
          California, Davis, 2013. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1310.6406.
      4 Alexandru Baltag and Sonja Smets. A qualitative theory of dynamic interactive belief
          revision. In Giacomo Bonanno, Wiebe van der Hoek, and Michael Wooldridge, editors,
          Logic and the Foundations of Game and Decision Theory (LOFT 7), volume 3 of Texts
          in Logic and Games, pages 11–58. Amsterdam University Press, 2008. Available from:
          https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt46mz4h.4.
      5 Alexandru Baltag and Sonja Smets. Learning what others know. In Elvira Albert and
          Laura Kovács, editors, LPAR23. LPAR-23: 23rd International Conference on Logic for
          Programming, Artificial Intelligence and Reasoning, volume 73 of EPiC Series in Computing,
          pages 90–119. EasyChair, 2020. doi:10.29007/plm4.
      6 Vaishak Belle, Thomas Bolander, Andreas Herzig, and Bernhard Nebel. Epistemic planning:
          Perspectives on the special issue. Artificial Intelligence, 316:103842, March 2023. doi:
          10.1016/j.artint.2022.103842.
A. Castañeda, H. van Ditmarsch, R. Kuznets, Y. Moses, and U. Schmid                                    61


 7   Ido Ben-Zvi and Yoram Moses. Beyond Lamport’s Happened-before: On time bounds and
     the ordering of events in distributed systems. Journal of the ACM, 61(2):13:1–13:26, April
     2014. doi:10.1145/2542181.
 8   Johan van Benthem. Dynamic logic for belief revision. Journal of Applied Non-Classical
     Logics, 17(2):129–155, 2007. doi:10.3166/jancl.17.129-155.
 9   Johan van Benthem, David Fernández-Duque, and Eric Pacuit. Evidence and plausibility
     in neighborhood structures. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 165(1):106–133, January
     2014. doi:10.1016/j.apal.2013.07.007.
10   Johan van Benthem, Jelle Gerbrandy, Tomohiro Hoshi, and Eric Pacuit. Merging frameworks
     for interaction. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 38(5):491–526, October 2009. doi:10.1007/
     s10992-008-9099-x.
11   Johan van Benthem and Sonja Smets. Dynamic logics of belief change. In Hans van
     Ditmarsch, Joseph Y. Halpern, Wiebe van der Hoek, and Barteld Kooi, editors, Handbook
     of Epistemic Logic, pages 313–393. College Publications, 2015.
12   Patrick Blackburn, Maarten de Rijke, and Yde Venema. Modal Logic, volume 53 of
     Cambridge Tracts in Theoretical Computer Science. Cambridge University Press, 2001.
     doi:10.1017/CBO9781107050884.
13   Thomas Bolander and Mikkel Birkegaard Andersen. Epistemic planning for single- and
     multi-agent systems. Journal of Applied Non-classical Logics, 21(1):9–34, 2011. doi:
     10.3166/jancl.21.9-34.
14   Armando Castañeda, Hans van Ditmarsch, David A. Rosenblueth, and Diego A. Velázquez.
     Communication pattern logic: Epistemic and topological views. Journal of Philosophical
     Logic, 2023. doi:10.1007/s10992-023-09713-8.
15   Armando Castañeda, Hans van Ditmarsch, David A. Rosenblueth, and Diego A. Velázquez.
     Comparing the update expressivity of communication patterns and action models. In Rineke
     Verbrugge, editor, Proceedings Nineteenth conference on Theoretical Aspects of Rationality
     and Knowledge, Oxford, United Kingdom, 28–30th June 2023, volume 379 of Electronic
     Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science, pages 157–172. Open Publishing Association,
     2023. doi:10.4204/EPTCS.379.14.
16   Armando Castañeda, Yannai A. Gonczarowski, and Yoram Moses. Unbeatable consensus.
     Distributed Computing, 35(2):123–143, April 2022. doi:10.1007/s00446-021-00417-3.
17   Armando Castañeda, Sergio Rajsbaum, and Michel Raynal. Long-lived tasks. In Amr
     El Abbadi and Benoît Garbinato, editors, Networked Systems: 5th International Con-
     ference, NETYS 2017, Marrakech, Morocco, May 17–19, 2017, Proceedings, volume
     10299 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 439–454. Springer, 2017. doi:
     10.1007/978-3-319-59647-1_32.
18   Armando Castañeda, Sergio Rajsbaum, and Michel Raynal. Unifying concurrent objects and
     distributed tasks: Interval-linearizability. Journal of the ACM, 65(6):45:1–45:42, December
     2018. doi:10.1145/3266457.
19   K. Mani Chandy and Jayadev Misra. How processes learn. Distributed Computing, 1(1):40–
     52, March 1986. doi:10.1007/BF01843569.
20   Francien Dechesne and Yanjing Wang. To know or not to know: epistemic approaches to
     security protocol verification. Synthese, 177(Supplement 1):51–76, 2010. doi:10.1007/
     s11229-010-9765-8.
21   Cédric Dégremont, Benedikt Löwe, and Andreas Witzel. The synchronicity of dynamic
     epistemic logic. In Krzysztof R. Apt, editor, TARK XIII, Theoretical Aspects of Rationality
     and Knowledge: Proceedings of the Thirteenth Conference (TARK 2011), pages 145–152.
     Association for Computing Machinery, 2011. doi:10.1145/2000378.2000395.
22   Hans van Ditmarsch. Prolegomena to dynamic logic for belief revision. Synthese, 147(2):229–
     275, November 2005. doi:10.1007/s11229-005-1349-7.




                                                                                                   23272
62   23272 – Epistemic and Topological Reasoning in Distributed Systems


     23   Hans van Ditmarsch, Jan van Eijck, Ignacio Hernández-Antón, Floor Sietsma, Sunil Simon,
          and Fernando Soler-Toscano. Modelling cryptographic keys in dynamic epistemic logic with
          DEMO. In Javier Bajo Pérez et al., editor, Highlights on Practical Applications of Agents
          and Multi-Agent Systems: 10th International Conference on Practical Applications of Agents
          and Multi-Agent Systems, volume 156 of Advances in Intelligent and Soft Computing, pages
          155–162. Springer, 2012. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-28762-6_19.
     24   Hans van Ditmarsch, Éric Goubault, Jérémy Ledent, and Sergio Rajsbaum. Knowledge
          and simplicial complexes. In Björn Lundgren and Nancy Abigail Nuñez Hernández, editors,
          Philosophy of Computing: Themes from IACAP 2019, volume 143 of Philosophical Studies
          Series, pages 1–50. Springer, 2022. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-75267-5_1.
     25   Hans van Ditmarsch, Joseph Y. Halpern, Wiebe van der Hoek, and Barteld Kooi. An
          introduction to logics of knowledge and belief. In Hans van Ditmarsch, Joseph Y. Halpern,
          Wiebe van der Hoek, and Barteld Kooi, editors, Handbook of Epistemic Logic, pages 1–51.
          College Publications, 2015.
     26   Hans van Ditmarsch, Wiebe van der Hoek, and Barteld Kooi. Dynamic Epistemic Logic,
          volume 337 of Synthese Library. Springer, 2007. doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-5839-4.
     27   Hans van Ditmarsch, Wiebe van der Hoek, Ron van der Meyden, and Ji Ruan. Model
          checking Russian Cards. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Model Checking and
          Artificial Intelligence (MoChArt 2005), volume 149(2) of Electronic Notes in Theoretical
          Computer Science, pages 105–123. Elsevier, 2006. doi:10.1016/j.entcs.2005.07.029.
     28   Cynthia Dwork and Yoram Moses. Knowledge and common knowledge in a Byzantine
          environment: Crash failures. Information and Computation, 88(2):156–186, October 1990.
          doi:10.1016/0890-5401(90)90014-9.
     29   Jan van Eijck. DEMO – A demo of epistemic modelling. In Johan van Benthem, Dov Gabbay,
          and Benedikt Löwe, editors, Interactive Logic: Selected Papers from the 7th Augustus
          de Morgan Workshop, London, volume 1 of Texts in Logic and Games, pages 303–362.
          Amsterdam University Press, 2007. Available from: https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.
          ctt45kdbf.15.
     30   Jan van Eijck and Malvin Gattinger. Elements of epistemic crypto logic (extended abstract).
          In AAMAS’15: Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Autonomous Agents &
          Multiagent Systems, pages 1795–1796. Association for Computing Machinery, 2015. Available
          from: https://www.ifaamas.org/Proceedings/aamas2015/aamas/p1795.pdf.
     31   Ronald Fagin, Joseph Y. Halpern, Yoram Moses, and Moshe Y. Vardi. Reasoning About
          Knowledge. MIT Press, 1995. doi:10.7551/mitpress/5803.001.0001.
     32   Krisztina Fruzsa, Roman Kuznets, and Ulrich Schmid. Fire! In Joseph Halpern and Andrés
          Perea, editors, Proceedings Eighteenth Conference on Theoretical Aspects of Rationality
          and Knowledge, Beijing, China, June 25–27, 2021, volume 335 of Electronic Proceedings
          in Theoretical Computer Science, pages 139–153. Open Publishing Association, 2021. doi:
          10.4204/EPTCS.335.13.
     33   Eli Gafni. Snapshot for time: The one-shot case. Eprint 1408.3432, arXiv, 2014. doi:
          10.48550/arXiv.1408.3432.
     34   Nina Gierasimczuk and Jakub Szymanik. A note on a generalization of the Muddy Chil-
          dren puzzle. In Krzysztof R. Apt, editor, TARK XIII, Theoretical Aspects of Rationality
          and Knowledge: Proceedings of the Thirteenth Conference (TARK 2011), pages 257–264.
          Association for Computing Machinery, 2011. doi:10.1145/2000378.2000409.
     35   Guy Goren and Yoram Moses. Silence. Journal of the ACM, 67(1):3:1–3:26, February 2020.
          doi:10.1145/3377883.
     36   Éric Goubault, Roman Kniazev, Jérémy Ledent, and Sergio Rajsbaum. Semi-simplicial set
          models for distributed knowledge. In 2023 38th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic
          in Computer Science (LICS). IEEE, 2023. doi:10.1109/LICS56636.2023.10175737.
A. Castañeda, H. van Ditmarsch, R. Kuznets, Y. Moses, and U. Schmid                                     63


37   Éric Goubault, Jérémy Ledent, and Sergio Rajsbaum. A simplicial complex model for dy-
     namic epistemic logic to study distributed task computability. Information and Computation,
     278:104597, June 2021. doi:10.1016/j.ic.2020.104597.
38   Michell Guzmán, Sophia Knight, Santiago Quintero, Sergio Ramírez, Camilo Rueda, and
     Frank Valencia. Reasoning about distributed knowledge of groups with infinitely many
     agents. In Wan Fokkink and Rob van Glabbeek, editors, 30th International Conference on
     Concurrency Theory: CONCUR 2019, August 27–30, 2019, Amsterdam, the Netherlands,
     volume 140 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 29:1–29:15.
     Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.CONCUR.
     2019.29.
39   Joseph Y. Halpern and Yoram Moses. Knowledge and common knowledge in a distributed
     environment. Journal of the ACM, 37(3):549–587, July 1990. doi:10.1145/79147.79161.
40   Joseph Y. Halpern and Lenore D. Zuck. A little knowledge goes a long way: Knowledge-
     based derivations and correctness proofs for a family of protocols. Journal of the ACM,
     39(3):449–478, July 1992. doi:10.1145/146637.146638.
41   Helle Hvid Hansen, Clemens Kupke, and Eric Pacuit. Neighbourhood structures: Bisimilarity
     and basic model theory. Logical Methods in Computer Science, 5(2):2:1–2:38, April 2009.
     doi:10.2168/LMCS-5(2:2)2009.
42   Maurice P. Herlihy, Dmitry Kozlov, and Sergio Rajsbaum. Distributed Computing through
     Combinatorial Topology. Morgan Kaufmann, 2014. doi:10.1016/C2011-0-07032-1.
43   Maurice P. Herlihy and Jeannette M. Wing. Linearizability: A correctness condition for
     concurrent objects. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, 12(3):463–
     492, July 1990. doi:10.1145/78969.78972.
44   Arjen Hommersom, John-Jules Meyer, and Erik de Vink. Update semantics of security
     protocols. Synthese, 142(2):229–267, September 2004. doi:10.1007/s11229-004-2247-0.
45   Jérémy Ledent. Geometric semantics for asynchronous computability. PhD thesis, Paris-
     Saclay University, Palaiseau, France, 2019. Prepared at École polytechnique. Available from:
     https://theses.hal.science/tel-02445180.
46   Qiang Liu and Yongmei Liu. Multi-agent epistemic planning with common knowledge. In
     Jérôme Lang, editor, Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on
     Artificial Intelligence, Stockholm, 13–19 July 2018, pages 1912–1920. International Joint
     Conferences on Artificial Intelligence, 2018. doi:10.24963/ijcai.2018/264.
47   Nancy A. Lynch. Distributed Algorithms. Morgan Kaufmann, 1996.
48   Bastien Maubert, Sophie Pinchinat, François Schwarzentruber, and Silvia Stranieri. Con-
     current games in Dynamic Epistemic Logic. In Christian Bessiere, editor, Proceedings
     of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Yokohama,
     January 2021, pages 1877–1883. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence,
     2020. doi:10.24963/ijcai.2020/260.
49   Yoram Moses. Relating knowledge and coordinated action: The knowledge of preconditions
     principle. In R. Ramanujam, editor, Proceedings Fifteenth Conference on Theoretical Aspects
     of Rationality and Knowledge, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA, June 4–6,
     2015, volume 215 of Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science, pages 231–245.
     Open Publishing Association, 2016. doi:10.4204/EPTCS.215.17.
50   Yoram Moses and Mark R. Tuttle. Programming simultaneous actions using common
     knowledge. Algorithmica, 3(1–4):121–169, November 1988. doi:10.1007/BF01762112.
51   Eric Pacuit. Neighborhood Semantics for Modal Logic. Short Textbooks in Logic. Springer,
     2017. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-67149-9.
52   Marc Pauly and Rohit Parikh. Game Logic – An overview. Studia Logica, 75(2):165–182,
     November 2003. doi:10.1023/A:1027354826364.




                                                                                                    23272
64   23272 – Epistemic and Topological Reasoning in Distributed Systems


     53   Vaughan Pratt. Modeling concurrency with geometry. In Conference Record of the Eigh-
          teenth Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, pages 311–322.
          Association for Computing Machinery, 1991. doi:10.1145/99583.99625.
     54   Krister Segerberg. Irrevocable belief revision in dynamic doxastic logic. Notre Dame Journal
          of Formal Logic, 39(3):287–306, summer 1998. doi:10.1305/ndjfl/1039182247.
     55   Diego A. Velázquez, Armando Castañeda, and David A. Rosenblueth. Communication
          pattern models: An extension of action models for dynamic-network distributed systems. In
          Joseph Halpern and Andrés Perea, editors, Proceedings Eighteenth Conference on Theoretical
          Aspects of Rationality and Knowledge, Beijing, China, June 25–27, 2021, volume 335 of
          Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science, pages 307–321. Open Publishing
          Association, 2021. doi:10.4204/EPTCS.335.29.
A. Castañeda, H. van Ditmarsch, R. Kuznets, Y. Moses, and U. Schmid                                 65


        Participants
 Alexandru Baltag                  Joseph Y. Halpern              Thomas Nowak
University of Amsterdam, NL      Cornell University –          ENS – Gif-sur-Yvette, FR
  Henning Basold                 Ithaca, NY, US                   Ami Paz
Leiden University, NL              Roman Kniazev               CNRS – Gif-sur-Yvette, FR
   Armando Castañeda             École Polytechnique –            Sergio Rajsbaum
National Autonomous University   Palaiseau, FR                 National Autonomous University
of Mexico, MX                     Sophia Knight                of Mexico, MX
 Hans van Ditmarsch              University of Minnesota –        Rojo Randrianomentsoa
CNRS – Toulouse, FR &            Duluth, MN, US                TU Wien, AT
Université de Toulouse, FR        Roman Kuznets                   Hugo Rincón Galeana
 Faith Ellen                     TU Wien, AT                   TU Wien, AT
University of Toronto, CA                                         David A. Rosenblueth
                                   Jérémy Ledent
 Pierre Fraigniaud               University of Strathclyde –   National Autonomous University
CNRS – Paris, FR &               Glasgow, GB                   of Mexico, MX
Université Paris Cité, FR                                         Ulrich Schmid
                                  David Lehnherr
 Krisztina Fruzsa                                              TU Wien, AT
                                 Universität Bern, CH
TU Wien, AT                                                       Sonja Smets
                                  Shihao (Jason) Liu           University of Amsterdam, NL
  Murdoch James Gabbay           University of Toronto, CA
Heriot-Watt University –                                          Thomas Studer
Edinburgh, GB                      Yoram Moses                 Universität Bern, CH
                                 Technion – Haifa, IL
  Guy Goren                                                       Diego A. Velázquez
Protocol Labs – Kibbutz           Susumu Nishimura             National Autonomous University
Nahsholim, IL                    Kyoto University, JP          of Mexico, MX




                                                                                                23272
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 23281

Theoretical Advances and Emerging Applications in
Abstract Interpretation
Arie Gurfinkel∗1 , Isabella Mastroeni∗2 , Antoine Miné∗3 ,
Peter Müller∗4 , and Anna Becchi†5
1       University of Waterloo, CA. arie.gurfinkel@uwaterloo.ca
2       University of Verona, IT. isabella.mastroeni@univr.it
3       Sorbonne University – Paris, FR. antoine.mine@lip6.fr
4       ETH Zürich, CH. peter.mueller@inf.ethz.ch
5       Bruno Kessler Foundation – Trento, IT. abecchi@fbk.eu

        Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 23281 “Theoretical
Advances and Emerging Applications in Abstract Interpretation.”
    Abstract Interpretation (AI) is a theory of the approximation of program semantics. Since its
introduction in the 70s, it lead to insights into theoretical research in semantics, a rich and robust
mathematical framework to discuss about semantic approximation and program analysis, and
the design of effective program analysis tools that are now routinely used in this industry. The
seminar brought together academic and industrial partners to assess the state of the art in AI as
well as discuss its future. It considered its foundational aspects, connections with other formal
methods, emergent applications, user needs in program verification, tool design and evaluation,
as well as educational aspects and community management. Its goal was to collect new ideas and
new perspectives on all these aspects of AI in order to pave the way for new applications.
Seminar July 9–14, 2023 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/23281
2012 ACM Subject Classification Software and its engineering → Automated static analysis;
   Software and its engineering → Completeness; Software and its engineering → Correctness;
   Software and its engineering → Formal methods; Software and its engineering; Software and
   its engineering → Software functional properties; Software and its engineering → Software
   safety; Software and its engineering → Software verification and validation
Keywords and phrases abstract domains, abstract interpretation, program semantics, program
   verification, static program analysis
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.13.7.66



    1    Executive Summary
Antoine Miné (Sorbonne University – Paris, FR)
Arie Gurfinkel (University of Waterloo, CA)
Isabella Mastroeni (University of Verona, IT)
Peter Müller (ETH Zürich, CH)
        License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © Antoine Miné, Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, and Peter Müller


Abstract Interpretation (AI) is a theory of the approximation of possible program behaviors.
Since its introduction in the late 70s, it has evolved into a very general theory to describe and
compare formal semantics of programs and systems. As a more practical aspect, it provides a


∗
    Editor / Organizer
†
    Editorial Assistant / Collector
            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Theoretical Advances and Emerging Applications in Abstract Interpretation, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 13, Issue 7, pp.
66–95
Editors: Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, Antoine Miné, Peter Müller, and Anna Becchi
                    Dagstuhl Reports
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, Antoine Miné, Peter Müller, and Anna Becchi                       67


formal framework to design effective static analyzers that are automatic, sound, and efficient.
The last two decades have seen the emergence of practical tools now used routinely in the
industry, starting with the embedded critical software industry and now being also applied
to more mainstream software.
    Despite its strength, designing new static analyses with AI remains a challenging task,
involving both theoretical research and engineering efforts. The limited diffusion of AI
knowledge in Universities, in Engineering Schools, and in the industry may hinder the
development and more widespread use of AI-based tools. Moreover, the early focus on the
verification of run-time errors in embedded software, while it provided a simpler and more
controlled context than the general problem of verifying consumer software, and resulted
in industrial successes, also could give the false impression that AI is only suitable for this
task, while its theory is in fact much more general. Finally, the AI community has little
interactions with that of other formal methods.
    Based on these early observations, we set out to organize a Dagstuhl seminar on “The-
oretical Advances and Emerging Applications in Abstract Interpretation” to discuss the
state of the art in AI, identify its key challenges, and plan for its future. The seminar
brought together 37 international experts in static analysis, from 10 countries, and from
both academic and industrial background, covering a wide spectrum from pure Abstract
Interpretation (AI) theory, to tool providers, to industrial users.
    To provide a structure to the discussion, the seminar was organized as a series of
topical days focusing on identified aspects (but not excluding other topics) of the state
of the art and perceived challenges in AI: static safety verification, tools and applications,
verification beyond safety analysis, and education. We proposed three invited talks and an
invited tutorial of extended length (1h) and from key people in the community to bootstrap
discussions on a variety of topics, ranging from theoretical AI to industrial tools, and
providing historical perspectives. These were complemented with 23 shorter talks proposed
spontaneously throughout the seminar. These talks, from 10min to 30min long, discussed
a large variety of topics, including new research results, theoretical advances, experience
reports, technical realizations, and reports on teaching activities. A significant number of
presentations discussed connections of AI with other formal methods, including SMT solving,
types, program logic.
    During the seminar, we also organized several breakout sessions, where smaller working
groups discussed a selection of topics: soundness requirements for static analysis tools,
expressive domains, community infrastructure, education, connections with other formal
methods, connections with machine learning, and tackling the verification of hyper-properties.
As a conclusion of these working groups and the overall seminar, several tasks were started
and a number of action items were proposed to advance further:
    The group on soundness requirements proposed a first list of requirements that an
    analyzer should fulfill. It identified the need to discuss these findings with members of
    the soundiness manifesto, which raised awareness on the lack of proper requirements.
    The group on community infrastructure proposed a series of practical actions to build
    the community on AI. It suggested the creation of a Special Interest Group in AI to
    coordinate the efforts.
    The group on teaching started an on-going list (to be completed) of educational materials
    on AI. It presented the need to develop materials targeting undergraduate students and
    practitioners, to make efforts to better share available teaching resources, and to provide
    introductory courses on AI on MOOC platforms.
    The group on the interaction between AI and other formal methods presented relevant
    connections with deductive verification, dynamic techniques, and model checking. In
    particular, it suggested the organization of a seminar on AI and deductive verification.


                                                                                                  23281
68   23281 – Theoretical Advances and Emerging Applications in Abstract Interpretation


        In general, this seminar expressed the interest to continue the discussion on the future of
     AI in further seminars focusing on specific challenges and opportunities as uncovered during
     the seminar, and adapting the list of participants in consequence.
Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, Antoine Miné, Peter Müller, and Anna Becchi                              69


 2      Table of Contents
Executive Summary
  Antoine Miné, Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, and Peter Müller . . . . . . . . 66

Overview of Talks
     Code Reuse Vulnerabilities in Modern Web Applications
     Musard Balliu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    71
     Cooperative Verification
     Dirk Beyer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     71
     Interactive Abstract Interpretation
     Bor-Yuh Evan Chang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
     Formal Verification of Avionics Software
     David Delmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
     Calculating Equational Laws over ADTs
     Gidon Ernst . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
     Teaching Abstract Interpretation with LiSA
     Pietro Ferrara . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   74
     Alpha from Below over Quantified First-order Formulas
     Eden Frenkel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     74
     Fast Approximations of Quantifier Elimination
     Isabel Garcia-Contreras, Arie Gurfinkel, Hari Govind V K, and Sharon Shoham
     Buchbinder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
     Uniform Interpolation for Efficient Domain Reduction
     Isabel Garcia-Contreras, Arie Gurfinkel, and Jorge Navas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
     An incomplete journey in Completeness
     Roberto Giacobazzi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
     Abstract interpretation based under approximations and Sufficient Incorrectness
     Logic
     Roberta Gori . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
     On the fly verification with (incremental) interactive abstract interpretation
     Manuel Hermenegildo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        77
     Automated Reasoning for Privacy
     Temesghen Kahsai . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
     Abstract Interpretation in Industry – Practical Experience with Astrée
     Daniel Kästner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
     SSA Translation Is an Abstract Interpretation, and its Application to Machine
     Code Analysis
     Matthieu Lemerre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
     A Multilanguage Static Analysis of Python/C Programs with Mopsa
     Raphaël Monat and Antoine Miné . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
     Crab: A library for building abstract-interpretation-based analyses
     Jorge Navas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80




                                                                                                         23281
70   23281 – Theoretical Advances and Emerging Applications in Abstract Interpretation


        Calculational Design of Program Logics by Abstract Interpretation
        Patrick Cousot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      81
        Mentorship for Formal Methods
        Ruzica Piskac . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     81
        Abstract Interpretation-based Program (Analysis) Logics
        Francesco Ranzato . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
        VeriCode: Correct Translation of Abstract Specifications to C-Code
        Gerhard Schellhorn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
        Data Race Repair using Static Analysis Summaries
        Ilya Sergey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
        Property-Directed Reachability as Abstract Interpretation in the Monotone Theory
        Sharon Shoham Buchbinder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
        Exploiting Pointer Analysis in Memory Models for Deductive Verification
        Mihaela Sighireanu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      84
        (Un-)Realizability of Condition Synthesis as CHC-SAT
        Yakir Vizel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   84
        Dataflow Refinement Type Inference
        Thomas Wies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
        Timing Analysis by Abstract Interpretation
        Reinhard Wilhelm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85

     Working groups
        Soundness requirements, transparency of assumptions
        Bor-Yuh Evan Chang and Raphaël Monat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
        Expressive Domains
        Gidon Ernst . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     87
        Education: Teaching Abstract Interpretation to the Masses
        Pietro Ferrara . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
        Community Infrastructure – Interest Group in Static Analysis
        Pietro Ferrara . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
        Abstract Interpretation and Other Formal Methods
        Arie Gurfinkel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
        Tools and Applications for Abstract Interpretation
        Falk Howar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      91
        Hyperproperties verification
        Isabella Mastroeni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
        AI for AI
        Antoine Miné . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93

     Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, Antoine Miné, Peter Müller, and Anna Becchi                                         71


 3      Overview of Talks
3.1     Code Reuse Vulnerabilities in Modern Web Applications
Musard Balliu (KTH Royal Institute of Technology – Stockholm, SE)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Musard Balliu
 Joint work of Mikhail Shcherbakov, Musard Balliu, Cristian-Alexandru Staicu
Main reference Mikhail Shcherbakov, Musard Balliu, Cristian-Alexandru Staicu: “Silent Spring: Prototype Pollution
               Leads to Remote Code Execution in Node.js”, in Proc. of the 32nd USENIX Security Symposium,
               USENIX Security 2023, Anaheim, CA, USA, August 9-11, 2023, pp. 5521–5538, USENIX
               Association, 2023.
          URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity23/presentation/shcherbakov


We study code reuse vulnerabilities in modern web application. Prototype pollution is a
dangerous vulnerability affecting prototype-based languages like JavaScript and the Node.js
platform. It refers to the ability of an attacker to inject properties into an object’s root
prototype at runtime and subsequently trigger the execution of legitimate code gadgets that
access these properties on the object’s prototype, leading to attacks such as Denial of Service
(DoS), privilege escalation, and Remote Code Execution (RCE).
    In this work, we set out to study the problem in a holistic way, from the detection of
prototype pollution to detection of gadgets, with the goal of finding end-to-end exploits
beyond DoS, in full-fledged Node.js applications. We build a multi-staged framework that
uses multi-label static taint analysis to identify prototype pollution in Node.js libraries
and applications, as well as a hybrid approach to detect universal gadgets, notably, by
analyzing the Node.js source code. We implement our framework on top of GitHub’s static
analysis framework CodeQL to find 11 universal gadgets in core Node.js APIs, leading to code
execution. Furthermore, we use our methodology in a study of 15 popular Node.js applications
to identify prototype pollutions and gadgets. We manually exploit eight RCE vulnerabilities
in three high-profile applications such as NPM CLI, Parse Server, and Rocket.Chat.



3.2     Cooperative Verification
Dirk Beyer (LMU München, DE)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Dirk Beyer
 Joint work of Dirk Beyer, Heike Wehrheim
Main reference Dirk Beyer, Heike Wehrheim: “Verification Artifacts in Cooperative Verification: Survey and
               Unifying Component Framework”, in Proc. of the Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods,
               Verification and Validation: Verification Principles – 9th International Symposium on Leveraging
               Applications of Formal Methods, ISoLA 2020, Rhodes, Greece, October 20-30, 2020, Proceedings,
               Part I, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 12476, pp. 143–167, Springer, 2020.
          URL https://doi.org//10.1007/978-3-030-61362-4_8


Cooperative verification is an approach in which several verifiers help each other solving
the verification problem by sharing artifacts about the verification process. There are many
verification tools available, and they have different strengths. While the tools continuously
increase their individual capabilities, the potential of cooperation is largely unused. The
problem is that in order to use verifiers ’off-the-shelf’, we need clear interfaces to invoke the
tools and to pass information. Part of the interfacing problem is to define standard artifacts
to be exchanged between verifiers. We explain a few recent approaches for cooperative
combinations that are based on verification witnesses as exchange format, including witness




                                                                                                                    23281
72   23281 – Theoretical Advances and Emerging Applications in Abstract Interpretation


     validation, component-based CEGAR, and exchanging invariants between automatic and
     interactive verifiers. We also give a brief overview of CoVeriTeam, a tool for composing
     verification systems from existing off-the-shelf components.
     References
     1    Beyer, D., Dangl, M., Wendler, P.: A unifying view on SMT-based software verification. J.
          Autom. Reasoning 60(3), 299–335 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10817-017-9432-6
     2    Beyer, D., Haltermann, J., Lemberger, T., Wehrheim, H.: Decomposing Software Verification
          into Off-the-Shelf Components: An Application to CEGAR. In: Proc. ICSE. pp. 536–548.
          ACM (2022). https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.3510064
     3    Beyer, D., Kanav, S.: CoVeriTeam: On-demand composition of cooperative verification
          systems. In: Proc. TACAS. pp. 561–579. LNCS 13243, Springer (2022). https://doi.org/
          10.1007/978-3-030-99524-9_31
     4    Beyer, D., Keremoglu, M.E.: CPAchecker: A tool for configurable software verification.
          In: Proc. CAV. pp. 184–190. LNCS 6806, Springer (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/
          978-3-642-22110-1_16
     5    Beyer, D., Spiessl, M., Umbricht, S.: Cooperation between automatic and interactive
          software verifiers. In: Proc. SEFM. p. 111–128. LNCS 13550, Springer (2022). https:
          //doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-17108-6_7
     6    Beyer, D., Wehrheim, H.: Verification artifacts in cooperative verification: Survey and
          unifying component framework. In: Proc. ISoLA (1). pp. 143–167. LNCS 12476, Springer
          (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61362-4_8



     3.3     Interactive Abstract Interpretation
     Bor-Yuh Evan Chang (University of Colorado – Boulder, US)
           License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Bor-Yuh Evan Chang
      Joint work of Benno Stein, Bor-Yuh Evan Chang, Manu Sridharan, David Flores
     Main reference Benno Stein, Bor-Yuh Evan Chang, Manu Sridharan: “Demanded abstract interpretation”, in Proc.
                    of the PLDI ’21: 42nd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Programming Language Design
                    and Implementation, Virtual Event, Canada, June 20-25, 2021, pp. 282–295, ACM, 2021.
               URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3453483.3454044


     We consider the problem of making expressive static analyzers interactive. Formal static
     analysis is seeing increasingly widespread adoption as a tool for verification and bug-finding,
     but even with powerful cloud infrastructure it can take minutes or hours to get batch
     analysis results after a code change. While existing techniques offer some demand-driven or
     incremental aspects for certain classes of analysis, the fundamental challenge we tackle is doing
     both for arbitrary abstract interpreters. Our technique, demanded abstract interpretation,
     lifts program syntax and analysis state to a dynamically evolving graph structure, in which
     program edits, client-issued queries, and evaluation of abstract semantics are all treated
     uniformly.
Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, Antoine Miné, Peter Müller, and Anna Becchi                                          73


3.4     Formal Verification of Avionics Software
David Delmas (Airbus S.A.S. – Toulouse, FR)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © David Delmas
 Joint work of David Delmas, Antoine Miné, Abdelraouf Ouadjaout, Famantanantsoa Randimbivololona,
               Abderrahmane Brahmi
Main reference David Delmas, Abdelraouf Ouadjaout, Antoine Miné: “Static Analysis of Endian Portability by
               Abstract Interpretation”, in Proc. of the Static Analysis – 28th International Symposium, SAS 2021,
               Chicago, IL, USA, October 17-19, 2021, Proceedings, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 12913,
               pp. 102–123, Springer, 2021.
          URL https://doi.org//10.1007/978-3-030-88806-0_5
Main reference Abdellatif Atki, Abderrahmane Brahmi, David Delmas, Mohamed Habib Essoussi, Famantanantsoa
               Randimbivololona, Thomas Marie: “Formalise to automate: deployment of a safe and cost-efficient
               process for avionics software”.In ERTSS: Proc. of the 9th European Congress on Embedded Real
               Time Software and Systems, Jan 2018, Toulouse, France.
          URL https://www.di.ens.fr/ delmas/erts18/
Main reference David Delmas: “Static analysis of program portability by abstract interpretation”, 2022.
          URL https://theses.hal.science/tel-04028096


The size and complexity of avionics software have grown exponentially from one aircraft
generation to the next in the past 4 decades. Traditional software development processes
leveraging informal verification techniques fail to scale within reasonable costs. In particular,
verification is liable for a steadily growing share of the overall development costs. The 2015
current status was about 70.
    To address this issue, Airbus have been transforming internal development processes since
2016. Internal domain-specific languages have been developed to enable the formalization of
design artifacts, and automate part of verification activities. Automation is enabled by the
interoperation of tools relying on sound formal techniques. For instance, Frama-C/WP and
SMT-solvers are used to automate unit verification with deductive methods. Most so-called
Unit Proofs are automatic, assuming high-level memory and numerical models, as well as
some preconditions. Such assumptions are verified by other tools, such as the Astrée static
analyzer, which leverages Abstract Interpretation to prove the absence of run-time errors and
check assumed non-aliasing properties. We rely on the CompCert formally verified compiler
to enable that most formal verification activities may be conducted on source code.
    Beyond safety properties and currently established processes, we also develop internally
static analyses by Abstract Interpretation to automate regression verification and portability
verification. In particular, our portability analysis is able to prove without false alarms the
portability of low-level C avionics software up to 1 million lines of C across platforms with
opposite byte-orders (endianness).



3.5     Calculating Equational Laws over ADTs
Gidon Ernst (LMU München, DE)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Gidon Ernst
 Joint work of Gidon Ernst, Grigory Fedyukovich, Robin Sögtrop


We motivate the use of program transformation, traditionally used for the optimization of
functional programs, as basic building blocks for lemma synthesis for recursive functions
over algebraic data types. The key idea is to calculate at the function level instead of at the
formula level, which allows one to work with intermediate syntactic functions. An important
step therefore is to complement existing techniques (fixpoint fusion, deaccumulation) with




                                                                                                                     23281
74   23281 – Theoretical Advances and Emerging Applications in Abstract Interpretation


     capabilities to recognize when two functions are identical resp. share commonalities wrt.
     preconditions. The approach, work in progress, discovers typical distributive laws of list/tree
     functions like length, append, remove, which are similar in shape to those lemmas often
     required for data refinement proofs.



     3.6    Teaching Abstract Interpretation with LiSA
     Pietro Ferrara (University of Venice, IT)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Pietro Ferrara
      Joint work of Pietro Ferrara, Luca Negrini, Vincenzo Arceri


     LiSA (LIbrary for Static Analysis – https://github.com/lisa-analyzer/lisa) is a Java
     library that implements the most common components of abstract interpretation-based static
     analyses. In this talk, we report our experience when adopting LiSA during courses at the
     master level focused on the theory of abstract interpretation. LiSA allowed students to
     implement, execute, and practice the theoretical concepts formalized throughout the course.
     However, it turned out that proper implementation of non-trivial abstract domains is beyond
     the capabilities of standard CS master students.



     3.7    Alpha from Below over Quantified First-order Formulas
     Eden Frenkel (Tel Aviv University, IL)
           License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Eden Frenkel
      Joint work of Eden Frenkel, Sharon Shoham Buchbinder, Oded Padon, Tej Chajed


     Often, verification of infinite-state and other complex systems, such as the Paxos consensus
     protocol, must work for unbounded domains. Quantified first-order logic allows us to reason
     over these unbounded domains, describe the desired behavior of these systems, and specify
     correctness properties. This is done by constructing formulas that describe the initial states
     of the system and its possible transitions, as well as formalizing the notion of illegal or
     unwanted states. A proof for the safety of a system then becomes an unreachability proof for
     the bad states, which can be provided via another formula, a safety invariant, which holds
     on the initial states, is invariant with respect to the transitions, and doesn’t hold on the bad
     states.
         In this work we tackle invariant inference though the framework of abstract interpretation.
     We propose an algorithm that computes the strongest over-approximation of reachable states
     by iteratively sampling counter-examples to induction, but which is highly infeasible due to
     the magnitude of the abstract domain and SMT solver limitations. We proceed by presenting
     techniques based on syntactic subsumption that manage to avoid redundant formulas and
     explore an identically expressive search space exponentially more efficiently, and generalize
     to the abstract domain of first-order formulas.
Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, Antoine Miné, Peter Müller, and Anna Becchi                                      75


3.8     Fast Approximations of Quantifier Elimination
Isabel Garcia-Contreras (University of Waterloo, CA), Arie Gurfinkel (University of Waterloo,
CA), Hari Govind V K, and Sharon Shoham Buchbinder (Tel Aviv University, IL)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Isabel Garcia-Contreras, Arie Gurfinkel, Hari Govind V K, and Sharon Shoham Buchbinder
Main reference Isabel Garcia-Contreras, Hari Govind V. K., Sharon Shoham, Arie Gurfinkel: “Fast Approximations
               of Quantifier Elimination”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2306.10009, 2023.
          URL https://doi.org//10.48550/ARXIV.2306.10009


Quantifier elimination (qelim) is used in many automated reasoning tasks including program
synthesis, exist-forall solving, quantified SMT, Model Checking, and solving Constrained Horn
Clauses (CHCs). Exact qelim is computationally expensive. Hence, it is often approximated.
For example, Z3 uses “light” pre-processing to reduce the number of quantified variables.
CHC-solver Spacer uses model-based projection (MBP) to under-approximate qelim relative
to a given model, and over-approximations of qelim can be used as abstractions. In this talk,
we present the QEL framework for fast approximations of qelim. QEL provides a uniform
interface for both quantifier reduction and model-based projection. QEL builds on the egraph
data structure – the core of the EUF decision procedure in SMT – by casting quantifier
reduction as a problem of choosing ground (i.e., variable-free) representatives for equivalence
classes. We have used QEL to implement MBP for the theories of Arrays and Algebraic
Data Types (ADTs). We integrated QEL and our new MBP in Z3 and evaluated it within
several tasks that rely on quantifier approximations, outperforming state-of-the-art.



3.9     Uniform Interpolation for Efficient Domain Reduction
Isabel Garcia-Contreras (University of Waterloo, CA), Arie Gurfinkel (University of Waterloo,
CA), and Jorge Navas (Certora – Seattle, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Isabel Garcia-Contreras, Arie Gurfinkel, and Jorge Navas


Handling precise abstract values over large sets of program variables is costly. A solution
is to split such “monolithic” values (over the whole set of program variables) into several
subvalues over smaller subsets of variables. Applying abstract transformers separately to
each subvalue is then more efficient than to the monolithic one, but typically incurs precision
loss. To address this, one can transfer information between subvalues, a process known as
reduction. Reduction is done iteratively by refining a subvalue using information from other
subvalues until no values are further refined. Information transfer can be stopped at any
time, guaranteeing soundness. Convergence is not ensured. In this talk, we study termination
and precision properties of reduction from the perspective of logic. We define the notion of
refutational equivalence between a monolithic and split value as a practical way to understand
when a split domain is “precise enough”. Our main result is that if the theories used in
the abstract domain admit and are closed uniform interpolation, reduction can be done in
one step – by computing the uniform interpolant of the formula – guaranteeing refutational
equivalence. For theories (or their combination) that do not admit uniform interpolation, or
are not closed under uniform interpolation, we show that if a uniform interpolant is found,
the reduction procedure can be immediately stopped, guaranteeing the best precision for the
partitioned domain.




                                                                                                                 23281
76   23281 – Theoretical Advances and Emerging Applications in Abstract Interpretation


     3.10      An incomplete journey in Completeness
     Roberto Giacobazzi (University of Verona, IT)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Roberto Giacobazzi


     In this talk I will present some results concerning the bridge between the theory of computation
     and abstract interpretation. The two theories differ profoundly in the way programs are
     interpreted: In the standard theory of computation program equivalence is extensional, we
     have compositionally and referential transparency. Abstract interpretation instead is deeply
     intensional, non compositional (in the sense that by composition we may lose precision).
     However, it is possible to view the theory of abstract interpretation from the perspective
     of the theory of computation. In this case a different notion of program equivalence is
     considered – the one defined by the equivalence of the abstract interpretations, and push the
     theory of abstract interpretation to its limits by studying the properties of abstraction that
     make an abstract interpretation closer to the standard notion of interpretation as originally
     defined by A. Turing. Interestingly, a analogous of Rice Theorem can be stated for abstract
     interpretation and a number of results can be obtained for classes of programs for which an
     abstract interpreter is precise (complete).



     3.11      Abstract interpretation based under approximations and Sufficient
               Incorrectness Logic
     Roberta Gori (University of Pisa, IT)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Roberta Gori
      Joint work of Flavio Ascari, Roberto Bruni, Roberta Gori, Francesco Logozzo
     Main reference Flavio Ascari, Roberto Bruni, Roberta Gori: “Limits and difficulties in the design of
                    under-approximation abstract domains”, in Proc. of the Foundations of Software Science and
                    Computation Structures – 25th International Conference, FOSSACS 2022, Held as Part of the
                    European Joint Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS 2022, Munich, Germany,
                    April 2-7, 2022, Proceedings, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 13242, pp. 21–39, Springer,
                    2022.
               URL https://doi.org//10.1007/978-3-030-99253-8_2


     To address bug finding rather than correctness, Incorrectness Logic has been recently
     proposed by O’Hearn: it is based on under-approximations, thus it only reports true
     alarms. In principle, Abstract Interpretation techniques can handle under-approximations
     as well as over-approximations, but, in practice, few attempts were developed for the
     former, notwithstanding the wide literature on the latter. We aim to answer the following
     open question raised by O’Hearn: which role can Abstract Interpretation play in the
     development of under-approximate tools for bug catching? Our findings clarify, for the first
     time, why over- and under-approximation analysers exhibited such a different development
     and outline the limits of under-approximation Abstract Interpretation based analyses. Our
     key argument is the practical difficulty to design an effective under-approximation abstract
     domain able to deal with common program statements. For this reasons we investigate
     logics for underapproximations. We introduce Sufficient Incorrectness Logic (SIL), a new
     under-approximating, triple-based program logic to reason about program errors. SIL is
     designed to set apart the initial states leading to errors. We formally compare SIL to existing
     triple-based program logics.
Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, Antoine Miné, Peter Müller, and Anna Becchi                                      77


3.12      On the fly verification with (incremental) interactive abstract
          interpretation
Manuel Hermenegildo (IMDEA Software Institute – Pozuelo de Alarcón, ES & UPM – Madrid,
ES)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Manuel Hermenegildo
 Joint work of Manuel Hermenegildo, Isabel Garcia-Contreras, José F. Morales, Pedro López-García, Louis
               Rustenholz, Daniela Ferreiro, Daniel Jurjo
Main reference Miguel A. Sanchez-Ordaz, Isabel Garcia-Contreras, Victor Perez-Carrasco, José F. Morales, Pedro
               López-García, Manuel V. Hermenegildo: “VeriFly: On-the-fly Assertion Checking via
               Incrementality”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2106.07045, 2021.
          URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.07045


We demonstrated how the integration of the Ciao abstract interpretation framework within
different IDEs takes advantage of our efficient and incremental fixpoint to achieve effective
verification on-the-fly, as the program is developed. We also demonstrated an embedding of
this framework within the browser, and how it can be used to build interactive tutorials for
teaching abstract interpretation.

Further reading
The work and demo presented builds on several specific components of the Ciao abstract
interpretation framework:
    The “top-down” algorithm: (a.k.a. the PLAI algorithm) is the fundamental component
    of our approach: see [4] and [5]. The latter is a step by step tutorial on how the algorithm
    was derived, the reasons for the different optimizations, etc. and is probably the best single
    reference for the original “top-down algorithm.” This first algorithm already achieves
    precision and efficiency through the use of memo tables; inferring call-answer pairs (aka
    summaries, precondition-postcondition pairs, etc.) which can be several per each procedure
   / block / program point (a.k.a. multivariance, path/context/call-site sensitivity, cloning,
    etc.); abstraction of the paths and recursions/loops in the program as graphs / regular
    trees; detection of SCCs; dependency tracking between memo table entries for accelerating
    the fixpoint (keeping track of what has to be recomputed when something changes, which
    is later instrumental for incremental analysis); handles procedures (projection, extension),
    including (mutual) recursion; etc. It is also generic in the sense that it takes care on
    one hand of abstracting the control: paths, dynamic CFG, procedure call and return
   (projection, extension), including (mutual) recursion, etc. Then, multiple ’abstract
    domains’ are available as plug-ins to abstract the data: recursive heap data structures,
    pointer aliasing, numerical domains, etc.
    Incremental Analysis: After developing the PLAI algorithm we developed and bench-
    marked the incremental version. It was first described in [2], which was later published
    in longer form as [3], and an improved incremental algorithm was later described in [6].
    Finally, we recently extended the ’96 algorithm to deal at the same time with modules
   (coarse-grained incrementality) and fine-grained incrementality within each module [1].
    Interactive verification: The final component is the integration of the analyer/verifier-
   /optimizer CiaoPP in the IDE. The latest version of this integration (“Verifly” [8, 7]),
    put in practice the idea of interactive verification with abstract interpretation.




                                                                                                                 23281
78   23281 – Theoretical Advances and Emerging Applications in Abstract Interpretation


     References
     1    I. Garcia-Contreras, J. F. Morales, and M. V. Hermenegildo. Incremental and Modular
          Context-sensitive Analysis. Theory and Practice of Logic Programming, 21(2):196–243,
          January 2021. https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.01839
     2    M. V. Hermenegildo, G. Puebla, K. Marriott, and P. Stuckey. Incremental Analysis of Logic
          Programs. In International Conference on Logic Programming, pages 797–811. MIT Press,
          June 1995. https://cliplab.org/papers/incanal-iclp95_bitmap.pdf
     3    M. V. Hermenegildo, G. Puebla, K. Marriott, and P. Stuckey. Incremental Analysis of
          Constraint Logic Programs. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems,
          22(2):187–223, March 2000. https://cliplab.org/papers/incanal-toplas.pdf
     4    K. Muthukumar and M. Hermenegildo. Determination of Variable Dependence Information
          at Compile-Time Through Abstract Interpretation. In 1989 North American Conference
          on Logic Programming, pages 166–189. MIT Press, October 1989. https://cliplab.org/
          papers/abs-int-naclp89.pdf
     5    K. Muthukumar and M. Hermenegildo. Deriving A Fixpoint Computation Algorithm for
          Top-down Abstract Interpretation of Logic Programs. Technical Report ACT-DC-153-90,
          Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation (MCC), Austin, TX 78759, April
          1990. http://cliplab.org/papers/mcctr-fixpt.pdf
     6    G. Puebla and M. V. Hermenegildo. Optimized Algorithms for the Incremental Analysis
          of Logic Programs. In International Static Analysis Symposium (SAS 1996), number 1145
          in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 270–284. Springer-Verlag, September 1996.
          https://cliplab.org/papers/inc-fixp-sas_bitmap.pdf
     7    M. A. Sanchez-Ordaz, I. Garcia-Contreras, V. Perez-Carrasco, J. F. Morales, P. Lopez-
          Garcia, and M.V. Hermenegildo. VeriFly: On-the-fly Assertion Checking with CiaoPP.
          In 6th Workshop on Formal Integrated Development Environment (F-IDE 2021, part of
          NASA NFM’21), Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science (EPTCS), pages
          1–5. Open Publishing Association (OPA), May 2021. Co-located with ETAPS 2021. https:
          //cister-labs.pt/f-ide2021/images/preprints/F-IDE_2021_paper_7.pdf
     8    M.A. Sanchez-Ordaz, I. Garcia-Contreras, V. Perez-Carrasco, J. F. Morales, P. Lopez-
          Garcia, and M. V. Hermenegildo. Verifly: On-the-fly Assertion Checking via Incrementality.
          Theory and Practice of Logic Programming, 21(6):768–784, September 2021. Special Issue
          on ICLP’21. http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.07045



     3.13      Automated Reasoning for Privacy
     Temesghen Kahsai (Amazon Lab 126, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Temesghen Kahsai


     Automated reasoning techniques offer an exceptional avenue to attain the utmost assurance
     in safeguarding data privacy. In this presentation, we will explore our adaptations of these
     techniques in addressing vital inquiries concerning code and cloud infrastructure, aimed
     at identifying potentially harmful misconfigurations. We will delve into the deployment
     of highly scalable static analysis for sensitive data tracking, the utilization of a provably
     correct differential privacy library to guarantee the safety of shared aggregated data, and the
     implementation of diverse pseudo-anonymization methods to safeguard sensitive information.
Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, Antoine Miné, Peter Müller, and Anna Becchi                                   79


3.14      Abstract Interpretation in Industry – Practical Experience with
          Astrée
Daniel Kästner (AbsInt – Saarbrücken, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Daniel Kästner


The presentation gives a brief overview of the verification goals addressed by the Astrée
analyzer, and then focuses on the development history from the ready-for-market academic
version from 2009 till today’s state. Enhancements are grouped into different categories,
usability, compliance to formal requirements, new capabilities, domain-specific extensions,
precision improvement and optimizations for scalability. The current state is briefly summar-
ized by experimental results on automotive integration analysis projects, taken from our 2023
SAE conference paper. We then briefly summarize “selling points” of verification tools to
industry users with an emphasis on the role of safety norms: they define the minimum state
of the art for system development and play a fundamental role in the adoption of tools in
industrial development processes. We give examples how abstract interpretation is addressed
in DO-178C and ISO 26262, observe that it is entirely missing in others, and conclude that
it is under-representated in today’s safety norms. The presentation ends with listing some
verification challenges we see upcoming due to current market trends.
References
1    D. Kästner, C. Mallon, L. Mauborgne, S. Schank, S. Wilhelm, C. Ferdinand. Automatic
     Sound Static Analysis for Integration Verification of AUTOSAR Software. SAE Technical
     Paper 2023-01-0591, SAE World Congress 2023, Detroit, April 2023. DOI: https://doi.
     org/10.4271/2023-01-0591



3.15      SSA Translation Is an Abstract Interpretation, and its Application
          to Machine Code Analysis
Matthieu Lemerre (CEA LIST – Gif-sur-Yvette, FR)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Matthieu Lemerre
 Joint work of Matthieu Lemerre, Olivier Nicole, Xavier Rival, Sébastien Bardin
Main reference Matthieu Lemerre: “SSA Translation Is an Abstract Interpretation”, Proc. ACM Program. Lang.,
               Vol. 7(POPL), pp. 1895–1924, 2023.
          URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3571258


Conversion to Static Single Assignment (SSA) form is usually viewed as a syntactic trans-
formation algorithm that gives unique names to program variables, and reconciles these
names using “phi” functions based on a notion of domination. We instead propose a semantic
approach, where SSA translation is performed using a simple dataflow analysis. Based on a
new technique to use cyclic terms in abstract domains, we propose a Symbolic Expression
abstract domain that performs a Global Value Numbering analysis, upon which we build our
SSA translation. This implies a shift in perspective, as global value numbering becomes a
prerequisite of SSA translation, instead of depending on SSA.
   One application to performing SSA Translation by Abstract Interpretation is that SSA
optimizations passes can be implemented as a combination of abstract domains, allowing to
perform several optimizations simultaneously to solve the usual phase ordering problem and
avoiding tedious maintenance of SSA invariants.




                                                                                                              23281
80   23281 – Theoretical Advances and Emerging Applications in Abstract Interpretation


         Our main motivation for this research is an analyser for machine code which uses SSA as
     its main intermediate representation. Machine code is too low-level to allow SSA translation
     without a prior semantic analysis, while SSA is an intermediate representation that makes
     static analysis easier than direct analysis of machine code. Viewing SSA translation as a
     semantic analysis solves this chicken-and-egg problem, allowing to simultaneously decompile
     machine code to SSA and use the SSA representation to perform the other semantic analyses
     (value analysis, memory analysis, and control-flow analysis). We illustrate the use of such
     an analysis on an embedded OS kernel where we prove security properties directly from its
     executable.
     References
     1    Matthieu Lemerre: SSA Translation Is an Abstract Interpretation. In Principle of Program-
          ming Languages (POPL), 2023.
     2    O. Nicole, M. Lemerre, S. Bardin, X. Rival: No Crash, No Exploit : Automated Verification
          of Embedded Kernels . In Real-time systems and applications (RTAS), 2021



     3.16      A Multilanguage Static Analysis of Python/C Programs with
               Mopsa
     Raphaël Monat (INRIA Lille, FR) and Antoine Miné (Sorbonne University – Paris, FR)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Raphaël Monat and Antoine Miné
      Joint work of Ouadjaout, Abdelraouf; Miné, Antoine
     Main reference Raphaël Monat, Abdelraouf Ouadjaout, Antoine Miné: A Multilanguage Static Analysis of Python
                    Programs with Native C Extensions. SAS 2021: 323-345
               URL https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-88806-0_16


     Mopsa is a conservative static analysis platform, independent of language and abstraction
     choices. Developers are free to add arbitrary abstractions (numeric, pointer, memory, etc.)
     and syntax iterators for new languages. Mopsa encourages the development of independent
     abstractions which can cooperate or be combined to improve precision. In this talk, we will
     show how Mopsa analyses Python programs calling C libraries. It analyses directly and fully
     automatically both the Python and the C source codes. It reports runtime errors that may
     happen in Python, in C, and at the interface. We implemented our analysis in a modular
     fashion: it reuses off-the-shelf C and Python analyses written in the same analyzer. Our
     analyzer can tackle tests of real-world libraries a few thousand lines of C and Python long.
        This talk is based on our SAS’21 paper.



     3.17      Crab: A library for building abstract-interpretation-based analyses
     Jorge Navas (Certora – Seattle, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Jorge Navas


     Crab is an open-source library that helps to develop static analyses based on the theory of
     Abstract Interpretation. It provides a variety of software components such as inter-procedural
     forward and backward analyses, fixpoint solvers and a rich set of abstract domains, including
     interfaces with numerical abstract domain libraries such as Apron, Elina or PPLite.
Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, Antoine Miné, Peter Müller, and Anna Becchi                                   81


    This tutorial focuses on demonstrating how to use Crab from the perspective of two
different kinds of users: (1) the ones who want to quick prototype new abstractions by
combining existing abstract domains, and (2) those who want to develop new static analyses
using Crab as a black-box. We show several interactive demos on how to derive new
abstractions based on the combination of an array domain with relational numerical domains
to prove memory safety of eBPF programs and how to implement a new LLVM-based static
analyzer to infer upper-bounds for dynamic memory allocation in less than 100 lines of C++
code.



3.18      Calculational Design of Program Logics by Abstract Interpretation
Patrick Cousot
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Patrick Cousot
Main reference Submitted


We study transformational program logics for correctness and incorrectness that we extend to
explicitly handle both termination and nontermination. We show that the logics are abstract
interpretations of the right image transformer for a natural relational semantics covering both
finite and infinite executions. This understanding of logics as abstractions of a semantics
facilitates their comparisons through their respective abstractions of the semantics (rather
that the much more difficult comparison through their formal deductive systems). More
importantly, the formalization provides a calculational method for constructively designing
the sound and complete formal deductive system by abstraction of the semantics. As an
example, we extend Hoare logic to cover all possible behaviors of nondeterministic programs
and design a new precondition (in)correctness logics. This logic can be used to prove that
false alarms in static analysis are due to the over approximation of nonterminating behaviors
by terminating over approximation in the analysis which cannot be done by incorrectness or
outcome logic is unreachable in the concrete (although it is reachable in the abstract).



3.19      Mentorship for Formal Methods
Ruzica Piskac (Yale University – New Haven, US)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Ruzica Piskac
 Joint work of Mark Santolucito, Ruzica Piskac
Main reference Mark Santolucito, Ruzica Piskac: “Formal Methods and Computing Identity-based Mentorship for
               Early Stage Researchers”, in Proc. of the 51st ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science
               Education, SIGCSE 2020, Portland, OR, USA, March 11-14, 2020, pp. 135–141, ACM, 2020.
          URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3328778.3366957


The field of formal methods relies on a large body of background knowledge that can dissuade
researchers from engaging with younger students, such as undergraduates or high school
students. However, we have found that formal methods can be an excellent entry point to
computer science research – especially in the framing of Computing Identity-based Mentorship.
In this talk, we report on our experience in using a cascading mentorship model to involve
early stage researchers in formal methods, covering the process with these students from
recruitment to publication. We present case studies and how we were able to integrate formal
methods research with the students’ own interests. We outline some key strategies that have
led to success and reflect on strategies that have been, in our experience, inefficient.


                                                                                                              23281
82   23281 – Theoretical Advances and Emerging Applications in Abstract Interpretation


     3.20      Abstract Interpretation-based Program (Analysis) Logics
     Francesco Ranzato (University of Padova, IT)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Francesco Ranzato
      Joint work of Roberto Bruni, Roberto Giacobazzi, Roberta Gori, Francesco Ranzato
     Main reference Roberto Bruni, Roberto Giacobazzi, Roberta Gori, Francesco Ranzato: “A Correctness and
                    Incorrectness Program Logic”, J. ACM, Vol. 70(2), pp. 15:1–15:45, 2023.
               URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3582267


     We introduce a program logic, called Local Completeness Logic for an abstract domain
     A (LCLA ), for proving both the correctness and incorrectness of program specifications.
     This proof system, which is parametrized by the abstraction A, combines over- and under-
     approximating reasoning: in a provable triple ⊢A [p]c[q] for the program c, q is an under-
     approximation of the strongest post-condition of c on input pre-condition p, such that their
     abstractions in A coincide. If A is the straightforward abstraction making all program
     properties equivalent, then the logic LCLA coincides with O’Hearn’s incorrectness logic. We
     discuss the pitfalls of this logic LCLA and why it is hard to make proofs within it. We,
     therefore, advocate designing a weakening of LCLA which should be able to prove properties
     of program analyses rather than program behaviors, in particular for proving that a program
     analysis is the best possible one in the underlying domain A.



     3.21      VeriCode: Correct Translation of Abstract Specifications to
               C-Code
     Gerhard Schellhorn (Universität Augsburg, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Gerhard Schellhorn


     The talk presented the new VeriCode project (funded by German Research Foundation
     DFG) we just started. The projects aims at the generation of efficient code from abstract
     specification. Such specifications are typical when using higher-order logic and abstract
     programs to specify functions. They typically use abstract datatypes which are easily
     translated to functional code. However the resulting code is typically not very efficient and
     requires garbage collection. The project was motivated by an earlier DFG project called
     Flashix that produced a verified file system for flash memory. A simple code generator
     is already implemented that produces C- and Scala-Code, based on the principle that in
     contrast to a functional implementation data structure should not share. The approach
     enables destructive updates and allows to avoid garbage collection. The approach still causes
     too much copying and the talk showed some first optimizations. Compared to a native
     implementation of a flash filesystem (UBIFS) in C that we used as a blueprint, our code is
     still some factors slower and the project aims to close the gap. The talk also showed the
     overall approach of the project, which is not just to implement an efficient code generator,
     but to verify that it is correct again using specifications of the relevant functionality and
     semantics. Ultimately this should allow to bootstrap the code generator by again generating
     code from the specification of its functionality.
Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, Antoine Miné, Peter Müller, and Anna Becchi                                      83


3.22      Data Race Repair using Static Analysis Summaries
Ilya Sergey (National University of Singapore, SG)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Ilya Sergey
 Joint work of Andreea Costea, Abhishek Tiwari, Sigmund Chianasta, Kishore R, Abhik Roychoudhury, Ilya Sergey
Main reference Andreea Costea, Abhishek Tiwari, Sigmund Chianasta, Kishore R, Abhik Roychoudhury, Ilya Sergey:
               “Hippodrome: Data Race Repair Using Static Analysis Summaries”, ACM Trans. Softw. Eng.
               Methodol., Vol. 32(2), pp. 41:1–41:33, 2023.
          URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3546942


Implementing bug-free concurrent programs is a challenging task in modern software devel-
opment. State-of-the-art static analyses find hundreds of concurrency bugs in production
code, scaling to large codebases. Yet, fixing these bugs in constantly changing codebases
represents a daunting effort for programmers, particularly because a fix in the concurrent
code can introduce other bugs in a subtle way.
    In this talk, I will show how to harness compositional static analysis for concurrency
bug detection, to enable a new Automated Program Repair (APR) technique for data
races in large concurrent Java codebases. The key innovation of our work is an algorithm
that translates procedure summaries inferred by the analysis tool for the purpose of bug
reporting into small local patches that fix concurrency bugs (without introducing new ones).
This synergy makes it possible to extend the virtues of compositional static concurrency
analysis to APR, making our approach effective (it can detect and fix many more bugs than
existing tools for data race repair), scalable (it takes seconds to analyse and suggest fixes for
sizeable codebases), and usable (generally, it does not require annotations from the users and
can perform continuous automated repair). Our study conducted on popular open-source
projects has confirmed that our tool automatically produces concurrency fixes similar to
those proposed by the developers in the past.



3.23      Property-Directed Reachability as Abstract Interpretation in the
          Monotone Theory
Sharon Shoham Buchbinder (Tel Aviv University, IL)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Sharon Shoham Buchbinder
 Joint work of Yotam M. Y. Feldman, Mooly Sagiv, Sharon Shoham Buchbinder, Mooly Sagiv
Main reference Yotam M. Y. Feldman, Mooly Sagiv, Sharon Shoham, James R. Wilcox: “Property-directed
               reachability as abstract interpretation in the monotone theory”, Proc. ACM Program. Lang.,
               Vol. 6(POPL), pp. 1–31, 2022.
          URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3498676
Main reference Yotam M. Y. Feldman, Sharon Shoham: “Invariant Inference with Provable Complexity from the
               Monotone Theory”, in Proc. of the Static Analysis – 29th International Symposium, SAS 2022,
               Auckland, New Zealand, December 5-7, 2022, Proceedings, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
               Vol. 13790, pp. 201–226, Springer, 2022.
          URL https://doi.org//10.1007/978-3-031-22308-2_10


Inferring inductive invariants is one of the main challenges of formal verification. One of
the latest breakthroughs in invariant inference is property-directed reachability (IC3/PDR).
In this talk, we utilize the rich theory of abstract interpretation to shed light on the
overapproximation of the reachable states performed by PDR’s frames. Namely, we define an
eager version of PDR, called Lambda-PDR, in which all generalizations of counterexamples
are used to strengthen a frame, and show that its frames can be formulated as an abstract
interpretation algorithm in a logical domain based on Bshouty’s monotone theory. Since the




                                                                                                                 23281
84   23281 – Theoretical Advances and Emerging Applications in Abstract Interpretation


     frames of Lambda-PDR are tighter than the frames of PDR, the same overapproximation,
     and more, is present in PDR’s frames. We demonstrate that this overapproximation can
     result in an exponential gap compared to exact forward reachability.



     3.24      Exploiting Pointer Analysis in Memory Models for Deductive
               Verification
     Mihaela Sighireanu (ENS Paris-Saclay – Gif-sur-Yvette, FR)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Mihaela Sighireanu
      Joint work of Quentin Bouillaguet, François Bobot, Mihaela Sighireanu, Boris Yakobowski
     Main reference Quentin Bouillaguet, François Bobot, Mihaela Sighireanu, Boris Yakobowski: “Exploiting Pointer
                    Analysis in Memory Models for Deductive Verification”, in Proc. of the Verification, Model Checking,
                    and Abstract Interpretation – 20th International Conference, VMCAI 2019, Cascais, Portugal,
                    January 13-15, 2019, Proceedings, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 11388, pp. 160–182,
                    Springer, 2019.
               URL https://doi.org//10.1007/978-3-030-11245-5_8


     Cooperation between verification methods is crucial to tackle the challenging problem of
     software verification. The paper focuses on the verification of C programs using pointers and
     it formalizes a cooperation between static analyzers doing pointer analysis and a deductive
     verification tool based on first order logic. We propose a framework based on memory models
     that captures the partitioning of memory inferred by pointer analyses, and complies with
     the memory models used to generate verification conditions. The framework guided us to
     propose a pointer analysis that accommodates to various low-level operations on pointers
     while providing precise information about memory partitioning to the deductive verification.
     We implemented this cooperation inside the Frama-C platform and we show its effectiveness
     in reducing the task of deductive verification on a complex case study.



     3.25      (Un-)Realizability of Condition Synthesis as CHC-SAT
     Yakir Vizel (Technion – Haifa, IL)
            License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                    © Yakir Vizel
      Joint work of Yakir Vizel, Bat-Chen Rothenberg, Orna Grumberg


     Condition synthesis takes a program in which some of the conditions in conditional branches
     are missing, and a specification, and automatically infers conditions to fill-in the holes such
     that the program meets the specification.
         In this talk, we present CoSyn [1], an algorithm for determining the realizability of a
     condition synthesis problem, with an emphasis on proving unrealizability efficiently. CoSyn
     is baed on a reduction of the condition synthesis problem to satisfiability of Constrained
     Horn Clauses (CHCs). In order to allow this reduction to CHCs, we use the novel concept
     of a doomed initial state, which is an initial state that can reach an error state along every
     run of the program. For a doomed initial state σ, there is no way to make the program safe
     by forcing σ (via conditions) to follow one computation or another. CoSyn encodes the
     existence of a doomed initial state as CHCs.
Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, Antoine Miné, Peter Müller, and Anna Becchi                                   85


   CoSyn is implemented in SeaHorn using Spacer as the CHC solver and evaluated it
on multiple examples. The evaluation shows that CoSyn outperforms the state-of-the-art
syntax-guided tool Cvc5 in proving both realizability and unrealizability. Evaluation also
shows that joining forces of CoSyn and Cvc5 outperforms Cvc5 alone, allowing to solve
more instances, faster.
References
1    B. Rothenberg et.al., Condition Synthesis Realizability via Constrained Horn Clauses. NASA
     Formal Methods – 15th International Symposium, Houston, TX, USA, May 16-18, 2023.



3.26      Dataflow Refinement Type Inference
Thomas Wies (New York University, US)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Thomas Wies
 Joint work of Zvonimir Pavlinovic, Yusen Su, Thomas Wies
Main reference Zvonimir Pavlinovic, Yusen Su, Thomas Wies: “Data flow refinement type inference”, Proc. ACM
               Program. Lang., Vol. 5(POPL), pp. 1–31, 2021.
          URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3434300


Refinement types enable lightweight verification of functional programs. Algorithms for
statically inferring refinement types typically work by reduction to solving systems of
constrained Horn clauses extracted from typing derivations. An example is Liquid type
inference, which solves the extracted constraints using predicate abstraction. However,
the reduction to constraint solving in itself already signifies an abstraction of the program
semantics that affects the precision of the overall static analysis. To better understand
this issue, we study the type inference problem in its entirety through the lens of abstract
interpretation. We propose a new refinement type system that is parametric with the choice
of the abstract domain of type refinements as well as the degree to which it tracks context-
sensitive control flow information. We then derive an accompanying parametric inference
algorithm as an abstract interpretation of a novel data flow semantics of functional programs.
We further show that the type system is sound and complete with respect to the constructed
abstract semantics. Our theoretical development reveals the key abstraction steps inherent in
refinement type inference algorithms. The trade-off between precision and efficiency of these
abstraction steps is controlled by the parameters of the type system. Existing refinement
type systems and their respective inference algorithms, such as Liquid types, are captured by
concrete parameter instantiations.



3.27      Timing Analysis by Abstract Interpretation
Reinhard Wilhelm (Universität des Saarlandes – Saarbrücken, DE)
       License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Reinhard Wilhelm
Main reference Reinhard Wilhelm: “Real time spent on real time”, Commun. ACM, Vol. 63(10), pp. 54–60, 2020.
          URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3375545


Hard real-time systems need a proof that they keep their deadlines. This proof is produced
by a code-level WCET analysis and a schedulability analysis for a set of tasks to be executed
on the same platform. A code-level WCET analysis computes a safe upper bound for all




                                                                                                              23281
86   23281 – Theoretical Advances and Emerging Applications in Abstract Interpretation


     execution times of a task. The only sound WCET analysis used widely in industry, developed
     by my group in Saarbrücken, uses several abstract interpretations to safely and efficiently
     derive such upper bounds for tasks to be executed on single-core platforms. Central for the
     practicality of our approach are adequate abstractions of the architecture of the execution
     platform. Thus, the architecture is an integral part of the semantics from which abstract
     interpretations of real-time programs are derived. This entails a number of peculiarities
     compared to more conventional abstract interpretations. They are more concerned with the
     occupancy of platform resources than with the values contained in those resources. The
     occupancy of resources, e.g. the cache contents or the usage of bus bandwidth influence
     the timing behavior. Iteration over loops, as part of the fixed-point iteration, needs to
     consider machine parameters to achieve accuracy. The first iteration of a loop typically loads
     the cache, and later iterations profit from this cache loading. Therefore, first and non-first
     iterations may have vastly different execution times. In order to obtain accurate execution
     times for loops, the iteration of the analysis first needs to stabilize the execution time of the
     loop body. In my talk I gave some such examples of peculiarities [2]. The main part was
     concerned with the development history of our WCET-analysis technology [1].
     References
     1    Reinhard Wilhelm. Real time spent on real time. Commun. ACM 63(10): 54-60 (2020)
     2    Jan Reineke and Reinhard Wilhelm. Static Timing Analysis – What is Special?. Semantics,
          Logics, and Calculi 2016: 74-87



      4     Working groups
     4.1    Soundness requirements, transparency of assumptions
     Bor-Yuh Evan Chang (University of Colorado – Boulder, US) and Raphaël Monat (INRIA
     Lille, FR)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Bor-Yuh Evan Chang and Raphaël Monat


     We held a discussion session around soundness requirements, and the transparency of
     assumptions made to ensure an analysis or a tool is sound.
         The starting point of this discussion was the Soundiness manifesto [1]. The goal of
     this manifesto is to raise awareness and highlight that there likely are – at least small and
     sometimes intentional – discrepancies between the formalized concrete semantics and the
     actual implementation. This might be due to the concrete semantics being formalized in
     a research paper not matching the whole semantics of the targetted language – either to
     simplify the presentation, make a trade-off in the analysis, or because modern programming
     languages are large and complex. However, the soundiness paper is sometimes misunderstood
     and used as an excuse to give up on establishing soundness results. Thus, we argue (and
     believe it to be in line with the original intent of the soundiness manifesto) for transparency
     in soundness claims: researchers should state and make explicit the limitations of their
     soundness claims, and in particular the assumptions that are being made. The reasonableness
     of those assumptions should be empirically evaluated whenever possible.
         In order to ensure this transparency at the tool level, we suggest tools should report the
     assumptions they made alongside the properties they have been able – or unable – to prove.
Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, Antoine Miné, Peter Müller, and Anna Becchi                         87


    For example, let us consider a C program where an extern function is called. For early
works, it might be sufficient to abort the analyses when encountering such cases. Then, a
reasonable approach to analyze this program is to assume the function does not have side-
effects and that it returned a value abiding by its return type signature. Instead of silently
performing this assumption and continuing the analysis, we argue that for transparency, this
assumption must be stored and displayed during the analyzer’s report.
    As another example, consider in Java, a program can modify the fields of an object using
reflection. Because perhaps such uses of reflection are rare in the code of interest or that
it is considered bad practice, a concrete semantics that models arbitrary field updates at
any point using reflection would lead to unrealistically imprecise and pessimistic analyses.
Thus, a reasonable approach is to make the assumption there is no reflective field update
and exclude it from the concrete semantics. Transparency means checking for the potential
reflective field update on the runs of the analysis are reporting it if it is encountered. And
transparency means empiricially evaluating the prevalence of reflective field update on a
representative corpus.
    This approach is being prototyped within the Mopsa static analyzer for its C, Python
and multilanguage analyses. We believe it may also help developers better understand the
outputs of static analyzers.
    Thanks to this approach, the assumptions made by a static analyzer are now clearly
defined in the implementation. In turn, this simplifies establishing theoretical soundness
claims on paper: it is easier to list the current limitations, and soundness assumptions of a
given analysis in practice.
    Of course, developers of commercial static analyzers that are used to certify safety-critical
systems with respect to regulations such as DO-178C are deeply aware of this transparency-
based approach. They internally have documents describing the trusted computing base,
and the exact soundness theorem, with all potential assumptions. While this is too time-
consuming and stringent for proof-of-concepts and early academic software, we believe both
that it is an ideal and a must for usable tools.
    Our next step is to discuss with the authors of the original soundiness manifesto. It was
suggested in our plenary recap and discussion to push for an evaluation of the transparency
of static analysis tools in selected conferences performing artifact evaluation.
References
1    Benjamin Livshits, Manu Sridharan, Yannis Smaragdakis, Ondrej Lhoták, José Nelson
     Amaral, Bor-Yuh Evan Chang, Samuel Z. Guyer, Uday P. Khedker, Anders Møller, Dimitrios
     Vardoulakis: In defense of soundiness: a manifesto. Commun. ACM 58(2): 44-46 (2015)



4.2    Expressive Domains
Gidon Ernst (LMU München, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Gidon Ernst


We discussed abstract domains for data structures and domains that can capture complex
properties. We observed that a large variety of techniques have been described in the
literature, e.g., for the data structures sequences/strings, sets, multisets, arrays, pointer-
structures, and trees/general ADTs, and which e.g., can express properties like sortedness or
initialization. However, while for numerical domains, we have nice open-source libraries that




                                                                                                    23281
88   23281 – Theoretical Advances and Emerging Applications in Abstract Interpretation


     can easily be embedded into larger use-cases, it was noted that this is hardly the case for such
     expressive domains despite the fact that there are many implementations. We then discussed
     the challenges in the design of both the domains itself as well as a uniform interface that
     could capture their features and commonalities: The first challenge is to define a common
     interface in the first place. Since domains are usually designed to tackle specific properties,
     the operations they offer are tuned to their respective use cases and therefore not uniform.
     As an example, it seemed unclear whether it is possible to represent the features offered
     by domains as part of a CHC solver. As possible future work, a first step towards usable
     off-the-shelf libraries was to investigate the design of a suitable API. A second challenge is the
     combined use of abstract domains, for example when nesting domains for element types inside
     container types. There is no canonical choice to do so many, and which is appropriate strongly
     depends on the application. This kind of integration often relies on the tight integration of
     the data structures representing the abstract domains at the implementation level. This
     kind of compositionality, however, is hard to achieve general because domains – even for
     the same purpose – may rely on rather different techniques. A related problem is how to
     provide on-line transfer from and to symbolic representations. We idientified as a question
     for the efficient combination of domains, whether some of the higher-level domains benefit
     from some specialized operators of the underlying abstract domains. The third challenge
     is that it is hard to design abstract domains that are robust. A lot of knowledge goes into
     selecting the right abstraction for a given (sub-)problem and choosing the an inappropriate
     one incurs high computational cost. Unfortunately, this is hard to determine automatically,
     and moreover may rely on user-provided partial specifications as guidance.



     4.3    Education: Teaching Abstract Interpretation to the Masses
     Pietro Ferrara (University of Venice, IT)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Pietro Ferrara


     During this working group, the discussion was divided into two main themes: teaching to
     graduate students, and to undergraduates or, generally speaking, practitioners. In the first
     case, a lot of good material is available. A non-comprehensive list (that should be further
     integrated) to the best of the participants’ knowledge is the following one: books [1, 2]; slides
     [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]; tools [9, 10].
         For undergrads and/or practitioners there is less material available. After an open
     discussion with all the seminar participants, we were able to assemble the following list:
     [11, 12, 13].
         Generally speaking, the first idea would be to augment undergraduate courses on the
     implementation of interpreters with the idea of abstraction (e.g., [7]). Another proposal
     was to design a generic interface to interact (ranging from the application to the extension)
     with static analyzers through a unique library, avoiding having analyzers that require being
     bound to specific programming languages. This is a rather standard approach adopted by our
     communities that over the years achieved better visibility and popularity (e.g., the machine
     learning community with libraries such as Scikit-learn and Pytorch, or the theorem-proving
     community with libraries such as SMT-lib).
         Overall, the participants agreed that the community is missing a place where educational
     material about static analysis can be shared, as well as introduction courses in popular
     MOOC platforms.
Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, Antoine Miné, Peter Müller, and Anna Becchi                            89


References
 1 Patrick Cousot: Principles of Abstract Interpretation, https://mitpress.mit.edu/
     9780262044905/principles-of-abstract-interpretation/
 2 Rival and Yi:         Introduction to Static Analysis, https://mitpress.mit.edu/
     9780262043410/introduction-to-static-analysis/
 3 Patrick Cousot’s course at MIT: http://web.mit.edu/afs/athena.mit.edu/course/16/
     16.399/www/
 4 Feret, Giet, Rival course at ENS Paris: https://www.di.ens.fr/~rival/semverif-2023/
 5 Miné, Urban, Feret, Rival in Paris (MPRI): https://www-apr.lip6.fr/~mine/
     enseignement/mpri/current/
 6 Ferrara (old – 2012) course at ETH: https://ethz.ch/content/dam/ethz/
     special-interest/infk/chair-program-method/pm/documents/Education/Courses/
     SS2012/SPA/Lectures.zip
 7 Evan course at the University of Colorado Boulder: https://csci3155.cs.colorado.edu/
     f22/ and https://github.com/csci3155/
 8 Jan Midtgaard: Abstract Interpretation (2015 Winter School) https://janmidtgaard.dk/
     aiws15/
 9 LiSA (Ca’ Foscari University of Venice): https://github.com/lisa-analyzer/lisa
10 MOPSA (Sorbonne Université): https://gitlab.com/mopsa/mopsa-analyzer
11 Anders Møller and Michael I. Schwartzbach: Static Program Analysis https://cs.au.dk/
     ~amoeller/spa/
12 Manuel’s older intro to AI, and AI for (C)LP (a tutorial from the early 90’s. but we still
     use it sometimes) https://cliplab.org/logalg/slides/B_ai.pdf
13 Manuel: Some tutorials on PLAI/CiaoPP using our analyzers embedded in web pages (work
     in progress) https://ciao-lang.org/ciao/build/doc/ciaopp_tutorials.html/




4.4    Community Infrastructure – Interest Group in Static Analysis
Pietro Ferrara (University of Venice, IT)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Pietro Ferrara


The main outcome of this working group was a proposal to build up a community infra-
structure to facilitate the promotion of events in our community, stimulate interactions, and
provide better visibility of the main outcomes in our field. In particular, currently, we have
various groups on social networks (such as Facebook and Linkedin) that are mostly silent.
However, every year we have a series of regular events that help the networking activities of
our community, such as conferences like SAS and VMCAI, workshops like SOAP, and events
organized by various institutions such as the “Dependable and Secure Software Systems”
workshop at ETH or the Challenges of Software Verification Symposium at Ca’ Foscari
University of Venice (just to name a few the participants were aware of, but such a list should
be quite expanded).
    The final proposal of the working group was to: (i) build up a website that contains
information about events and materials about static analysis (taking inspiration from https:
//microservices.community), (ii) open a mailing list about announcements regarding
scientific activities and opportunities in static analysis, and (iii) establish an Interest Group in
Static Analysis (IGSA) with an advisory board that supervise the overall process. Potentially
this might become an ACM Special Interest Group, an IFIP Working Group, or something
else, based on the success of the initiative.



                                                                                                       23281
90   23281 – Theoretical Advances and Emerging Applications in Abstract Interpretation


     4.5    Abstract Interpretation and Other Formal Methods
     Arie Gurfinkel (University of Waterloo, CA)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Arie Gurfinkel


     This working group discussed potential new connections between Abstract Interpretation
     and other Formal Methods. Based on the interests and expertise of the participants, the
     other formal methods that the group focused on were: Deductive Verification, Dynamic
     Techniques, Deduction, Model Checking, and Practical and Industrial applications.
         For deductive verification, there is a desire for Abstract Interpretation to infer complex
     specifications, especially in the context of memory analysis. Currently, most developed Ab-
     stract Interpretation techniques are geared towards numeric domains that are not sufficiently
     structurally complex (i.e., no quantifiers, no memory separation, etc.). Deductive verification
     also requires very reliable tools that reliably provide an answer since such tools involve a
     direct and active interaction with a user.
         For dynamic techniques, there is a desire for better abstract domains for strings. Perhaps
     based on the deep connection between automata and regular languages. There is also a
     potential in using dynamic analysis to infer context for Abstract Interpretation-based static
     analysis. This, for example, is already used in debloading projects such OCCAM at SRI. The
     group felt that this combination might also create new challenges to maintaining soundness
     of the analysis and/or articulating the soundness conditions clearly.
         For deduction, it was discussed that the main challenge is to identify an insight for why a
     proof works or fails. In this context, a complex but hard-to-understand specification, such as
     an automatically generated inductive invariant, is not very helpful. Perhaps the results of
     Abstract Interpretation can be presented in a more readable form by using some pre-defined
     set of predicates.
         For model checking, there is an interest in building Abstract Interpretation models that
     explain core model checking algorithms such as IC3 and PDR. There is recent work on
     this subject, but the group agrees that better understanding is required to capture the
     many nuances of these algorithms. There is also a potential application in using Abstract
     Interpretation to infer temporal specifications.
         Group members from industry, were interested in Abstract Interpretation for probabil-
     istic programs, with application to differential privacy. There is also interest in Abstract
     Interpretation in aid of property-based testing.
         Overall, the working group concluded that there is a lot of interest in both applications
     of Abstract Interpretation in different domains, and in research on challenges that are posed
     by these domains. The group members from Deductive Verification have been most vocal,
     and, perhaps the combination of Abstract Interpretation and Deductive Verification is most
     suited for a follow up seminar.
Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, Antoine Miné, Peter Müller, and Anna Becchi                        91


4.6    Tools and Applications for Abstract Interpretation
Falk Howar (TU Dortmund, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Falk Howar


We had a discussion on challenges that developers of research tools must address to enable
industrial collaborations and on possible working directions for the research community to
foster the development of robust and scalable research tools. Among the attendees were
researchers, academic tools developers, as well as developers of commercial tools and industrial
researchers from companies that use formal methods tools in their product development,
presenting both, academic perspectives, and insights from industry.
    The initial focus of the discussion was on the potential and challenges of using research
tools effectively in real-world scenarios and started with the observation that it is often
difficult to use research tools in industrial collaborations.
    Lessons learned by academic developers included the following points:
    Usefulness: It is important to have findings and to make these findings accessible to
project partners, who typically are not experts in a particular formal method or a particular
research tool.
    Robustness: It is important that tools can be used in industrial settings. This often
requires operation in an automated analysis pipeline, e.g., a build system. In such a setting,
an analysis will not be run manually executed one target but is executed as part of a build
process.
    Participants from companies complemented these observations with the following points:
    Helpful features: To support robustness, certain features help applicability that are
(usually) not important in an academic context: since industrial codebases in many cases
cannot be extended with annotations for a tool, it is important to support declarative
configurations and external annotations. Usefulness can be increased by support for problem
extraction (i.e., interpretation / mapping of results to code) and by providing information
on relationships between alarms (i.e., root causes).
    Project formats: Analyzing an industrial codebase is not an easy task, especially when
done by someone who is not a contributor to that codebase. Typically, success hinges
on support from developers, access to architecture documentation, and on communication
between maintainers and researchers. Project formats should accommodate these success
factors.
    Licenses: Copyleft licenses are a big obstacle in industry if code is under such a license
and the industrial partner must look at the code (e.g., to understand how a tool work).
    Eventual Payoff: It is important for industrial partners to understand if and what the
eventual payoff can be when using a technique or tool. As a concrete successful example, the
technique of unit proving was mentioned. In the experience of one participant, maintainability
and conformance to low level specs seems to be much easier with unit proving than with
testing once it is established in the development process.
    After the initial collection of lessons learned, discussion evolved around dealing with
theoretical limitations of techniques and (potential) usability requirements.
    Dealing with Limitations: Commercial tool developers (AbsInt and Astree tools) reported
that in their experience mostly scalability and precision are bottlenecks and that proofs
tend to work on slices, but do not work on whole programs. It was discussed if and to
what extend a target can be modified in order to scale or work around limitations (e.g.,
loop unrolling, transformations at the IR level). Consensus was that, while it is usually not




                                                                                                   23281
92   23281 – Theoretical Advances and Emerging Applications in Abstract Interpretation


     possible to change a customer’s code, transformations typically happen during analysis (with
     some limitations in safety-critical domains). It was deemed important that the result/verdict
     of an analysis can be explained to the user and in terms of the original code.
         Usability: There was no consensus on or shared understanding of usability requirements.
     Most participants agreed that a user interface is not a strong requirement for a research tool,
     but that usability is still important in the sense that users need to be able to understand the
     findings of a tool (e.g., based on CFGs).
         The discussion concluded with plans for actions the research community could take to
     recognize and facilitate the development of robust research tools. Case studies were identified
     as a relevant format: It shows potential users how a tool can be used on a realistic example
     and forces developers to invest in robustness and applicability. Examples of existing case
     studies and publicly available systems included the effort to verify the Linux kernel, medical
     systems (e.g., infusion pumps, a pacemaker), and a wheel-break system. Participants agreed
     that it will be important to promote case study papers in academic conferences. Published
     case studies should include a public repository with the problem, corresponding artifacts
     (e.g., documentation), and an experience report.



     4.7    Hyperproperties verification
     Isabella Mastroeni (University of Verona, IT)
           License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Isabella Mastroeni


     Hyperproperties are intended as sets of sets of traces, for a more general point of view, we
     can see them as sets of properties. A standard example of hyperproperty is non-interference,
     a 2-safety property that requires to compare pairs of executions. The question for stimulating
     the discussion was about the right implication formalization for hyperproperties. In the
     literature we mainly find two different approaches: (1) The first one allows to add new
     elements in the hyper set, but all the elements in the stronger property must be in the weaker
     one, more formally, let A, B, C, D, E sets, then {A, B, C} implies {A, B, C, D, E}; (2) the
     second one consists in allowing to approximate the inner elements without adding any new
     element, formally let A, B, C, A′ , B ′ , C ′ be sets such that A ⊆ A′ , B ⊆ B ′ and C ⊆ C ′ , then
     {A, B, C} implies {A′ , B ′ , C ′ } but {A, B, C} does not imply {A′ , B ′ , C ′ , D′ } where D′ does
     not contain any of A, B, C. Hence, which of these orders properly capture the approximation
     order between hyperproperties.
         There are several approaches to noninterference that can help in understanding the issue,
     in particular those based on hyper analysis of programs. But also there are other relevant
     formal approaches to hyper properties verification, such as the hyper Hoare logic, useful for
     understanding the issue.
         By reasoning on both these formal approaches, the discussion ended up understanding
     that probably there is no a right or better order, in particular (2) is necessary for computing
     fixpoints programs/properties in an hyper levels both in the analysis and in the logic, while
     (1) is used for deciding whether a property imply another one, again both in the analysis
     and in the logic (consequence rule). Hence, the conclusion was that (1) is the approximation
     order while (2) is the computational order, which maybe must co-exists when dealing with
     hyper property verification. We believe that this final observation, even if it may appear
     quite “simple”, may represent anyway an important first step for really understanding the
Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, Antoine Miné, Peter Müller, and Anna Becchi                         93


connection between standard approaches to static analysis and the emerging hyper property
verification issue. All participants agree that surely further understanding of the problem is
necessary.



4.8    AI for AI
Antoine Miné (Sorbonne University – Paris, FR)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Antoine Miné


A small working group entitled “AI for AI” discussed existing and possible future interactions
between Abstract Interpretation (AI) and Machine Learning (ML). Both directions, AI to
help ML and ML to help AI, were considered.
    We started with the observation that, with the progress and increasing use of ML systems,
ensuring their correctness also became an increasing concern. Since 2015, the field of formal
verification techniques applied to ML systems has been growing steadily. A large amount of
work targets the verification of trained neural networks, but other models are considered
as well (e.g., support vector machines, ensemble trees). Moreover, many kinds of formal
methods have been adapted to work on ML systems, including: SMT solving, constraint
solving, optimisation, model-checking, Abstract Interpretation. Notable works on Abstract
Interpretation for ML models include the developments of dedicated numeric abstract domains
able to prove local robustness properties and fairness properties. A more detailed review of
recent work can be found in Urban et al. 2021 [1]. However, given the pace of the research
in this area, such reviews become outdated very quickly.
    We then discussed what we perceived as some of the current limitations of AI methods
for ML and possible area of improvements.
    The verification of robustness has been successful for models of moderate size, and for
    local robustness against perturbation and adversarial attacks. Future challenge concern
    more global robustness properties. Numeric abstractions and partitioning techniques
    from AI could be key to achieve scalability.
    ML research has recently focused on interpretability and explainability of ML models.
    This constitutes an interesting opportunity to apply formal verification and obtain sound
    and automatic guarantees on these properties. We postulate that AI-specific techniques,
    such as relational abstractions, might help in evaluating out inputs influence the outcome
    of a ML model.
    In general, however, a key difficulty for formal verification (including Abstract Interpreta-
    tion) is the lack of formal specification of the properties to prove. This is an area that
    must be improved in order to unlock further progress.
    Most works in ML ignore the effect of floating-point rounding errors. AI techniques exist
    to soundly verify floating-point programs and to evaluate the effect of rounding errors
    formally. Applying such techniques to ML models could prove useful.

   The working group also considered how ML could help AI. An important aspect is to
keep the formal guarantees of the combined AI and ML method by maintaining soundness,
even in the absence of soundness guarantees for the ML part.
   One possible use of ML in AI is the automatic parameterization of static analyzers to
   optimize the efficiency and precision of the analysis within the parameter space (e.g.,
   choice of abstract domains, level of relationality and sensitivity, etc.).




                                                                                                    23281
94   23281 – Theoretical Advances and Emerging Applications in Abstract Interpretation


        A specific aspect of AI is the use of widening operators to automatically infer complex
        invariants. The heuristic nature of widenings makes them an interesting target for ML
        techniques: the heuristics “guessing” candidate invariants do not need strong soundness
        guarantees, given that candidate invariants can be checked with a classic, sound stability
        tests. This idea could be extended to the inference of contract pre/post-conditions to
        unlock efficient modular analyses.

         As concluding remark, we observed that early research in formal verification of ML was
     mainly conducted by formal method researchers, adapting on ML models the techniques
     they were familiar with for the verification of software. Given the substantial differences
     between ML models and programs, and the need to extract and formalize the properties we
     are interested to verify on ML models, we believe that progress in this field requires a tighter
     collaboration of experts in ML and experts in AI.
     References
     1    C. Urban and A. Miné. A review of formal methods applied to machine Learning. Technical
          report, Computing Research Repository (arXiv) (CoRR), Apr. 2021. http://www-apr.
          lip6.fr/~mine/publi/article-urban-mine-mlfm2021.pdf.
Arie Gurfinkel, Isabella Mastroeni, Antoine Miné, Peter Müller, and Anna Becchi                      95


        Participants
 Vincenzo Arceri                 Roberta Gori                    Jorge Navas
University of Parma, IT        University of Pisa, IT          Certora – Seattle, US
  Musard Balliu                  Arie Gurfinkel                  Marie Pelleau
KTH Royal Institute of         University of Waterloo, CA      Université Côte d’Azur –
Technology – Stockholm, SE       Reiner Hähnle                 Sophia Antipolis, FR
  Anna Becchi                  TU Darmstadt, DE                  Ruzica Piskac
Bruno Kessler Foundation –       Ben Hermann                   Yale University – New Haven, US
Trento, IT                     TU Dortmund, DE                   Francesco Ranzato
 Dirk Beyer                      Manuel Hermenegildo           University of Padova, IT
LMU München, DE                IMDEA Software Institute –        Gerhard Schellhorn
                               Pozuelo de Alarcón, ES & UPM – Universität Augsburg, DE
  Bor-Yuh Evan Chang
                               Madrid, ES                        Ilya Sergey
University of Colorado –
Boulder, US                      Falk Howar                    National University of
                               TU Dortmund, DE                 Singapore, SG
  Patrick Cousot
New York University, US          Daniel Kästner                  Sharon Shoham Buchbinder
                               AbsInt – Saarbrücken, DE        Tel Aviv University, IL
  David Delmas
Airbus S.A.S. – Toulouse, FR     Temesghen Kahsai                Mihaela Sighireanu
                               Amazon Lab 126, US              ENS Paris-Saclay –
 Gidon Ernst                                                   Gif-sur-Yvette, FR
                                 Matthieu Lemerre
LMU München, DE
                               CEA LIST – Gif-sur-Yvette, FR     Yakir Vizel
 Pietro Ferrara                  Isabella Mastroeni            Technion – Haifa, IL
University of Venice, IT       University of Verona, IT          Thomas Wies
  Eden Frenkel                   Antoine Miné                  New York University, US
Tel Aviv University, IL        Sorbonne University – Paris, FR   Reinhard Wilhelm
 Isabel Garcia-Contreras         Raphaël Monat                 Universität des Saarlandes –
University of Waterloo, CA     INRIA Lille, FR                 Saarbrücken, DE
 Roberto Giacobazzi              Peter Müller                    Enea Zaffanella
University of Verona, IT       ETH Zürich, CH                  University of Parma, IT




                                                                                                 23281
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 23291

Parameterized Approximation: Algorithms and Hardness
Karthik C. S.∗1 , Parinya Chalermsook∗2 , Joachim Spoerhase∗3 ,
Meirav Zehavi∗4 , and Martin Herold†5
1       Rutgers University – New Brunswick, US. karthik.0112358@gmail.com
2       Aalto University, FI. parinya.chalermsook@aalto.fi
3       University of Sheffield, GB. j.spoerhase@sheffield.ac.uk
4       Ben Gurion University – Beer Sheva, IL. zehavimeirav@gmail.com
5       MPI für Informatik – Saarbrücken, DE. mherold@mpi-inf.mpg.de

        Abstract
Parameterization and approximation are two established approaches of coping with intractability
in combinatorial optimization. In this Dagstuhl Seminar, we studied parameterized approximation
as a relatively new algorithmic paradigm that combines these two popular research areas. In
particular, we analyzed the solution quality (approximation ratio) as well as the running time of
an algorithm in terms of a parameter that captures the “complexity” of a problem instance.
    While the field has grown and yielded some promising results, our understanding of the area
is rather ad-hoc compared to our knowledge in approximation or parameterized algorithms alone.
In this seminar, we brought together researchers from both communities in order to bridge this
gap by accommodating the exchange and unification of scientific knowledge.
Seminar July 16–21, 2023 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/23291
2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Computational complexity and
   cryptography; Theory of computation → Design and analysis of algorithms
Keywords and phrases approximation algorithms, Hardness of approximation, Parameterized
   algorithms
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.13.7.96



    1    Executive Summary
Joachim Spoerhase (University of Sheffield, GB)
Karthik C. S. (Rutgers University – New Brunswick, US)
Parinya Chalermsook (Aalto University, FI)
Meirav Zehavi (Ben Gurion University – Beer Sheva, IL)
        License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © Joachim Spoerhase, Karthik C. S., Parinya Chalermsook, and Meirav Zehavi


Parameterization and approximation are two popular approaches of coping with intractability
in combinatorial optimization. They have gained substantial maturity over the last decades,
leading to tight bounds for many fundamental computational problems and beautiful al-
gorithmic techniques that show surprising interplay between algorithms and various areas
of mathematics. In this Dagstuhl Seminar, we studied parameterized approximation as a
relatively new algorithmic paradigm that combines these two popular research areas. In
particular, we analyzed the solution quality (approximation ratio) as well as the running


∗
    Editor / Organizer
†
    Editorial Assistant / Collector




            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Parameterized Approximation: Algorithms and Hardness, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 13, Issue 7, pp. 96–107
Editors: Karthik C. S., Parinya Chalermsook, Joachim Spoerhase, and Meirav Zehavi
                    Dagstuhl Reports
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
Karthik C. S., Parinya Chalermsook, Joachim Spoerhase, and Meirav Zehavi                                97


time of an algorithm in terms of a parameter that captures the “complexity” of a problem
instance.
    While the field has grown and yielded some promising results, our understanding of
the area is rather ad-hoc compared to our knowledge in approximation or parameterized
algorithms alone. In this seminar, we brought together researchers from both communities
in order to bridge this gap by accommodating the exchange and unification of scientific
knowledge.
    Our first goal was to foster a transfer of techniques between the classic fields of approxim-
ation and parameterization. We discussed how recent developments in one research area can
be transferred to another. Towards this, we organized five invited one-hour tutorials (one on
each morning) that were delivered by leading experts from the fields and which we believe
helped exchange of state-of-the-art techniques. The tutorial topics covered parameterized or
polynomial time approximation algorithms for graph edit and network design problems, for
clustering problems, matroid constrained maximization problems, as well as the hardness of
parameterized approximation of problems arising in error correcting codes.
    Our second goal was to systematically identify important research directions and concrete
open problems in research areas that are relevant to parameterized approximation. Towards
this, we organized a panel discussion on the first seminar day led by experts from para-
meterized algorithms, approximation algorithms, hardness of approximation, but also from
neighboring areas such as fine-grained complexity and coding theory. A vibrant discussion
ensued between the moderator, panelists, but also the other participants. Moreover, we
organized two open discussion sessions, which were open to any participant to bring up a topic
they would like to discuss with the other participants: This could be, for example, concrete
open problems, more general research directions, or highlights. Besides several concrete open
problems suggested by particpants, there were two contributions to the sessions that gave
overviews over a coherent collection of open questions on hardness of parameterized approx-
imation under Gap-ETH and beyond, as well as on the parameterized (in-)approximability
of clustering problems.
    Our third goal was to bolster the creation of new collaborations between researchers
in the two communities by encouraging the participants to actively discuss the suggested
directions for open problems. It was therefore a particular priority for us to provide sufficient
time for collaboration. Towards this, we reserved time slots for six collaboration sessions and
one session for progress reports.
    We thank Martin Herold for collecting the abstracts from the participants and for his
assistance with creating and editing this report.




                                                                                                    23291
98   23291 – Parameterized Approximation: Algorithms and Hardness


      2       Table of Contents
     Executive Summary
       Joachim Spoerhase, Karthik C. S., Parinya Chalermsook, and Meirav Zehavi . . . 96

     Overview of Talks
          Hardness of Approximation in P via Short Cycle Removal: Cycle Detection, Distance
          Oracles, and Beyond
          Amir Aboud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
          Baby PIH: Parameterized Inapproximability of Min CSP
          Venkatesan Guruswami . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
          A (3/2 + ϵ)-Approximation for Multiple TSP with a Variable Number of Depots
          Matthias Kaul . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
          Parameterized Approximability of F -Deletion Problems
          Euiwoong Lee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
          The Cut Covering Lemma
          Jason Li . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
          Parameterized Approximation Schemes for Clustering with General Norm Objectives
          Dániel Marx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
          FPT Approximation Schemes for Matroid-constrained Problems
          Hadas Shachnai . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
          Approximating Weighted Connectivity Augmentation below Factor 2
          Vera Traub . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102

     Panel discussions
          Panel Discussion
          Frances A. Rosamond, Amir Abboud, Michael R. Fellows, Venkatesan Guruswami,
          Bingkai Lin, and Saket Saurabh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103

     Open problems
          TSP with line-neighborhoods in R3
          Antonios Antoniadis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
          Parameterized approximability of clustering problems
          Vincent Cohen-Addad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
          Parameterized Approximation for the Santa Claus Problem
          Fabrizio Grandoni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
          FPT Inapproximability Results Beyond Gap-ETH
          Pasin Manurangsi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
          (2 − ε)-approximation for the Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem
          Hang Zhou . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106

     Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
Karthik C. S., Parinya Chalermsook, Joachim Spoerhase, and Meirav Zehavi                                      99


 3     Overview of Talks
3.1    Hardness of Approximation in P via Short Cycle Removal: Cycle
       Detection, Distance Oracles, and Beyond
Amir Aboud (Weizmann Institute – Rehovot, IL)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Amir Aboud
 Joint work of Amir Aboud, Karl Bringmann, Seri Khoury, Or Zamir
Main reference Amir Aboud, Karl Bringmann, Seri Khoury and Or Zamir: Hardness of Approximation in P via
               Short Cycle Removal: Cycle Detection, Distance Oracles, and Beyond. STOC 2022.
          URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3519935.3520066


This talk will overview a new technique for gap amplification called “short cycle removal” and
it applications for hardness of approximation for polynomial time problems. In particular,
we will present lower bounds on the approximation factor of distance oracles that preprocess
a graph in almost-linear time and answer distance queries in almost-constant time. Based on
joint works with Karl Bringmann, Nick Fischer, Seri Khoury, and Or Zamir.



3.2    Baby PIH: Parameterized Inapproximability of Min CSP
Venkatesan Guruswami (University of California – Berkeley, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Venkatesan Guruswami


The Parameterized Inapproximability Hypothesis (PIH) is the analog of the PCP theorem in
the world of parameterized complexity. It asserts that no FPT algorithm can distinguish a
satisfiable 2CSP instance from one which is only (1 − ε)-satisfiable (where the parameter is
the number of variables) for some constant 0 < ε < 1.
     We consider a minimization version of CSPs (Min-CSP), where one may assign r values to
each variable, and the goal is to ensure that every constraint is satisfied by some choice among
the r × r pairs of values assigned to its variables (call such a CSP instance r-list-satisfiable).
We prove the following strong parameterized inapproximability for Min CSP: For every r ≥ 1,
it is W[1]-hard to tell if a 2CSP instance is satisfiable or is not even r-list-satisfiable. We refer
to this statement as “Baby PIH”, following the recently proved Baby PCP Theorem. Our
proof adapts the combinatorial arguments underlying the Baby PCP theorem, overcoming
some significant obstacles that arise in the parameterized setting.
     An extension of our result to an average-version of Baby PIH would prove the inapprox-
imability of parameterized k-ExactCover, a notorious open problem.




                                                                                                          23291
100   23291 – Parameterized Approximation: Algorithms and Hardness


      3.3     A (3/2 + ϵ)-Approximation for Multiple TSP with a Variable
              Number of Depots
      Matthias Kaul (TU Hamburg, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Matthias Kaul
       Joint work of Max Deppert, Matthias Kaul, Matthias Mnich
      Main reference Max Deppert, Matthias Kaul, Matthias Mnich: “A (3/2 + ϵ)-Approximation for Multiple TSP with
                     a Variable Number of Depots”, in Proc. of the 31st Annual European Symposium on Algorithms,
                     ESA 2023, September 4-6, 2023, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, LIPIcs, Vol. 274, pp. 39:1–39:15,
                     Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2023.
                URL https://doi.org//10.4230/LIPICS.ESA.2023.39


      One of the most studied extensions of the famous Traveling Salesperson Problem (TSP)
      is the Multiple TSP: a set of m ≥ 1 salespersons collectively traverses a set of n cities by
      m non-trivial tours, to minimize the total length of their tours. This problem can also
      be considered to be a variant of Uncapacitated Vehicle Routing, where the objective is to
      minimize the sum of all tour lengths. When all m tours start from and end at a single
      common depot v0 , then the metric Multiple TSP can be approximated equally well as the
      standard metric TSP, as shown by Frieze (1983)[1]. The metric Multiple TSP becomes
      significantly harder to approximate when there is a set D of d ≥ 1 depots that form the
      starting and end points of the m tours. For this case, only a (2 − 1/d)-approximation in
      polynomial time is known, as well as a 3/2-approximation for constant d which requires a
      prohibitive run time of nΘ(d) (Xu and Rodrigues, INFORMS J. Comput., 2015)[3]. A recent
      work of Traub, Vygen and Zenklusen (STOC 2020)[2] gives another approximation algorithm
      for metric Multiple TSP with run time nΘ(d) , which reduces the problem to approximating
      metric TSP. In this paper we overcome the nΘ(d) time barrier: we give the first efficient
      approximation algorithm for Multiple TSP with a variable number d of depots that yields a
      better-than-2 approximation. Our algorithm runs in time (1/ϵ)O(d log d) · nO(1) , and produces
      a (3/2 + ϵ)-approximation with constant probability. For the graphic case, we obtain a
      deterministic 3/2-approximation in time 2d · nO(1) .
      References
      1    Alan M. Frieze. An extension of christofides heuristic to the k-person travelling salesman
           problem. Discret. Appl. Math., 6(1):79–83, 1983.
      2    Vera Traub, Jens Vygen, and Rico Zenklusen. Reducing path TSP to TSP. In Konstantin
           Makarychev, Yury Makarychev, Madhur Tulsiani, Gautam Kamath, and Julia Chuzhoy,
           editors, Proccedings of the 52nd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing,
           STOC 2020, Chicago, IL, USA, June 22-26, 2020, pages 14–27. ACM, 2020.
      3    Zhou Xu and Brian Rodrigues. A 3/2-approximation algorithm for the multiple TSP with
           a fixed number of depots. INFORMS J. Comput., 27(4):636–645, 2015.



      3.4     Parameterized Approximability of F -Deletion Problems
      Euiwoong Lee (University of Michigan – Ann Arbor, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Euiwoong Lee


      For a fixed class F of graphs, the F -Deletion problem, given a graph G, asks to remove the
      minimum number of vertices so that the resulting graph belongs to the class F . The study
      of various F -Deletion problems has led to interesting connections between approximation
Karthik C. S., Parinya Chalermsook, Joachim Spoerhase, and Meirav Zehavi                                        101


algorithms and parameterized algorithms, ultimately leading to parameterized approximation
algorithms. In this talk, we survey known results for subgraph, induced subgraph, and minor
deletion problems.



3.5     The Cut Covering Lemma
Jason Li (University of California – Berkeley, US)
      License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Jason Li
Main reference Stefan Kratsch, Magnus Wahlström: “Compression via Matroids: A Randomized Polynomial Kernel
               for Odd Cycle Transversal”, ACM Trans. Algorithms, Vol. 10(4), pp. 20:1–20:15, 2014.
          URL https://doi.org//10.1145/2635810


We present the cut covering lemma, a classic result by Kratsch and Wahlstrom (2012)[1] in
FPT literature with many applications to kernelization. Loosely speaking, the lemma states
that on any graph with k terminal vertices, there is a smaller graph on O(k 3 ) vertices that
preserves the complete cut structure of the graph. We discuss connections to the field of
fast graph algorithms, in particular the implications of an approximate version of the cut
covering lemma with O(k) vertices.
References
1    Stefan Kratsch and Magnus Wahlström. Compression via matroids: a randomized polynomial
     kernel for odd cycle transversal. In Yuval Rabani, editor, Proceedings of the Twenty-Third
     Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2012, Kyoto, Japan, January
     17-19, 2012, pages 94–103. SIAM, 2012.



3.6     Parameterized Approximation Schemes for Clustering with General
        Norm Objectives
Dániel Marx (CISPA – Saarbrücken, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Dániel Marx
 Joint work of Fateme Abbasi, Sandip Banerjee, Jaroslaw Byrka; Parinya Chalermsook; Ameet Gadekar; Kamyar
               Khodamoradi; Roohani Sharma; Joachim Spoerhase
Main reference Fateme Abbasi, Sandip Banerjee, Jaroslaw Byrka, Parinya Chalermsook, Ameet Gadekar, Kamyar
               Khodamoradi, Dániel Marx, Roohani Sharma, Joachim Spoerhase: “Parameterized Approximation
               Schemes for Clustering with General Norm Objectives”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2304.03146, 2023.
          URL https://doi.org//10.48550/ARXIV.2304.03146


We consider the well-studied algorithmic regime of designing a (1+ϵ)-approximation algorithm
for a k-clustering problem that runs in time f (k, ϵ)poly(n). Our main contribution is a clean
and simple EPAS that settles more than ten clustering problems (across multiple well-studied
objectives as well as metric spaces) and unifies well-known EPASes. Our algorithm gives
EPASes for a large variety of clustering objectives (for example, k-means, k-center, k-median,
priority k-center, ℓ-centrum, ordered k-median, socially fair k-median aka robust k-median, or
more generally monotone norm k-clustering) and metric spaces (for example, continuous high-
dimensional Euclidean spaces, metrics of bounded doubling dimension, bounded treewidth
metrics, and planar metrics). Key to our approach is a new concept that we call bounded
ϵ-scatter dimension – an intrinsic complexity measure of a metric space that is a relaxation
of the standard notion of bounded doubling dimension.




                                                                                                             23291
102   23291 – Parameterized Approximation: Algorithms and Hardness


      3.7     FPT Approximation Schemes for Matroid-constrained Problems
      Hadas Shachnai (Technion – Haifa, IL)
            License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Hadas Shachnai
       Joint work of Ilan Doron Arad, Ariel Kulik, Hadas Shachnai
      Main reference Ilan Doron Arad, Ariel Kulik, Hadas Shachnai: “Budgeted Matroid Maximization: a Parameterized
                     Viewpoint”, CoRR, Vol. abs/2307.04173, 2023.
                URL https://doi.org//10.48550/ARXIV.2307.04173


      We study budgeted variants of well known maximization problems with multiple matroid
      constraints. Given an ℓ-matchoid M on a ground set E, a profit function p and a cost
      function c on E, and a budget B, the goal is to find in the ℓ-matchoid a feasible set S
      of maximum profit p(S) subject to the budget constraint, i.e., c(S) ≤ B. The budgeted
      ℓ-matchoid (BM) problem includes as special cases budgeted ℓ-dimensional matching and
      budgeted ℓ-matroid intersection. A strong motivation for studying BM from parameterized
      viewpoint comes from the APX-hardness of unbudgeted ℓ-dimensional matching (i.e., B = ∞)
      already for ℓ = 3. Nevertheless, while there are known FPT algorithms for the unbudgeted
      variants of the above problems, the budgeted variants are studied here for the first time
      through the lens of parameterized complexity.
          We show that BM parametrized by solution size is W [1]-hard, already with a degenerate
      single matroid constraint. Thus, an exact parameterized algorithm is unlikely to exist,
      motivating the study of FPT-approximation schemes (FPAS). Our main result is an FPAS
      for BM (implying an FPAS for ℓ-dimensional matching and budgeted ℓ-matroid intersection),
      relying on the notion of representative set − a small cardinality subset of elements which
      preserves the optimum up to a small factor. We also give a lower bound on the minimum
      possible size of a representative set which can be computed in polynomial time.



      3.8     Approximating Weighted Connectivity Augmentation below Factor 2
      Vera Traub (Universität Bonn, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Vera Traub
       Joint work of Vera Traub, Rico Zenklusen
      Main reference Vera Traub, Rico Zenklusen: “A (1.5+ϵ)-Approximation Algorithm for Weighted Connectivity
                     Augmentation”, in Proc. of the 55th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC
                     2023, Orlando, FL, USA, June 20-23, 2023, pp. 1820–1833, ACM, 2023.
                URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3564246.3585122


      The Weighted Connectivity Augmentation Problem (WCAP) asks to increase the edge-
      connectivity of a graph in the cheapest possible way by adding edges from a given set. It is
      one of the most elementary network design problems for which no better-than-2 approximation
      algorithm has been known, whereas 2-approximations can be easily obtained through a variety
      of well-known techniques.
          In this talk, I will discuss an approach showing that approximation factors below 2
      are achievable for WCAP, ultimately leading to a (1.5 + ϵ)-approximation algorithm. Our
      approach is based on a highly structured directed simplification of WCAP with planar optimal
      solutions. We show how one can successively improve solutions of this directed simplification
      by moving to mixed-solutions, consisting of both directed and undirected edges. These
      insights can be leveraged in local search and relative greedy strategies, inspired by recent
      advances on the Weighted Tree Augmentation Problem, to obtain a (1.5 + ϵ)-approximation
      algorithm for WCAP.
Karthik C. S., Parinya Chalermsook, Joachim Spoerhase, and Meirav Zehavi                                        103


 4     Panel discussions
4.1    Panel Discussion
Frances A. Rosamond (University of Bergen, NO), Amir Abboud (Weizmann Institute –
Rehovot, IL), Michael R. Fellows (University of Bergen, NO), Venkatesan Guruswami
(University of California – Berkeley, US), Bingkai Lin (Nanjing University, CN), and Saket
Saurabh (The Institute of Mathematical Sciences – Chennai, IN)
      License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Frances A. Rosamond, Amir Abboud, Michael R. Fellows, Venkatesan Guruswami, Bingkai Lin,
                and Saket Saurabh


The aim of the panel was fostering exchange between the various research communities
(eg, parameterized and approximation algorithms as well as hardness of approximation) by
identifying (i) general key challenges (meta research questions in a conceptual or technical
sense) that are important to advance and promote the field, (ii) suitable taxonomy that
allows to classify the possible algorithmic results, (iii) advance systematic understanding (in
contrast to ad-hoc results), (iv) and concrete open research questions.
    In particular the panelists discussed (under the moderation of Frances Rosamond) the
following questions.
    In which direction would you like to see the field grow?
    What is a distinctive technical challenge in parameterized approximation? By “distinctive
    challenge” we mean an (exciting) technical challenge that (may) require an approach that
    goes beyond combining techniques that were previously already used in parameterization
    or approximation separately. We believe that it is crucial for the field to gain momentum
    and attract researchers that there are such unique challenges.
    What is your favorite result in the field?

   After the panelists discussed the three questions, the floor was opened to all the parti-
cipants of the Dagstuhl Seminar to share their ideas.



 5     Open problems
5.1    TSP with line-neighborhoods in R3
Antonios Antoniadis (University of Twente, NL)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Antonios Antoniadis


The traveling salesperson problem (TSP) with line neighborhoods given a set of n lines in R3
one seeks a shortest tour (closed curve) C that visits each line. A line L is visited by C if and
only if C ∩ L is non-empty. In [1] an O(log3 n)-approximation algorithm was presented that
is based on a reduction from TSP with line neighborhoods to Group Steiner Tree (at the loss
of a constant factor in the approximation ratio). The setting where the lines are parallel is
equivalent to solving a classical Euclidean instance in R2 and thus the problem is NP-hard. It
was also shown among other results in [2], that the problem is actually APX-hard and admits
an O(log2 n)-approximation algorithm, albeit with a running time of nO(log log n) . Given the
large gap between the respective upper and lower bounds, the most important open question
with respect to the problem is whether or not it admits a constant-approximation algorithm.




                                                                                                             23291
104   23291 – Parameterized Approximation: Algorithms and Hardness


      References
      1    Adrian Dumitrescu and Csaba D. Tóth. The traveling salesman problem for lines, balls,
           and planes. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 12(3):43:1–43:29, 2016.
      2    Antonios Antoniadis, Sándor Kisfaludi-Bak, Bundit Laekhanukit, and Daniel Vaz. On
           the approximability of the traveling salesman problem with line neighborhoods. In Artur
           Czumaj and Qin Xin, editors, 18th Scandinavian Symposium and Workshops on Algorithm
           Theory, SWAT 2022, June 27-29, 2022, Tórshavn, Faroe Islands, volume 227 of LIPIcs,
           pages 10:1–10:21. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2022.



      5.2    Parameterized approximability of clustering problems
      Vincent Cohen-Addad (Google Paris, FR)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Vincent Cohen-Addad


      Given a set of points (clients) C and a set of facilities F in a metric space (C ∪ F, dist),
      the classic k-Median problem asks to find a subset S ⊆ F of size k (the centers), such that
                                  P
      the total distance d(S) := p∈C minc∈S dist(p, c) of points in C to the closest facility is
      minimized.
      1. Find a (1 + 2/e)-approximation that runs in time 2O(k) poly(n) (where (C ∪ F, dist) is an
         arbitrary metric space).
      2. Consider the continuous setting of k-median with L∞ metrics (i.e.: C is a subset of Rd
         and F is Rd ). Find a 2-Approximation that runs in 2O(k) poly(nd) time.



      5.3    Parameterized Approximation for the Santa Claus Problem
      Fabrizio Grandoni (SUPSI – Lugano, CH)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Fabrizio Grandoni


      In the Santa Claus problem we are given a collection of presents and a collection of children.
      Each present i has a value vij ≥ 0 for child j. The happiness of a child j is the sum of
      the values of the presents that (s)he receives. Our goal is to assign the presents so as to
      maximize the minimum happiness of any child. Santa Claus turns out to be an extremely
      challenging problem in terms of approximation algorithms. The best known lower bound on
      the (polynomial-time) approximation ratio is 2, while the best known upper bound on the
      same ratio is polynomial in the number n of items.
          Given the difficulty of this problem, it makes sense to consider FPT approximation
      algorithms. One natural parameter is the number k of children. I did ask if a constant
      approximation (or better) is possible in FPT time. Andreas Wiese made me notice that a
      parameterized approximation scheme (PAS) for this problem is implied by [1] (described in
      the form of an EPTAS for constant k)
          An interesting open question that remains is to define alternative parameters that make
      sense in practice, and design FPT approximation algorithms with respect to them.
      References
      1    Klaus Jansen and Marten Maack. An EPTAS for scheduling on unrelated machines of few
           different types. Algorithmica, 81(10):4134–4164, 2019.
Karthik C. S., Parinya Chalermsook, Joachim Spoerhase, and Meirav Zehavi                              105


5.4    FPT Inapproximability Results Beyond Gap-ETH
Pasin Manurangsi (Google Thailand – Bangkok, TH)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Pasin Manurangsi


While a number of parameterized problems are known to be hard to approximate under the
Gap Exponential Time Hypothesis (Gap-ETH), certain results are still out of reach of the
current techniques even under Gap-ETH. We discuss a few such questions, including:
1. Strong FPT Inapproximability of k-Set Cover. While it is known that approximating
   k-Set Cover to within g(k)-factor is W[1]-hard for any function g[6]. The situation is less
   clear when we allow dependency on n (the number of elements in the universe) in the
   approximation factor; the greedy algorithm yields O(log n)-approximation while the best
   known ETH-hardness result is only Ω̃(log1/k n)[4]. Open Question: Can we improve this
   hardness to, say, Ω(log0.99 n) under Gap-ETH?
2. Total FPT Inapproximability of Exact k-Set Cover. Exact k-Set Cover is a special case
   of the Set Cover problem where we are promised that there exists a set cover of size k
   such that the subsets in the solution are all disjoint. (Note here that the output solution
   only needs to cover the space but needs not be disjoint.) This version of Set Cover is often
   useful in subsequent reductions, e.g. to Coding-theoretic and Lattice problems. While
   the hardness of Exact Set Cover is achieved for free in the NP-hardness of approximation
   reduction for Set Cover of Feige[3], the parameterized hardness reductions do not give
   the hardness of such a version. This is due to the so-called “projection” property in
   Label Cover, which does not hold in the parameterized version of Label Cover used in
   the FPT hardness regime; in fact, it is not hard to see that requiring such projection
   properties will lead to at most 2k gap. To the best of our knowledge, the best FPT
   hardness of approximation of Exact Set Cover based on Gap-ETH is only k 1/2−−o(1) ,
   which follows from the result of Manurangsi and Dinur [2]. Open Question: Can we rule
   out all g(k)-approximation FPT algorithm for Exact k-Set Cover?
3. Total FPT Inapproximability of Densest k-Subgraph (with perfect completeness). The
   best known FPT hardness of approximation under Gap-ETH of Densest k-Subgraph
   has inapproximability factor of k o(1) (where o(1) can be any function that converges to
   zero as k → ∞)[1]. On the other hand, under a non-standard “Strongish Planted Clique
   Hypothesis”, this factor can be improved to o(k)[5]. Open Question: Can we prove the
   same hardness under Gap-ETH?

References
 1 Parinya Chalermsook, Marek Cygan, Guy Kortsarz, Bundit Laekhanukit, Pasin Manurangsi,
     Danupon Nanongkai, and Luca Trevisan. From gap-exponential time hypothesis to fixed
     parameter tractable inapproximability: Clique, dominating set, and more. SIAM J. Comput.,
     49(4):772–810, 2020.
 2 Irit Dinur and Pasin Manurangsi. Eth-hardness of approximating 2-csps and directed steiner
     network. In Anna R. Karlin, editor, 9th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science
     Conference, ITCS 2018, January 11-14, 2018, Cambridge, MA, USA, volume 94 of LIPIcs,
     pages 36:1–36:20. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018.
 3 Uriel Feige. A threshold of ln n for approximating set cover. J. ACM, 45(4):634–652, 1998.
 4 Bingkai Lin. A simple gap-producing reduction for the parameterized set cover problem.
     In Christel Baier, Ioannis Chatzigiannakis, Paola Flocchini, and Stefano Leonardi, editors,
     46th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2019,




                                                                                                   23291
106   23291 – Parameterized Approximation: Algorithms and Hardness


            July 9-12, 2019, Patras, Greece, volume 132 of LIPIcs, pages 81:1–81:15. Schloss Dagstuhl -
            Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019.
       5    Pasin Manurangsi, Aviad Rubinstein, and Tselil Schramm. The strongish planted clique
            hypothesis and its consequences. In James R. Lee, editor, 12th Innovations in Theoretical
            Computer Science Conference, ITCS 2021, January 6-8, 2021, Virtual Conference, volume
            185 of LIPIcs, pages 10:1–10:21. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2021.
       6    Karthik C. S., Bundit Laekhanukit, and Pasin Manurangsi. On the parameterized complexity
            of approximating dominating set. J. ACM, 66(5), aug 2019.



      5.5    (2 − ε)-approximation for the Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem
      Hang Zhou (Ecole Polytechnique – Palaiseau, FR)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Hang Zhou


      In the capacitated vehicle routing problem, we are given a metric space with a vertex called
      depot and a set of vertices called terminals. The goal is to find a minimum length collection
      of tours starting and ending at the depot such that each tour visits at most k terminals, and
      each terminal is visited by some tour. We consider this problem in the Euclidean plane. The
      best-to-date approximation ratio was 2 + ϵ using the iterated tour partitioning technique
      introduced by Haimovich and Rinnooy Kan. It is an open question whether there is a
      better-than-2 approximation.
Karthik C. S., Parinya Chalermsook, Joachim Spoerhase, and Meirav Zehavi                           107


        Participants
  Amir Abboud                   Lawqueen Kanesh                   Rajiv Raman
Weizmann Institute –          Indian Institute of Techology –   University Blaise Pascal –
Rehovot, IL                   Jodhpur, IN                       Aubiere, FR & IIIT Delhi –
  Antonios Antoniadis          Matthias Kaul                    New Delhi, IN
University of Twente, NL      TU Hamburg, DE                      Frances A. Rosamond
  Jarek Byrka                                                   University of Bergen, NO
                               Madhumita Kundu
University of Wroclaw, PL     University of Bergen, NO            Saket Saurabh
  Karthik C. S.                                                 The Institute of Mathematical
Rutgers University – New        Euiwoong Lee                    Sciences – Chennai, IN
Brunswick, US                 University of Michigan –
                              Ann Arbor, US                       Chris Schwiegelshohn
  Parinya Chalermsook                                           Aarhus University, DK
Aalto University, FI            Jason Li
                              University of California –          Hadas Shachnai
  Vincent Cohen-Addad                                           Technion – Haifa, IL
                              Berkeley, US
Google – Paris, FR
                                Bingkai Lin                       Roohani Sharma
  Klim Efremenko                                                MPI für Informatik –
Ben Gurion University –       Nanjing University, CN
                                                                Saarbrücken, DE
Beer Sheva, IL                 Pasin Manurangsi
                                                                  Krzysztof Sornat
  Andreas Emil Feldmann       Google Thailand – Bangkok, TH
                                                                SUPSI – Lugano, CH
University of Sheffield, GB     Dániel Marx                       Joachim Spoerhase
  Michael R. Fellows          CISPA – Saarbrücken, DE           University of Sheffield, GB
University of Bergen, NO
                                Pranabendu Misra                  Vera Traub
  Ameet Gadekar               Chennai Mathematical
Aalto University, FI                                            Universität Bonn, DE
                              Institute, IN
  Fabrizio Grandoni                                               Daniel Vaz
                               Tobias Mömke                     ENS – Paris, FR
SUPSI – Lugano, CH            Universität Augsburg, DE
  Carla Groenland                                                 Andreas Wiese
Utrecht University, NL          Danupon Nanongkai               TU München, DE
                              MPI für Informatik –
  Venkatesan Guruswami                                            Meirav Zehavi
                              Saarbrücken, DE
University of California –                                      Ben Gurion University –
Berkeley, US                   Marcin Pilipczuk                 Beer Sheva, IL
  Martin Herold               University of Warsaw, PL            Hang Zhou
MPI für Informatik –           Nidhi Purohit                    Ecole Polytechnique –
Saarbrücken, DE               University of Bergen, NO          Palaiseau, FR




                                                                                                23291
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 23292

SportsHCI
Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller∗1 , Carine Lallemand∗2 , Dennis Reidsma∗3 ,
Elise van den Hoven∗4 , and Maria F. Montoya†5
1       Exertion Games Lab, Monash University, Melbourne, AU.
        floyd@exertiongameslab.org
2       HCI Research group, University of Luxembourg, LU & Industrial Design
        Department, TU Eindhoven, NL. c.e.lallemand@tue.nl
3       Human Media Interaction, University of Twente, Enschede, NL.
        d.reidsma@utwente.nl
4       Interaction Design Discipline, Faculty of Engineering & IT, University of
        Technology Sydney, AU & Industrial Design Department, TU Eindhoven, NL.
        elise.vandenhoven@uts.edu.au
5       Monash University – Clayton, AU. Maria.MontoyaVega@monash.edu

        Abstract
This report presents the work developed by 22 researchers and academics from across the world
gathered for a week in Schloss Dagstuhl, Saarland, Germany, to discuss the future of interactive
systems designed to support sport and exercise activity, a field called Sports HCI. Firstly, we
present the activities developed day by day, from attendee’s presentations to concrete community
actions. Secondly, we show in detail the talks presented by the attendees, the interactivity and
demo sessions, the discussion sessions, and the implications of the discussed topics to the Sports
HCI field. Finally, we present the Sports HCI design pathways that attendees proposed based on
the daily activities developed throughout the seminar. Ultimately, we hope this report inspires
and motivates other Dagstuhl seminar proposals interested in the exciting field of HCI.
Seminar July 16–21, 2023 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/23292
2012 ACM Subject Classification Human-centered computing → Interaction paradigms
Keywords and phrases SportsHCI, Embodiment, Wearables, Mobile Computing
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.13.7.108



    1    Executive Summary
Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller
Carine Lallemand
Dennis Reidsma
Elise van den Hoven
        License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Carine Lallemand, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven


In July 2023, a seminar took place in which 22 researchers and academics from across the
world gathered for a week in Schloß Dagstuhl, Saarland, Germany, to discuss the future
of the design of interactive systems to support sport and exercise activity, concerning the
emerging field of “SportsHCI”. The following report documents the seminar and the efforts of
the participants to investigate the underlying gaps in developing interactive technologies for
sports by Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) practitioners, as well as knowledge guiding the
design of such technologies, and the challenges the field of SportsHCI faces moving forward.


∗
    Editor / Organizer
†
    Editorial Assistant / Collector
            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
SportsHCI, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 13, Issue 7, pp. 108–151
Editors: Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven
                    Dagstuhl Reports
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                     109


    Interactive systems are increasingly used to support sports and physical exercise activities,
not only for functional purposes, such as sensing achievements to determine personal records
but also for experiential reasons, such as highlighting the joy of movement, aiming to enrich
the sports experience. The result is a surge in human-computer interaction systems for
sports, such as sports watches that not only optimize runners’ athletic training plans but
also provide beat-adjusted music for entertainment, augmented reality systems in stadiums
to support the audience experience, and AI-enhanced capture systems to allow parents to
watch their kids play soccer from afar in real-time. We call the resulting field “SportsHCI”.
    A growing body of sensors, devices, and systems support these SportsHCI applications,
allowing people to engage with athletic performance in novel and interesting ways, extending
the field of HCI beyond the mouse and keyboard paradigm. Unfortunately, what is missing,
though, is a thorough understanding of how to design such SportsHCI systems in a systematic
way. This is in part due to a lack of a theoretical framework that is concerned with the coming
together of computing and the physically active human body in a way that incorporates
and integrates all aspects of movement, performance, learning, and experience, and a lack of
understanding of how this combination has implications for how we approach the design of
SportsHCI. It seems reasonable to assume that efforts that aim to address this could help
people to engage more in physical activity and make high performance more accessible, and
maybe even reach previously unengaged people, motivating them to try physical activity,
so that ultimately, more people profit from the many physical, social, and mental health
benefits sport and exercise activity can provide.
    This Dagstuhl Seminar built on prior work that highlighted that supporting sport and
exercise activities with technology should not only be concerned with functional aspects,
such as measuring and comparing athletic performance, but it should also consider the
experiential aspects, in other words, for example, how do sports people feel about their
athletic performance. Therefore, this seminar invited experts from across the world and with
different backgrounds, who understand that successful sport and exercise activity-support
technology needs to be designed also with this experiential perspective in mind, and seek to
develop guidance on how to support it. This seminar invited experts from both industry and
academia, including experts from sports science as well as HCI and design, to work towards
several large goals, including the identification of grand challenges in SportsHCI, so that a
coherent approach could be developed to help more people profit from the benefits of sports
and physical exercise.
    There were several main outcomes of the Dagstuhl Seminar. The most notable of these
are: a draft Grand Challenges paper was outlined, which since then has been finalised and
submitted to a major conference in the field; an outline was made for a large Marie Curie
grant proposal that accommodates all participants in the seminar; a proposal and call for
papers have been drafted for a special issue in one of the major journals in the field; and plans
have been laid for setting up, over the course of the coming two years, a separate international
conference dedicated to the topic of this seminar. Furthermore, additional papers have been
identified that could be developed jointly on the basis of the work done in this seminar. For
all these points, concrete community actions were identified, and participants volunteered
to take the lead on those actions, thus ensuring followup on the ideas developed during the
seminar. Indeed, since finalizing the seminar, several of these action points have already
been further taken up.




                                                                                                    23292
110   23292 – Sports HCI


       2       Table of Contents
      Executive Summary
        Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Carine Lallemand, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den
        Hoven . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108

      Organisation of the Seminar
           Preparations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
           Day 1: Introductions to the Seminar and Participants; Initial Challenges . . . . . . 113
           Day 2: Interactivity session and group work on the Grand Challenges . . . . . . . 114
           Day 3: Concrete Community Actions; Hike . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
           Day 4: Novel SportsHCI Designs and Potential Scientific Impact . . . . . . . . . . 115
           Day 5: Wrap-up, Conclusive Remarks, and Concrete Followup Actions . . . . . . . 116

      Overview of Talks
           Embodied interaction
           Elise van den Hoven . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
           Designerly approaches to exercising motivation and injury prevention
           Carine Lallemand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
           Research focus in context
           Dennis Reidsma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
           From gymnastics and carpentry to critical sports interaction design
           Lars Elbæk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
           Designing Sports Interaction Technology to create meaningful movement for all
           Dees Postma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
           Complexity simplified? Understanding and Designing for the Subjective experiences
           of Objective Sports Measures
           Armağan Karahanoğlu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
           SportsHCI: where interactive technologies inspire new uses and users
           Robby van Delden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
           Digital Breathing Coach – exploring explicit interaction on the run
           Vincent van Rheden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
           Designing Superhero Movement Experiences
           Perttu Hämäläinen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
           Digital Motion in Sports, Fitness, and Wellbeing
           Lisa Anneke Burr . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
           Using Human Augmentations to Learn and Enhance Sports Skills
           Don Samitha Elvitigala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
           Multisensory Wearable Technology to Enhance and Transform Body Perception
           Laia Turmo Vidal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
           Athlete Experience in Figure Skating and Outdoor Recreation
           Michael Jones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                      111


   Data visualization in sports
   Paolo Buono . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
   Towards the Design of Playful water activities
   Maria Fernanda Montoya Vega . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
   Blending micro-health behaviors into everyday activities through “invitations” as
   SportsHCI
   Xipei Ren . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
   Experiencing Cycling Indoors and Outdoors
   Andrii Matviienko . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
   AI+MR for augmented sport training systems
   Fabio Zambetta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
   Towards SportsHCI to improve skill acquisition and performance in athletes
   Florian Daiber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
   The Role of HCI in Enhancing Inclusivity and Encouraging Engagement in Sports
   and Exercise
   Daniel Harrison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
   SportsHCI benefits from integration
   Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
   Digital Twins and SportsHCI: Design Challenges and Benefits
   Regina Bernhaupt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127

Overview of Interactivity Session . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127

Defining the Grand Challenges of Sports HCI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
   Time in SportsHCI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
   Strategic vision for the field of SportsHCI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
   Performance and Experience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
   Subjective and Objective Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
   Engineering SportsHCI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
   Other Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135

Design for SportsHCI: Design Lenses, Role Play, and Impact Pathways . . 136
   SportsHCI lens: Reverie
   Laia Turmo Vidal, Carine Lallemand, Lars Elbæk, Daniel Harrison . . . . . . . . . 137
   SportsHCI lens: Pleasure
   Regina Bernhaupt, Maria Fernanda Montoya Vega, Perttu Hämäläinen, Vincent
   van Rheden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
   SportsHCI lens: Beauty in movement – Multi-equality spaces in sports
   Dennis Reidsma, Andrii Matviienko, Xipei Ren, Paolo Buono . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
   SportsHCI lens: Pain in sports
   Michael Jones, Fabio Zambetta, Armağan Karahanoğlu, Don Samitha Elvitigala . . 145
   SportsHCI lens: Humility in sports
   Florian Daiber, Floyd ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dees Postma, Robby van Delden . . . . . . 146




                                                                                                     23292
112   23292 – Sports HCI


      Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149

      Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                   113


 3     Organisation of the Seminar
The Seminar was organised in several phases to lead to the definition of Grand Challenges in
the field of SportsHCI, as well as to articulate concrete community actions to bring the field
forward after completion of the Seminar. First, participants introduced themselves and their
work and identified initial challenges that they encountered in their work. These challenges
were collected, extended through discussions, and roughly organised into candidate Grand
Challenges for the field of SportsHCI. These Grand Challenges were elaborated further in
break-out groups. To elaborate our shared vision on these challenges, they were then built
upon to articulate novel design ideas in teams of four or five participants, followed by a
session in which the teams built on the design ideas to articulate the potential for scientific
impact for each of those ideas. This further clarified our thoughts on the Grand Challenges
as well. In addition, demonstrations of novel SportsHCI systems by various participants
as well as a hike in the environment were organised for inspiration and to trigger further
exchange of ideas. Finally, the week ended with a session in which everyone worked on the
report, on documentation of results, and on identifying (and volunteering for) follow-up
actions to be taken after the Seminar. The remainder of this section describes these various
activities in more detail in chronological order.



3.1    Preparations
Prior to the workshop, the organizers have asked the participants to prepare a pitch (Pecha
Kucha format), including the following elements: an introduction of each participant (includ-
ing their hobbies), a presentation of their relevant SportsHCI work, their expectations for
the seminar, their recommended reading for other participants and their rationale behind
that choice, and the challenges they encountered in their work in the SportsHCI field. The
recommended readings were collected in a shared folder, and more were added throughout
the week.
    A spreadsheet “who has what to offer” was furthermore shared prior to the seminar, with
a focus on sports and activities that could be done during the week. Participants brought
equipment and offered joint sessions of the following activities: running, meditation, yoga,
gymnastic rings, volleyball, table tennis.



3.2    Day 1: Introductions to the Seminar and Participants; Initial
       Challenges
The seminar took place in one of the Dagstuhl school’s conference rooms. Beforehand, the
organizers established several work group materials, such as whiteboards, flipover sheets,
sticky notes, and markers, to allow participants to record their thoughts and opinions and
share them in easy sight inside the room. To begin the seminar, an interactive icebreaker
activity was first undertaken to foster quick connections among the participants and establish
a playful and enthusiastic group atmosphere. The activity involved forming a circle, where
each participant introduced themselves with their name and a corresponding bodily gesture.
The rest of the participants would then repeat both the name and gesture. Each time a new
participant joined in, all the previous introductions were reiterated in sequence. By the end
of the activity, with 22 participants present, a total of 253 introductions were accumulated
and everyone was thoroughly familiar with the names of all participants.



                                                                                                  23292
114   23292 – Sports HCI


          After the engaging introductory activity, organizer Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller provided the
      opening remarks, which contextualized the seminar and set the basis for the discussion
      of designing for SportHCI. Floyd encouraged participants to add, while listening through
      the various introductions, their thoughts on “challenges and opportunities” of designing for
      SportsHCI to the available flipover sheets at any time during the session.
          Each seminar participant then gave a prepared presentation introducing their research (see
      Figure 1). In order to preserve a spirit of open and spontaneous group ideation, discourse, and
      collaboration, we strove to avoid a conference-like format of dry, dense lengthy presentations
      and instead adopted for a “Pecha Kucha” inspired presentation format; a rapid-fire series
      of short six-minute, visually oriented (picture and video) presentations. In addition to
      showcasing their work and its relation to SportsHCI, the content of each presentation also
      included an articulation of what the presenter expected from the seminar, the challenges they
      encountered in their investigations, and what prior work the group should read and why. An
      abstract of each presentation can be found at the end of the present report. Finally, during
      the Pecha Kucha talks, challenges that presenters mentioned and challenges that attendees
      members associated through the presentation were added as sticky notes to flipover sheets.
      They were initially grouped according to five categories: technology, users, society, research,
      and design.




         Figure 1 Pecha Kucha sessions, where all participants introduced their research related to
      SportsHCI.




      3.3    Day 2: Interactivity session and group work on the Grand Challenges
      An interactivity-style session involved participants trying out each others’ SportsHCI systems
      and artefacts. These demonstrations are documented in Section 5.
          The remainder of the day was spent working further on elaborating Grand Challenges for
      the field of SportsHCI. This was prepared beforehand by organiser Dennis Reidsma using a
      shared information board in the Miro platform. All challenges and opportunities identified
      in Day 1 were added to this information board as separate notes, and lightly grouped into
      themes prior to the session on Day 2. In a plenary session on Day 2, participants associated
      additional themes with these notes. A discussion on what constitutes a “grand challenge”
      was held, and some inclusion and exclusion criteria were defined. Participants were then
      invited to select a few key challenges for the next stage of the activity.
          Then, in breakout groups in two rounds (groups were reshuffled in round 2), challenges
      were further worked out on the Miro board as the next step towards getting at our grand
      challenges. After each round, a plenary presentation was given by each group, where they
      briefly described the current understanding of the high-level description of the challenge, and
      mentioned several core facets to the challenge. This process is further described in Section 6.
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                         115


3.4    Day 3: Concrete Community Actions; Hike
In the morning of the third day, organiser Elise van den Hoven facilitated a strategic discussion
on ways to bring the field forward. The focus was now not on the content and research
problems but rather on organisational things that we as a field can pursue to consolidate
the field of sportsHCI (special issues, workshops or special venues, etc). Participants first
wrote down individual ideas for follow-up actions, which were then collectively sorted and
clustered on the digital Miro board. This was followed by a plenary discussion to clean
up the categories and clarify the ideas. Subsequently, participants split up into subgroups,
selecting the most important action points. Participants were then invited to take concrete
action by writing text for five key action points (e.g., draft the call for a journal special issue).
These outcomes were documented as separate documents, and shared between participants
for future action.
    In the afternoon, participants joined the traditional Saarschleife Tafeltour hike in the
region. Organizers suggested taking the opportunity of walking together to share career
mentoring advice.




   Figure 2 Participants to the SportsHCI seminar hiking in the region.




3.5    Day 4: Novel SportsHCI Designs and Potential Scientific Impact
In the morning of the fourth day, organizer Carine Lallemand invited the participants to
participate in a design challenge based on the paper “10 lenses to design Sports-HCI” [1].
The goal was to come up with design concepts related to one of the lenses, and to present
them in the form of a role playing activity. Participants were randomly assigned to a group
of 4 and randomly assigned a lens from the 10 lenses of the paper. After reading the 2-3
pages on that lens, each group could choose their own method to come up with ideas for
designs; then they picked one and acted it out to the other groups. A quick debriefing was
done with the groups after the roleplay. This was all documented in text (see Section 7) as
well as in videos shared in the shared repository maintained by the organisers. This exercise
was furthermore the inspiration for one of the outcomes of the seminar (plans for a follow-up
paper on the lenses).
    In the afternoon, organiser Dennis Reidsma presented slides to introduce the idea of
an impact pathway, along with relevant terminologies and resources. These pathways are
particularly interesting for funding proposals, as they are the basis for many funding agencies’
expectations regarding articulation of expected scientific impact. The groups (same as in the
morning) proceeded to write an impact pathway related to their design lens and concept, in
the standard pattern used on the slides. These impact pathway descriptions are presented in
Section 7.
    In the evening, participants were invited by participant Florian Daiber to join a visit to
the DFKI lab. Half of the group travelled to Saarbrücken to experience the infinity climbing
demo which is included in the overview of the interactivity session in Section 5.

                                                                                                        23292
116   23292 – Sports HCI


      3.6      Day 5: Wrap-up, Conclusive Remarks, and Concrete Followup
               Actions
      The last morning of the seminar was devoted to wrapping up all the ideas and insights
      collected during the week. Based on a report outline prepared by Carine Lallemand and a
      list of tasks, the participants produced extensive notes and text fragments for all chapters of
      this report. They also peer-reviewed the concrete text results from the session of Day 3.
           Besides the report, it was of utmost importance to define and divide the responsibilities
      for the follow-up actions. For all concrete “next step actions”, and based on personal interests
      and preferences, the group assigned a main person as the “shaper / lead” and listed all the
      participants interested to commit to work on the task.
      References
       1 Florian Mueller, Damon Young, et al. 10 lenses to design sports-hci. Foundations and
           Trends® in Human–Computer Interaction, 12(3):172–237, 2018.



          4    Overview of Talks
      4.1      Embodied interaction
      Elise van den Hoven (University of Technology Sydney – Sydney, AU & Eindhoven University
      of Technology, NL, elise.vandenhoven@uts.edu.au)
              License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                        © Elise van den Hoven


      Within my international research program Materialising Memories (MM)1 we study embodied
      interaction in its different meanings. This includes physical technology on or around human
      bodies as well as giving tangible artefacts agency (according to a definition by Dourish [1]).
      The typical MM application aims to support remembering practices in the broadest possible
      sense, including sharing holiday memories, reflection about everyday life, grieving a lost loved
      one, curating digital photo collections to understanding forgetfulness in older adults, to name
      a few. One of the projects focuses on motor memory, which is the memory of the muscles in
      the human body and relevant to SportsHCI. We are currently investigating whether HCI
      and interaction design can use this as a resource for designing technology, and how people
      can benefit from technology designed by taking motor memory into account.
      References
      1    Paul Dourish. Where the action is: the foundations of embodied interaction. MIT press,
           2001.


      1
          https://www.materialisingmemories.com/
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                   117


4.2    Designerly approaches to exercising motivation and injury prevention
Carine Lallemand (University of Luxembourg, LU & Eindhoven University of Technology,
NL, carine.lallemand@uni.lu)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Carine Lallemand


As the leader of an educational community focused on challenge-based learning for sports,
wellbeing and preventive health (Vitality Squad, TU Eindhoven), I have been supervising
or leading a large variety of projects related to SportsHCI. Being part of a department of
industrial design, our vision revolved around designerly ways to trigger healthy lifestyles
with solutions contributing to both physical and mental vitality. Relying on aesthetics
of interaction principles and the use of data as a creative material, we design interactive
artefacts to support motivation and change. My work, done in collaboration with several
Ph.D. candidates, covers several application areas and target audiences, with a main focus
on exercising motivation (Daphne Menheere), sports injury prevention (Juan Restrepo
Villamizar), office vitality through active ways of working (Ida Damen, Roy van den Heuvel),
and the design of (inter)active urban environments (Loes van Renswouw [1, 2, 3]). We see
an important role for data in the design process, to gain insight into these complex new
behavior patterns in everyday life.
    In my talk, I presented several projects to illustrate our main design approaches. Based
on the Runners’ journey [4, 5], projects were developed to trigger exercising motivation using
qualitative interfaces [6, 7], data physicalization [8], and aesthetics of friction [9, 10]. We
approached injury prevention by on-skin interfaces [11] or the concept of interaction-through-
negotiation [12]. I concluded my talk with two challenges for SportsHCI: 1/ the necessity
to further develop non-normative views on sports and motivation and to address audiences
who are not already intrinsically motivated by physical activity. 2/ the responsible and
meaningful use of data.
References
 1 Loes van Renswouw, Steven Vos, Pieter van Wesemael, and Carine Lallemand. Exploring
     the design space of interactive urban environments: Triggering physical activity through
     embedded technology. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Designing Interactive Systems
     Conference, DIS ’21, page 955–969, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing
     Machinery.
 2 Loes van Renswouw, Jelle Neerhof, Steven Vos, Pieter van Wesemael, and Carine Lallemand.
     Sensation: Sonifying the urban running experience. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI
     Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI EA ’21, New York, NY, USA,
     2021. Association for Computing Machinery.
 3 Pieter van Wesemael Loes van Renswouw, Carine Lallemand and Steven Vos. Creating
     active urban environments: insights from expert interviews. Cities & Health, 7(3):463–479,
     2023.
 4 Daphne Menheere, Carine Lallemand, Erik Van Der Spek, Carl Megens, Andrew Vande Mo-
     ere, Mathias Funk, and Steven Vos. The runner’s journey: Identifying design opportunities
     for running motivation technology. In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human-
     Computer Interaction: Shaping Experiences, Shaping Society, pages 1–14, 2020.
 5 Daphne Menheere, Mark Janssen, Mathias Funk, Erik van der Spek, Carine Lallemand,
     and Steven Vos. Runner’s perceptions of reasons to quit running: Influence of gender, age
     and running-related characteristics. International Journal of Environmental Research and
     Public Health, 17(17):6046, August 2020.




                                                                                                  23292
118   23292 – Sports HCI


       6    Dan Lockton. Designing qualitative interfaces: Experiences from studio education. In
            DRS2022: Bilbao, DRS2022. Design Research Society, June 2022.
       7    Daphne Menheere, Carine Lallemand, Ilse Faber, Jesse Pepping, Bram Monkel, Stella Xu,
            and Steven Vos. Graceful interactions and social support as motivational design strategies
            to encourage women in exercising. In Proceedings of the Halfway to the Future Symposium
            2019, HTTF 2019, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery.
       8    Daphne Menheere, Evianne van Hartingsveldt, Mads Birkebæk, Steven Vos, and Carine
            Lallemand. Laina: Dynamic data physicalization for slow exercising feedback. In Proceedings
            of the 2021 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference, DIS ’21, page 1015–1030, New
            York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery.
       9    Alynne de Haan, Daphne Menheere, Steven Vos, and Carine Lallemand. Aesthetic of
            friction for exercising motivation: A prototyping journey. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
            Designing Interactive Systems Conference, DIS ’21, page 1056–1067, New York, NY, USA,
            2021. Association for Computing Machinery.
      10    Daphne Menheere, Alynne de Haan, Steven Vos, and Carine Lallemand. Raya: A tangible
            exercise buddy reminding oneself of the commitment to exercise. In Human-Computer
            Interaction – INTERACT 2021: 18th IFIP TC 13 International Conference, Bari, Italy,
            August 30 – September 3, 2021, Proceedings, Part V, page 471–475, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2021.
            Springer-Verlag.
      11    Juan Restrepo-Villamizar, Steven Vos, Evert Verhagen, and Carine Lallemand. Crafting
            on-skin interfaces: An embodied prototyping journey. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
            Designing Interactive Systems Conference, DIS ’21, page 1129–1142, New York, NY, USA,
            2021. Association for Computing Machinery.
      12    Juan Restrepo. Hyaku: A qualitative negotiation-through-interaction interface to support
            runners in achieving balanced training sessions. In DRS2022: Bilbao, DRS2022. Design
            Research Society, June 2022.



      4.3    Research focus in context
      Dennis Reidsma (University of Twente – Enschede, NL, d.reidsma@utwente.nl)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Dennis Reidsma


      My work in Sports Interaction Technology is shaped around Things that Interact for a
      Purpose against a background of Theory and Domain Knowledge. Each of these may be
      the focus of my research in some projects, but may as easily serve as the mere context for
      other projects. The “things” are typically digital technologies, often with expressive qualities.
      Holographic virtual reality for telepresence; smart objects with sensors and lights on a sports
      field; game-like settings in immersive virtual reality; robots and embodied agents; music
      technology; and many more. When the “thing” is the central concern, research questions
      involve finding good architectures, algorithms, and models, or working on novel creative,
      and playful designs. Alternatively, the “thing” may just be something used as a vehicle to
      explore other questions. The “interaction” in my work involves the sense-think-act cycle that
      is always embedded in the technology that I develop or use. Research questions at this level
      are about modifying elements in that cycle (what is sensed, what form do responses take,
      and how are the two mapped in an unfolding interactive dialog with the technology) and
      asking how this changes the immediate social and physical behaviour and experience of users.
      The larger “purpose” of my work tends to involve contributions to play, care, and learning –
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                      119


sports can be said to be all three of those. Research questions that focus on the purpose
mostly concern longer-term impact: does the technology indeed change social relations,
health, and well-being, learning, etcetera? These questions are typically very intensive to
answer and thus less frequently put in the center of my own work. The “theory and domain
knowledge” about sports, play, and movement, finally, is present in two ways. On the one
hand, it serves as a necessary foundation to inform the other three pillars. On the other
hand, sports interaction technology can be used as a lab setup to explore and answer more
fundamental questions that contribute to sports and movement theory.



4.4    From gymnastics and carpentry to critical sports interaction design
Lars Elbæk (University of Southern Denmark – Odense M, DK, lelbaek@health.sdu.dk)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Lars Elbæk


As a former elite gymnast, it paved my way into sports science, and I challenged myself
to re-train the backward somersault to show off on my 60-year birthday. Despite being a
trained carpenter with dyslexia, I pursued building houses, incorporating the double diamond
as a window design of my house. With philosophy and a sports-physiology master’s, I
entered interaction design, creating SportsPlanner without knowing the discipline. This
journey led to establishing the first Sports Innovation and Entrepreneurship program in
sports science education, encompassing technology. Research has circled around developing
games for an interactive back-yard trampoline, making a platform for filming and using
visual data to strengthen learning in school physical education. As these two projects we
have also in the Kids n’ Tweens project developed the iMO-LEARN interactive stool for
move-and-learn. In the field of physical activity for special needs we have co-designed the
Handi-Wall with the local company PlayAlive inc. We have developed the “Real Man”
platform using gamification for social connecting and enhancing behavioral change among
blue workers. We have co-designed the feedback elements of the Eye4Talent football coaching
tool. Considering health crises and talent development, technology presents ethical dilemmas.
We see reality stars being online coaches having no knowledge and compassion and thus
coaching towards fertilised eating disorders. It could also be that talent is produced from
the many, but too much data may exclude and restrict motivational fellowship, reducing the
talent pool. How will AI affect and on which values should we build ethical future HCIsport?



4.5    Designing Sports Interaction Technology to create meaningful
       movement for all
Dees Postma (University of Twente – Enschede, NL, d.b.w.postma@utwente.nl)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Dees Postma


The field of SportsHCI holds great potential to contribute to a more active and sportful
society. Ubiquitous computing, wearable sensors, and artificial intelligence allow for on-the-fly,
real-time interactions to support motor learning, skill acquisition, performance, and long-term
engagement in sports. To live up to these promises, the field of SportsHCI needs to address
a number of challenges to be able to tackle the big societal issues that we face today. The



                                                                                                     23292
120   23292 – Sports HCI


      first of these challenges is to join forces within the HCI community and beyond to get a
      multidisciplinary perspective on wicked problems like: physical inactivity, decreasing physical
      activity, and impoverished physical literacy. Together, we need to rethink sensing techniques,
      processing approaches, and actuation paradigms to match the capabilities of interactive
      technologies to the needs of sports and movement.



      4.6    Complexity simplified? Understanding and Designing for the
             Subjective experiences of Objective Sports Measures
      Armağan Karahanoğlu (University of Twente – Enschede, NL, a.karahanoglu@utwente.nl)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Armağan Karahanoğlu


      Improving the data accuracy and performance metrics is one of the driving forces of Sports-
      HCI. Research shows that the introduction of performance and biomechanical measurements
      altered the act and practice of sports. However, experience of the data collection technology
      (e.g., sports trackers) changes the way the athletes experience and immerse themselves in
      sports. I argue that athlete’s subjective experience of objective measures is richer and more
      complex than their looking into performance and biomechanical data. For example, athletes
      can misinterpret data or may feel frustrated when the meaning derived from sports data
      does not match with their expectations or feeling of their performance. Furthermore, such
      mismatch and misinterpretation may negatively influence athletes’ perceptions of self, such
      as self-worth and self-care. Hence, I challenge the sports-HCI with going beyond making
      data readable, understandable and interpretable, and investigating the practices of when
      the numbers and the data representation are not aligned with what an athlete feels about
      their body and performance. In my work, I investigate how sports technology influences
      athletes’ experience and sensemaking of sports-data, their sporting and bodily experiences. I
      presented an initial framework that can shed light on investigating athlete’s data sensemaking
      practices and concluded with the grand challenge of further investigating the “subjective
      experiences of objective measures”.



      4.7    SportsHCI: where interactive technologies inspire new uses and
             users
      Robby van Delden (University of Twente – Enschede, NL, r.w.vandelden@utwente.nl)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Robby van Delden


      SportsHCI provides an additional opportunity to engage in sports. Our SportsHCI projects
      include virtual rowing, tag, skiing and volleyball. These projects showed how VR and
      projections might visualise elements of our bodily behaviour and might steer us to behave
      in different ways. It also made us rethink what sports is and what SportsHCI could be.
      This familiarised us with the notion of sportification amidst a un(-)ification triangle of
      playification, gamification, and sportification. Adding or removing sportslike elements might
      be one starting point of what SportsHCI technologies could add in, SportsHCI and beyond.
      We will continue to explore where technologies can really be of added value and will provide
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                   121


new types of motivations. I see interactions can be aimed at getting people to actively move
to exhaustion and excellence, but also as technology which could unlock feelings of awe and
enjoyment of moving physically just a little for entrance level athletes. Furthermore, new and
not yet existing mixed reality sports, such as GPT4’s teamsport SpectraBall where rugby,
beatsaber and football are combined, not only provide new experiences for athletes but also
open up untapped potential for relatedness through the act of jointly (watching) sports.



4.8    Digital Breathing Coach – exploring explicit interaction on the run
Vincent van Rheden (Salzburg Universit, AT, vincent.vanrheden@plus.ac.at)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Vincent van Rheden


In this research project I developed a simple instance of breath coach that supports runners
with breathing. Specifically we support Locomotor-Respiratory Coupling (LRC), also known
as Rhythmic Breathing. Locomotor-Respiratory Coupling (LRC), a breathing technique in
which the breath is coupled to steps, can positively impact running experience and economy.
Locomotor-Respiratory Coupling (LRC), typically is done in whole-integer ratios, counted in
steps per inhalation and exhalation. For example, one could use a 2:2 ratio, implying that
the runner performs two steps per inhalation and two steps per exhalation: An Android
application picks up the runner’s steps and guides the breath through sound feedback. Based
on a proof of concept a full fledged Android application is designed and developed to support
longitudinal studies. Follow-up steps will explore feeding the system with breath data to
further support the runner at individual level when needed. Additionally we aim to explore
explicit interactions during the running activity, exploring interactions that do not interfere
with the running experience or the running motion.



4.9    Designing Superhero Movement Experiences
Perttu Hämäläinen (Aalto University, FI, perttu.hamalainen@aalto.fi)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Perttu Hämäläinen


Human-computer interaction has potential to impact physical activity through two key ways:
Making it easier to learn movement skills and improving the motivation to keep learning and
moving. In my work, I have been mostly focusing on motivation, although my group has
also done some learning interventions. I mostly build on intrinsic motivation theories such
as Self-Determination Theory and the work of Silvia et al. [1] on curiosity. These highlight
the importance of satisfying basic psychological needs such as competence, autonomy, social
relatedness, and novelty. In my talk, I present examples of a stream of research originating in
my own doctoral research, almost 20 years back: Creating “superhero movement experiences”
with both physical and digital manipulations that aim to make one feel more competent as
a mover. For instance, one might become the protagonist of a kung-fu game where one’s
body appears stronger, faster, and more flexible, and where one can execute backflips so
that one only does the movement up to a point that is safe, and the game then takes over
and guides the virtual body through the rest of the skill. I will also briefly comment on




                                                                                                  23292
122   23292 – Sports HCI


      supporting other needs, such as curious exploration of novel movement opportunities in an
      urban environment, approached through an AI system that recognizes parkour spots and
      creates spot maps based on Google Street View images.
      References
      1    Paul J Silvia. Curiosity. The science of interest, pages 97–107, 2017.



      4.10      Digital Motion in Sports, Fitness, and Wellbeing
      Lisa Anneke Burr (Salzburg University, AT, lisaanneke.burr@plus.ac.at)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Lisa Anneke Burr


      The project “Digital Motion in Sports, Fitness, and Wellbeing” (DiMo) is motivated by the
      belief that by digitizing the quality of movement and making emotion visible during movement,
      we can support people in their movement and lead them to optimal performance and motion
      experiences. The project aims to give people a better understanding of their physical activity
      by linking motion and emotion, resulting in an overall new (digital) experience. Within
      this project, I worked on two streams: 1. exploring respiration as an interaction modality
      while in motion, and 2. working with visual respiration data feedback while running. Here,
      my focus lay on supporting breath pacing in treadmill runners while also trying to address
      impacts on breathing awareness. In the seminar, I am really interested in conversations on
      how technology can be used to build or increase body awareness to support training, recovery,
      as well as pleasure and enjoyment during sports. I am also keen to dive into discussions
      about ethical questions that arise in the field of emerging technologies in sports.



      4.11      Using Human Augmentations to Learn and Enhance Sports Skills
      Don Samitha Elvitigala (Monash University – Melbourne, AU, don.elvitigala@monash.edu)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Don Samitha Elvitigala


      Different skills need to be acquired in sports to perform well. Also, following the correct
      technique will not only enhance performance but also will avoid unnecessary injuries. Hence,
      my research has focused on integrating sensing and feedback into our bodies for skill learning
      and enhanced performance. For example, GymSoles allow our body to feel where our
      centre of pressure is to keep the correct body posture while lifting weight. The interface is
      integrated with our body taking foot pressure as input and creating vibrio tactile patterns to
      internalise our centre of pressure allowing the body to keep the correct posture. Similarly,
      in CricketCoach, we explored how feedback from SMA wires could be used in a cricket
      training session to render the hand feedback of a cricket coach, allowing a more naturalistic
      experience in self-cricket learning. In the future, I want to explore how body integrations can
      automatically be adjusted according to the contextual changes of the player’s environment.
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                    123


4.12      Multisensory Wearable Technology to Enhance and Transform
          Body Perception
Laia Turmo Vidal (Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, ES, laia.turmo@uc3m.es)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Laia Turmo Vidal


Attuning to, cultivating, and enhancing body perception is crucial in sports. Advances in
sensing, actuating, and wireless technology offer new ways to understand body physiology
and movements. Further, wearable technology facilitates integration in challenging sporting
contexts. My work in SportsHCI focuses on designing and evaluating sensory technologies
to enhance and transform body perception. I presented two aspects of my work. First,
Intercorporeal Biofeedback, a type of technology that enhances individual and mutual
body perception, and that has been proven to improve understanding, communication,
performance, and movement learning in yoga, strength training and circus training. Secondly,
I presented Body Perception Transformation technologies, which utilize sensory feedback
to create illusions of body changes, like feeling faster, lighter, or more fluid. Evaluations in
everyday physical activity contexts and with dancers have shown that these technologies
yield empowering, creative and motivating experiences for individuals. I concluded presenting
current SportsHCI challenges, and perspectives I wish to discuss.



4.13      Athlete Experience in Figure Skating and Outdoor Recreation
Michael Jones (Brigham Young University – Provo, UT, USA, jones@cs.byu.edu)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Michael Jones


Interactive computing is reshaping the athlete experience in sports and in outdoor recreation
more broadly defined. This talk will discuss these issues in the context of figure skating
and day hiking. In figure skating, the primary issues revolve around injecting data into
the coach-athlete relationship where the athlete is a child and the parent is also involved.
In the context of day hiking we present self-reported motivations for headphone use and
non-use in the United States. These motivations involve safety, mediating social interaction
and creating specific experiences. Before the seminar, I uploaded an essay and a research
paper for pre-seminar reading. The essay frames cars in nature and foreshadows modern
discussions of smartphones and nature. The research paper is an inductive study of sources
of enjoyment in figure skating for elite skaters published in 1989. It focuses on enjoyment–an
important concept in sports at all levels. My tentative pre-seminar grand challenge is:
redefine SportsHCI to enhance the wellness benefits of lifelong participation in sports.




                                                                                                   23292
124   23292 – Sports HCI


      4.14      Data visualization in sports
      Paolo Buono (University of Bari, IT, paolo.buono@uniba.it)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Paolo Buono


      Data visualization is an established field of HCI. One of the main goals is to help users to
      understand and analyze data through visualization techniques and interaction. Visualizations
      have the property of being processed in parallel by the human perceptive system. Good
      visualizations should allow the observer to quickly understand the data and make decisions.
      Classic approaches, such as Shneiderman’s Mantra, cannot be implemented anymore due to
      the massive amount of data. AI might help, but in many cases, the role of the user is not
      clear. Sports data are multivariate and are produced massively, making them challenging to
      compute and visualize. We aim to investigate the feasibility and utility of data visualization
      in sports, analyzing first soccer data visualization and interactive interfaces for video analysis.



      4.15      Towards the Design of Playful water activities
      Maria Fernanda Montoya Vega (Monash University – Melbourne, AU,
      maria.montoyavega@monash.edu)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Maria Fernanda Montoya Vega


      Water’s pleasant nature and associated health benefits have captivated the interest of HCI
      researchers. Prior WaterHCI work mainly focused on advancing instrumental applications,
      such as improving swimming performance, and less on designing systems that support
      interacting with technology in water in more playful contexts. In this regard, I explore the
      somaesthetic design of playful interactive water experiences, specifically, floating, surfing and
      diving, aiming to enrich the experiential aspect of the water activity through technology.
      Employing somaesthetic design, I aim to develop different playful prototypes to understand
      the integration of the soma (human mind and body), the technology and the water, towards
      a synergy that enriches the water experience. To date, I have designed an extended reality
      system for a flotation tank experience, which suggests interesting opportunities for the
      technological enrichment of water experiences. Ultimately, I hope that our WaterHCI work
      supports people to be playful and benefit from the many advantages of being in the water.



      4.16      Blending micro-health behaviors into everyday activities through
                “invitations” as SportsHCI
      Xipei Ren (Beijing Institute of Technology, CN, x.ren@bit.edu.cn)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Xipei Ren


      Sitting in front of computers has become a major part of our workaday routines, challenging
      us in maintaining active and healthy lifestyles. This challenge becomes even more salient and
      more relatable to many of us after COVID-19. Is it possible to design interface and interaction
      so that the health behaviour intervention is integrated into the target users’ established
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                    125


lifestyles and daily routines? We argue that by leveraging existing social mechanisms, a
SportsHCI design can enable health interventions in a natural and effective way. One simple
example could be facilitating a social context where users feel being invited for micro health
gains. To better illustrate this design mechanism, we use several design instances (Step-by-
Step, Anti-Sedentary Robot, Co-Drink, Co-Coffee) to exemplify our proposal. We would also
like to learn your advice to inspire us in figuring out the design, evaluation and scaling-up
methods of this persuasive strategy.



4.17      Experiencing Cycling Indoors and Outdoors
Andrii Matviienko (KTH Royal Institute of Technology – Stockholm, SE,
matviienko.andrii@gmail.com)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Andrii Matviienko


Cycling is a great way to remain physically active, maintain cardiovascular health, and
improve physical shape. While cycling outdoors is de facto a standard that includes cycling
tours, training, or commuting, cycling indoors has become more popular over the last decade.
In my research, I explore technological improvements for indoor and outdoor cycling. I
will present how we employed multimodal and extended reality user interfaces and new
tandem-based cycling simulation methods to facilitate cycling safety and realism. The results
of these works demonstrate how technology can improve the cycling experience and reduce
motion sickness indoors and facilitate safety outdoors.



4.18      AI+MR for augmented sport training systems
Fabio Zambetta (RMIT University – Melbourne, AU, fabio.zambetta@rmit.edu.au)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Fabio Zambetta


SportsHCI can benefit from the integration of MR (Mixed Reality) interfaces with AI
(Artificial Intelligence) algorithms, particularly CV (computer vision) and ML (Machine
Learning algorithms). We discuss the blend of such technologies in use cases related to
training high performing athletes in table tennis, albeit ideas and principles can be extended
to other racket sports and, in fact, to a variety of other sports, as well. We are also very
interested in the interplay of such technologies with humans in the loop (athletes and coaches),
specifically wrt their acceptance of such technologies, their perception of user experience and
the opportunities for such technologies to be assisting athletes and para athletes.




                                                                                                   23292
126   23292 – Sports HCI


      4.19      Towards SportsHCI to improve skill acquisition and performance in
                athletes
      Florian Daiber (German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI) – Saarbrücken,
      DE, florian.daiber@dfki.de)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Florian Daiber


      In the last years, sports technology has become ubiquitous and there has been a large body
      of work in HCI and Ubicomp as well as commercial products including apps, wearables
      and smart sports environments. SportsHCI has the potential to analyze complex human
      movements and provide guidance when learning a new motor skill. In our research we
      investigate intelligent assistants to support skill acquisition and improve performance in
      athletes. To achieve this goal we investigate different feedback techniques, both on the
      athlete’s body and in their training environment. This includes smart environments using
      intelligent sports equipment and projections as well as wearables and virtual reality headsets,
      which enable us to provide in-situ feedback to enhance motor learning. We are particularly
      interested in implicit, in-situ and real-time feedback for example by using EMS but also
      playful approaches in mixed realities.



      4.20      The Role of HCI in Enhancing Inclusivity and Encouraging
                Engagement in Sports and Exercise
      Daniel Harrison (Northumbria University – Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK,
      daniel.b.p.harrison@northumbria.ac.uk)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Daniel Harrison


      Much of the historic focus of physical activity-related HCI has either been related to: those
      starting out their journey; or, to performance, particularly in (semi-) professional athletes.
      Over time this has broadened to include a range of sports, fitness levels, and technologies.
      However, more work remains to be done to establish a more inclusive SportsHCI research
      agenda that caters for all athletes, as well as promotes enjoyment and continued engagement
      regardless of gender, race, background, ability, body size, or time-pressures. While there is a
      broader movement in HCI around designing inclusive and accessible technologies, this should
      be more explicit in SportsHCI. Here I will bring examples from the cycling communities to
      highlight this need. I argue that a Feminist HCI framework can help emphasise inclusivity and
      diversity from an intersectional standpoint, allowing SportsHCI to better address individual
      needs and preferences, challenge stereotypes, and create a more welcoming environment for
      all.
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                   127


4.21      SportsHCI benefits from integration
Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller (Monash University – Melbourne, AU, floyd@exertiongameslab.org)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller


SportsHCI benefits from the integration of the human body and interactive technology.
We demonstrate this through a series of research design works around integrated cycling
experiences, integrated entertainment experiences, and integrated arts experiences. The
results of these works suggest interesting ways forward for SportsHCI research, in particular
how the design of integrated SportsHCI can highlight experiential aspects, facilitating playful
exertion experiences. Ultimately, with our work, we want to enhance our knowledge around
the design of integrated SportsHCI experiences to help people understand who they are, who
they want to become, and how to get there.



4.22      Digital Twins and SportsHCI: Design Challenges and Benefits
Regina Bernhaupt (Eindhoven University of Technology (TU/e), NL, r.bernhaupt@tue.nl)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Regina Bernhaupt


Data – qualitative or quantitative – has become central for Sports HCI. My personal take
on data is from the perspective of digital twins. The goal of digital twins is to have a full
representation of an artefact, process, machine or even a digital replica of a human. The
identified key challenge from my perspective is that time, evolvement over time and especially
how to enable people with the future. Digital twins have the ability to simulate and predict
in real time – making it imperative for people to interact with future states and alternative
futures. We know that humans are not very good when it comes to planning, predicting the
future and knowing what to come is sometimes disturbing for people and how they react. It
will be important to consider the ethics when designing with digital twins, to ensure that
sports systems will be a positive contributor to humans health and their planning of sport
activities and does not become a burden or a scary prediction instrument that is foreshading
possible diseases or injuries. The key topic emerging from this challenge is to understand
overall on how to interact with data and representations that relate to the future: “future
interactions”.



 5      Overview of Interactivity Session
The second day of the seminar was introduced by organizer Dennis Reidsma, starting off
with an “interactivity session” that involved live interactive demonstrations of systems and
technologies relating to sports HCI. Numerous participants in the seminar showcased their
prototypes and technologies, strategically arranged throughout the main room and the nearby
hall. This layout allowed other attendees to freely explore the setups, test the systems, and
engage in interactive discussions. The main goal was to provide a hands-on demonstration
of interactive technologies, hoping to inspire participants to conceptualize their innovative
interactive systems for different sports contexts.




                                                                                                  23292
128   23292 – Sports HCI


          Laia Turmo Vidal demonstrated “SoniBand” [1], a wearable device designed for real-time
      sonification of movement angles, through a range of movement-generated sounds. Embedded
      in a patch of fabric in a bracelet, SoniBand can be worn in various body locations (e.g.
      arm, leg, neck). Soniband integrates a BITalino R-IoT embedding a 9-axis Inertial Motion
      Unit (IMU). The R-IoT transmits movement angle data wirelessly to a Raspberry Pi Zero,
      which can be controlled using a web browser e.g., in a smartphone. The device registers
      the minimum and maximum angle of the body part (calibration), and then it sonifies the
      movement angle. SoniBand includes different metaphorical sonifications, such as wind, water,
      or rusty gears.




         Figure 3 SoniBand.

           Michael Jones [2] presented a measurement system for figure skating jump detection,
      consisting of a wearable IMU and a smartphone. The wearable IMU was affixed to the
      participant’s lower back, which sampled motion at 120 Hz and sent all readings wirelessly to
      the smartphone. The smartphone ran a jump detection algorithm tuned to specific properties
      of figure skating jumps. A jump was detected when the airtime of the participant’s jump
      was sufficiently large and when the rotational velocity around the participant’s longitudinal
      axis surpassed a given threshold. In this demo, Mike recorded the participants’ results on
      a whiteboard to encourage competition among them. Participants achieving a jump off
      the ice created a greater appreciation for the difficulty of spinning jumps performed on
      ice. Particularly, participants rarely completed more than one rotation while in the air. In
      contrast, skaters in international competitions routinely perform 2.5 or more rotations in the
      air.




         Figure 4 Wearable IMU for figure skating jumps.


         Perttu Hämäläinen demonstrated an anticipatory visualization for VR dancing. A
      key visuomotor control challenge in dancing is following the choreography or movements
      demonstrated by someone else. This is hard to do in real-time due to the inertia of the body
      and the delays inherent in human visuomotor control. The only way to perfectly follow a
      choreography in real-time is to have some anticipatory knowledge about it, either through
      memorization or additional cues such as a visualization of the upcoming movements. Perttu
      presented a novel way to do this for complex full-body contemporary dance movements, going
      beyond the highly simplified visualization techniques of current dancing and rhythm games
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                    129


that only specify parts of the movement such as footstep positions in space. Participants
engaged in this demo by using the VR headset and following the choreography visualised in
the VR environment.
    Robby van Delden presented “FireFly Island”, an interactive social VR world created for
a dyad-based exploration through which social intimacy can grow. This demo was developed
on the basis of Savio Menifer’s MSc thesis2 with further input of Medra, Joris Weijdom, and
Dirk Heylen. In this demo, a set of interactive triggers facilitate moments of non-sexual
intimacy, such as an area with proximity-sensitive witch hats and selfie mirrors that physically
brings people closer together. The demonstrator identified how relatedness also in sports
and through the medium of VR/XR can provide ample opportunities to deliberately provide
epochs of reflection to stimulate relatedness beyond or mixed with more fast-paced physical
activity-based interactions.




     Figure 5 Firefly Island by Savio Menifer.

    Lars Elbæk presented the “MeCaMInD” method card toolbox [3]. He explained how
researchers, teachers and potentially the seminar attendees could use this toolbox to access a
design methods collection that will equip them with tangible tools to integrate movement
into their design practice, transforming traditional creative methodologies with an innovative,
movement-centred approach. The Method Cards for Movement-based Interaction Design
(MeCaMInD) project is an ambitious initiative funded by the EU through the Erasmus+
strategic partnership program. 3 The project’s objective is to introduce movement as an
integral component in designing new movement practices, artefacts, and interaction designs
for sports and physical activities. The intent is to drive the development of more sustainable
movement technologies and sports concepts, enhancing health and well-being for people.




     Figure 6 Method cards for movement-based interaction design.

   Carine Lallemand presented the Vitality database, a collection of student and researchers
projects on the topic of vitality realized at the Eindhoven University of Technology from
2017-2023. It addresses the challenge in design education or design research communities


2
    https://essay.utwente.nl/89341/
3
    https://mecamind.eu



                                                                                                   23292
130   23292 – Sports HCI


      to document and share past projects in order to learn from them and potentially valorize
      them through dissemination activities. In the Vitality database, each project is tagged with
      metadata to allow for easy sorting and filtering by topic, method, and material used. The
      idea behind the demo was to envision how such a database could be used by the SportsHCI
      community as a whole (rather than by a single institution). First, the design exemplars can
      inspire future products or be used for educational purposes so that students working on a
      SportsHCI project have prior design work to review and build on. These design exemplars
      can also be combined by topics to create papers such as annotated portfolios or explorations
      of design spaces. Other tabs can be created in the database for recommended readings and
      publications.




         Figure 7 A screenshot of student projects in the Vitality database.

          Florian Daiber presented slackliner 2.0 [4], an interactive slackline training assistant
      which features head and skeleton tracking, and real-time feedback through life-size projection.
      Like in other sports, proper training leads to a faster increase of skill and lessens the risk of
      injuries. We chose a set of exercises from slackline literature and implemented an interactive
      trainer which guides the user through the exercises giving feedback if the exercises were
      executed correctly. The present demo showcases an interactive sports training system that
      provides in-situ feedback while following a well-guided learning procedure.




         Figure 8 Demonstration of Slackliner 2.0.

          Vincent van Rheden presented the Digital Breathing Coach [5], which supports Locomotor-
      Respiratory Coupling (LRC), also known as Rhythmic Breathing. Locomotor-Respiratory
      Coupling (LRC), a breathing technique in which the breath is coupled to steps, can positively
      impact running experience and economy. Locomotor-Respiratory Coupling (LRC), typically
      is done in whole-integer ratios, counted in steps per inhalation and exhalation. For example,
      one could use a 2:2 ratio, implying that the runner performs two steps per inhalation and
      two steps per exhalation. BreathTool, an Android application picks up the runner’s steps
      and guides the breath through sound feedback. Based on a proof of concept a full fledged
      Android application is designed and developed to support longitudinal studies.
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                     131




     Figure 9 BreathTool: a Digital Breathing Coach.


    Florian Daiber, finally, presented InfinitiWall [6], an integration of a Virtual Reality
outdoor rock climbing experience coupled with a rock climbing treadmill which allows the
virtual experience to extend infinitely in vertical space.




     Figure 10 InfinityWall: VR climbing on a vertical rock climbing treadmill.




 6      Defining the Grand Challenges of Sports HCI
Through the Pecha Kucha presentations, a comprehensive list of “challenges” was collated
by the time every participant had presented, providing a strong foundation for steering
discussion during the remainder of the seminar toward topics that require further elaboration.
Previous works have argued that HCI requires “grand challenges”, namely in that it provides
a steering force to drive coordinated action in guiding future research, theory, design, and
commercial development [9, 10, 8, 7]. Acknowledging this need, these challenges were further
consolidated into a set of concrete “Grand Challenges for SportsHCI”, with the intention
their articulation would give guidance to researchers wishing to contribute to the development
of the theory by providing specific and actionable gaps in knowledge or capability to which
they can contribute through future research.
    To determine what constitutes a Grand Challenge in SportsHCI, some inclusion criteria
were discussed:
    Is the challenge specific to SportsHCI or more salient in our field? If not, does it play out
    differently?
    Is the challenge important for the field and not easily solved?
    Is the challenge not addressed yet in current work?
    Can the challenge be solved within the next 10 years?

    With the help of the Miro board (see Figure 11) and according to the abovementioned
criteria, participants discussed a list of potential grand challenges. This included: reconciling
performance and experience, the feeling of data (objective vs. subjective data), the temporal
aspect in SportsHCI, sports data in a wider context (home, nature, city, work) from both a




                                                                                                    23292
132   23292 – Sports HCI


      technology and an activity perspective, designing for political futures, athletic performance
      from the experiential perspective, the role of the audience, promoting physical literacy,
      addressing inequality by reaching people at a disadvantage, and developing a strategic vision
      for the field. Then, in breakout groups, all 22 participants were broken into four groups, with
      each group tasked with discussing one of the proposed grand challenges and taking notes on
      the Miro board. A second round was conducted with the reshuffling of the groups with a
      different challenge. After each round, a plenary presentation of highlights was given for each
      challenge addressed by a breakout group.




         Figure 11 Overview of initial challenges that were grouped and sorted into the preliminary Grand
      Challenges.

          Following the completion of all participant presentations, a discussion took place in which
      the participants synthesized the concepts brought to light during the presentations, as well
      as the opportunities and challenges that were also highlighted.
          The challenges were extensively documented in a separate initial draft for a Grand
      Challenges paper; here we only provide initial summaries of the Grand Challenges that were
      separately discussed during the Seminar.



      6.1    Time in SportsHCI
      Time emerges as a critical aspect in sports experiences, encompassing various phases that
      demand consideration. These phases range from the immediate timespan of the sports
      activity itself to preparatory and recovery phases. Additionally, long-term time periods, like
      seasons and training for major competitions, like the Olympics, hold significance. Aging also
      influences sports, prompting changes across different life phases. The influence of aging on
      sports prompts adaptations across different life phases. Consequently, designing with time
      as a central consideration becomes indispensable, involving careful attention to time span
      and data sampling for efficient monitoring and feedback. Moreover, despite its challenges,
      predictive methods and visualizations based on temporal data are crucial for positively
      manipulating athletes’ time span, mitigating skill deterioration over time. Furthermore,
      understanding the body’s changes over time in SportsHCI design poses underlying challenges,
      mainly due to the scarcity of longitudinal data. Addressing this requires implementing
      longitudinal methods for subjective evaluation, and once human interactions are successfully
      modeled, the question remains of how to effectively engage with these models and interact
      with predictions and simulated outcomes.
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                     133


6.2    Strategic vision for the field of SportsHCI
Much of our discussion (across both sessions) moved around the fact that sports themselves
are often not inclusive, and by promoting a generic message of “we should be more inclusive”
we are not providing an actionable vision for the future. Beyond inclusivity (which we
re-categorised as “access and participation” to more accurately reflect the conversations we
were having in the sessions, we also discussed sustainability and how similarly this was too
broad of a term to be useful in providing a useful strategic vision – this is something we better
need to define and more explicitly break down in order to be useful (do we mean sustainable
in human-costs, in fiscal costs, in environmentalism, in terms of access to facilities?). We also
discussed that, by their very nature, conversations around the strategic vision for SportsHCI
are political and how the political landscape across different places and sports will have
a significant influence on our work, meaning that our strategic visions would need to be
aware of this and sufficiently broad. Within the context of inequalities, we discussed how
SportsHCI tech can exacerbate (or even be the root cause of) inequalities, because of design
decisions, target audiences, and costs.



6.3    Performance and Experience
We discussed other ways to “enjoy” sports beyond improving athletic performance. We
realised an experience as joy is very narrow and using “appreciation” of the experience
describes better how to enclose the sport experience and provide a holistic view. In that
sense we as sports researchers can support several ways to appreciate sports. We also
discussed how our field can learn from other fields that moved from performance to the
experience, such as game research, in which at the start they were focused on developing
for competition and then they created more experiential games based on arts, for example.
Performance, measurement, judgement, competition, winning and losing are core elements of
sport. However, the unmeasured subjective athlete experience drives both performance and
participation. Conversely, performance strongly impacts the athlete experience. Performance
and experience are closely interrelated in SportsHCI. The grand challenge is to incorporate
elements of both performance and experience in HCI for sports. Doing so may increase
performance and participation while improving the athlete’s performance.



6.4    Subjective and Objective Data
We discussed the need to understand how we can provide meaningful data independently
of being subjective or objective, and also not only meaningful for the athlete but also for
the coach. We discussed how there is a two-way feedback loop where: (1) objective data
is “translated” to actionable, subjective data (i.e., joint data is turned into coach advice to
an athlete, such as “raise our right elbow”); (2) subjective data is “verified” (fact checked)
using objective data (e.g., misconceptions about dancers’ lightness when dancing actually
depends on the colour of their shoes). A lot of research work is still based on quantification
and measurement. While there is certainly room for that, there are plenty of opportunities
to capture people’s experience of sport (how they feel about it). This is important in Sports
HCI, because for many people the feeling of being “immersed” in sports is key.




                                                                                                    23292
134   23292 – Sports HCI


      6.5    Engineering SportsHCI
      SportsHCI introduces a number of very specific engineering challenges that may not be so
      salient/prominent or even present in some other HCI fields. Compared to the other application
      fields of HCI, SportsHCI often puts more emphasis on accuracy, timely measurement,
      embodied experiences, and high-level integration with bodily exertion. This requires higher
      fidelity levels and robustness of the prototype. Yet, there lacks toolkit and design methods
      to help designers easily engineer their out-of-box ideas into testable/experienceable probes,
      which sometimes also limit the novelty of SportsHCI research and work efficiency. Partly
      because of this, the prototypes for SportsHCI are not that easy to avoid disturbing people in
      use due to their physical obtrusiveness, making it challenging to create an ultra-realistic setup
      for testing proposed design concepts. Additionally, unlike other computing technologies that
      were designed for constant usage, many SportsHCI techs are designed for special sports, which
      makes them not being used very frequently. How should we deal with these occasionally used
      technologies? And how can we make sure such technologies can be evolved to fit the changes
      of users’ needs? A systemic thinking might be needed to study and design SportsHCIs
      ecologically. Some specific challenges include:
      Complex data. Data consists of large and complex time series, that require processing to
          turn into meaningful interpretations. For HCI applications often the detections and
          interpretations need to happen on the spot so the interactive application can immediately
          respond to it. At the same time, discovering meaningful interpretations sometimes needs
          a) too much processing power and b) to work on the full data (including “future” data).
          The challenge is to find ways to develop (possibly based on training stages) the AI that
          can deliver real-time immediate meaningful interpretations for the HCI to respond to the
          user‘s activity.
      Movement artefacts. Not all, but many measuring systems are prone to “movement arte-
          facts” (EEG, eye tracking, ...). This means a user must sit pretty still when working with
          that measurement system. Unlike in other HCI fields, SportsHCI is by definition high
          on movement, so if we want to use those kinds of measurement systems, we need to find
          fundamentally new ways to deal with / get around those movement artefacts.
      Robust prototyping platforms. Existing prototyping platforms are often not robust enough
          for use in the SportsHCI context; there is a need for other, more robust prototyping
          toolkits tailored to both the setting in terms of sensing and actuation paradigms, and to
          the context in terms of robustness.
      Sensing sports movement. Compared to some other movement-based contexts in HCI,
          sports see a wide range of movement speed and power; measurement systems require high
          resolution at low values but also enough room at the high end to deal with explosive
          actions (cf the figure skaters who jump so hard that the IMU is maxed out, in the demo
          of Mike Jones during this seminar).
      Robust and challenging environmental circumstances. Sports sensing and actuation hap-
          pen in challenging settings that require more robust technology compared to many other
          mobile/wearable/ubiquitous works. Water, sand, ice, bumping into rocks and mountains,
          collisions between athletes, etcetera. This robustness problem is exacerbated by the need
          for long-term studies – ideally, systems could survive year-long deployments, which for
          prototypes in more lenient circumstances is already challenging, but in sports settings
          even more so.
      Safety, sports regulations, and wearables. Wearables may run into regulations forbidding
          athletes from wearing anything (including jewelry, etc.) for safety reasons; the engineering
          of the thing needs to prevent any safety risk (and regulations then must adapt). Wearables
          interfere with, and are interfered with by, athletic movement. The physical obtrusiveness
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                      135


   of wearables is a problem for athletes’ movement. Solutions may involve off-body sensing,
   smaller components integrated across the body rather than bulky wearables, different
   weight distribution of wearable, flat electronics that don’t extrude, and other directions.
   The athletes’ movement is also a problem for the physical wearable: straps are not good
   enough, and we need new attachments that don’t shift and don’t hinder.
Per-sport specific things to measure and model. In sports we often deal with very specific
   types and categories of movement that do not automatically generalize to other sports. A
   spin in ice skating is (data-wise) not the same as a spin in skateboarding or gymnastics.
   So where quite a bit of work on movement-centric HCI looks for generalizable models, we
   need approaches and methodologies that help us, in any sports context, to quickly get at
   those sport-specific movements.



6.6    Other Challenges
Other challenges that were discussed but not yet elaborated during the seminar, include the
challenge of involving movement in the design of new practices and artefacts; the challenge
of doing SportsHCI designs and studies that do not focus on novelty but instead offers
the opportunity to triangulate already-known results (that is, go from “having a bunch of
cases” to “having generalizable, well-grounded knowledge”); and the challenge of finding
good methodologies to do forms of meta-analysis in this field.
    In summary, the discussions of grand challenges during the seminar, of which an initial
selection has been summarized above, has led to a deep insight of the community of seminar
participants into where the future directions of the field lie; these insights will be written up
in a manuscript for a major conference.
References
 1 Judith Ley-Flores, Laia Turmo Vidal, Nadia Berthouze, Aneesha Singh, Frédéric Bevilacqua,
     and Ana Tajadura-Jiménez. Soniband: Understanding the effects of metaphorical movement
     sonifications on body perception and physical activity. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI
     Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–16, 2021.
 2 Michael Jones, Sarah Ridge, Mia Caminita, Kirk E Bassett, and Dustin Bruening. Automatic
     classification of take-off type in figure skating jumps using a wearable sensor. 2022.
 3 Lars Elbæk, Rasmus Vestergaard Andersen, Robby W Van Delden, José María Font
     Fernández, René Engelhardt Hansen, Perttu Hämäläinen, Mats Johnsson, Lærke Schjødt
     Rasmussen, Søren Lekbo, Solip Park, et al. Method cards for movement-based design. 2023.
 4 Christian Murlowski, Florian Daiber, Felix Kosmalla, and Antonio Krüger. Slackliner 2.0:
     Real-time training assistance through life-size feedback. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019
     CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–4, 2019.
 5 Vincent Van Rheden, Eric Harbour, Thomas Finkenzeller, Lisa Anneke Burr, Alexander
     Meschtscherjakov, and Manfred Tscheligi. Run, beep, breathe: exploring the effects on
     adherence and user experience of 5 breathing instruction sounds while running. In Proceedings
     of the 16th International Audio Mostly Conference, pages 16–23, 2021.
 6 Felix Kosmalla, Florian Daiber, and Antonio Krüger. Infinitywall–vertical locomotion in
     virtual reality using a rock climbing treadmill. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in
     Computing Systems Extended Abstracts, pages 1–6, 2022.
 7 Eleonora Mencarini, Amon Rapp, Ashley Colley, Florian Daiber, Michael D Jones, Felix
     Kosmalla, Stephan Lukosch, Jasmin Niess, Evangelos Niforatos, Paweł W Woźniak, et al.
     New trends in hci and sports. In Adjunct Publication of the 24th International Conference
     on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services, pages 1–5, 2022.




                                                                                                     23292
136   23292 – Sports HCI


          8   Eleonora Mencarini, Amon Rapp, Lia Tirabeni, and Massimo Zancanaro. Designing wearable
              systems for sports: a review of trends and opportunities in human–computer interaction.
              IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Systems, 49(4):314–325, 2019.
          9   Florian Mueller, Rohit A Khot, Alan D Chatham, Sebastiaan Pijnappel, Cagdas" Chad"
              Toprak, and Joe Marshall. Hci with sports. In CHI’13 Extended Abstracts on Human
              Factors in Computing Systems, pages 2509–2512. 2013.
      10      Stina Nylander, Jakob Tholander, Florian Mueller, and Joe Marshall. Hci and sports. In
              CHI’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 115–118. 2014.



          7    Design for SportsHCI: Design Lenses, Role Play, and Impact
               Pathways
      On Thursday morning, Carine Lallemand conducted a design activity based on the paper
      “10 Lenses to Design Sports-HCI” [1]. Participants were randomly divided into 5 groups
      of 4, each group being randomly assigned one of the lenses. Each group was invited to
      read the section of the paper related to the lens they had been assigned and to brainstorm
      potential design concepts representative of that lens. The concepts were presented to the
      entire group in the form of role-play, along with insights into the design for this lens. The
      concepts produced were intended to be used as starting points to think of impact pathways
      in SportsHCI research.
          On Thursday afternoon, Dennis Reidsma gave a presentation on how to articulate the
      scientific and societal contributions of our SportsHCI work, for the purpose of papers and
      grant proposals, in a way that outsiders can follow the line of argumentation.
          We started off with a presentation on the Impact tool of Erasmus+ Partnerships 4 which
      provides a schematic to articulate the difference between output, outcome, and impact in
      terms of how much it is under direct control or influence from the project activities (see
      Figure 12). The same tool also provides extensive help in building up a storyline, starting
      from the impact you want to make, all the way down to the input and activities that are
      needed for this, and then going the same path back to show how the input and activities
      make it likely that the impact will indeed occur.




          Figure 12 Erasmus+ impact tool: how to build up the storyline about the impact that a project
      will have.



      4
          https://www.erasmusplus.nl/en/impacttool-strategicpartnerships
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                                 137


    Next, we discussed the impact pathways (see Figure 13) that are currently used to
structure many National 5 and European 6 grant proposals. These build up a similar story as
the Erasmus+ tool but are a bit more articulate about how impact, outcome, and necessary
output are tied together by assumptions about underlying causes for problems and knowledge
gaps that prevent us from resolving the underlying cause.




    Figure 13 Impact Pathways used for Dutch NWO grant proposals, with a central role of
“assumptions”.

   Based on the concepts presented above, all groups worked on articulating an “impact
pathway story” about one of their design concepts from the morning session, as reported in
the remainder of this chapter.
   The remainder of this section presents both the design concepts and their corresponding
impact pathways.
References
1    Florian Mueller, Damon Young, et al. 10 lenses to design sports-hci. Foundations and
     Trends® in Human–Computer Interaction, 12(3):172–237, 2018.



7.1      SportsHCI lens: Reverie
Laia Turmo Vidal, Carine Lallemand, Lars Elbæk, Daniel Harrison
        License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © Laia Turmo Vidal, Carine Lallemand, Lars Elbæk, Daniel Harrison


After having read about the Reverie lens from the paper, the group summarized what they
understood about the concept and the three subfacets (Void, Solitude, and Mini-Holidays).
We highlighted in the text a few elements that could act as design triggers to create reverie
(e.g., removing stimulation in the environment or adding extra stimulation). Then, each
participant shared their own experiences of reverie, in a sport or non-sport context. Void
and solitude were often hard to distinguish:

5
    E.g., for Dutch NWO proposals: https://www.nwo.nl/en/impact-plan-approach
6
    We discussed how EU grant proposals are typically expected to show expected impact in scientific,
    societal, as well as economic ways – although in the later exercise we did not address the latter at all.




                                                                                                                23292
138   23292 – Sports HCI


         Walking in the forest, foraging = safe solitude
         Cycling to work with a toddler in a cargo bike = co-experience of solitude (alone together)
         Solo hot air balloon flight = feeling insignificant in the greater scheme of things
         Rhythm of breathing during a run
         Slackline, being in one’s bubble despite the audience (note: for some, it is rather the
         opposite, where the audience is intimidating)
      Personal experiences resonating with the mini-holidays sub-facet were:
         Using swings on children’s playground as an adult.
         Listening to an audiobook while using an indoor bike trainer
         Knitting (automatized gestures), wood-turning, pottery

      The group tried to identify higher-level concepts within these examples. The ideas of
      contemplation, patterns/rhythm, craft/material experience, and purposeless activity were
      emphasized. However, here again, interindividual differences in the appreciation of craft (fear
      of non-mastery) or purposeless activities emerged.
      Besides a general audience, possible target groups of reverie technology were discussed as a
      means to reach a more concrete level in ideation:
          Trauma survivors, where vulnerability and fears of specific situations are a challenge
          Eating disorders, with opposing needs where refraining from compulsive physical activity
          is a goal
          Aging population, with the opportunity to reframe solitude as positive
      The group identified some opportunities linked to reverie Tech, e.g., overcoming obstacles in
      exercising related to the security to embrace an activity (yoga class), the body awareness or
      the threshold to get started.
      Roleplay. The group roleplayed two concepts:
         Speed down: Contrary to the optimization and HR quantification (high exertion), we
         tried to slow down movement speed to support the pathway of getting into reverie. That
         was exemplified by showing, and afterwards, everyone successfully tried the “Beat Saver”
         slowing down exercise.
         Proprioceptive sonified gym ball: A gym ball that would turn the attention of the user
         inward through sonified feedback related to the propriocepsis of moving the ball along
         one’s own body.




         Figure 14 Roleplaying the two concepts related to the SportsHCI lens Reverie.


      Impact pathway. Burnout and stress are on the rise, negatively impacting mental health.
      Research shows that physical activity is a key factor in preventing burnout and stress, and
      improving mental health in overall. Yet, people experiencing burnout or stress often face
      a set of barriers (e.g. feeling not good enough to engage in PA, feeling tired due to the
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                     139


burnout, feeling they have no time because they are stressed, etc). Hence, these people who
would benefit significantly from PA are not doing so enough. Reverie technologies could
offer a solution in that regard. Building on principles of positive solitude, feeling void and
experiencing mini-holidays, reverie technologies promote light physical activity, which can be
done with little equipment and alone, and that is intrinsically motivating. It can help reframe
solitude as a positive feeling. The fact that it is quite opposed to the current narrative around
sports is revolutionary and is an ideal entrance point for people to engage with movement.
Yet, there is a need to understand exactly how these technologies can be designed to address
different people/different contexts, what are the triggers of reverie and how to design for
the right balance in order to reach positive reverie experiences. A second design challenge
related to the use of technology in reverie experiences, as those are usually low-tech or even
purposively done to disengage with the stress and fast pace of life attached to the use of
technology.




   Figure 15 Impact pathway sketch for “reverie sports technology”.

    The group brainstormed two alternative entry points/problem statements that could
justify Reverie Sports technology.
    The first one was simply to start from the observation that people do not reach the
    recommended levels of physical activity → Individual sports are easier and have a lower
    threshold to start (walking and running are the most popular options) → Despite this
    low threshold, people start running or walking but do not manage to sustain this practice
    due to several barriers → Reverie Technology as a solution.
    The second one took a complete different approach, with a problem statement outside of
    the realm of sports. There is an urgency to take action to combat climate change and
    adopt more sustainable lifestyles → Connection with nature can be a driver for individual
    behavior change → Reverie technology can be used to raise awareness for nature.




                                                                                                    23292
140   23292 – Sports HCI


      7.2    SportsHCI lens: Pleasure
      Regina Bernhaupt, Maria Fernanda Montoya Vega, Perttu Hämäläinen, Vincent van Rheden
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Regina Bernhaupt, Maria Fernanda Montoya Vega, Perttu Hämäläinen, Vincent van Rheden


      First, the group spent time reading the description of the pleasure lens from the paper.
      Then, we discussed our understanding about the lenses and how we conceive the definition
      of pleasure in different ways than the ones provided by the paper. Next, we provide our first
      person experiences about the pleasure we encounter from physical activity, such as intense
      exertion through sports like cycling and crossfit, very similar to the discomfort subcategory in
      the paper. On the contrary, we also discussed the pleasure we get from less intense exertion
      but more expressive physical activity, such as dance, which is not described in the paper.
      We then discussed how this last one is less explored in our field and then we brainstormed
      in which scenarios we encounter pleasure from dance and music. Finally, we came out with
      the case of a work office environment in which workers are seated all day and are under
      great amounts of stress. Most of the time these workers don’t have the chance to have active
      breaks, sometimes because they don’t have access to facilities that allowed them to have a
      physical active break, or sometimes they don’t have the time. Therefore it would be useful
      to provide and active break through dance, allowing them to get rid of the stress while
      performing bodily movements following the music. We also imagined a system, for example
      VR, that allows the worker to switch off the external work environmental and encourage
      them to move however they want avoiding feeling judged by others.
      Roleplay. The group roleplayed a concept where a boring and stressful moment in the life of
      an office working suddenly gets transformed into an inspiring, enthusiasm-eliciting, physically
      active episode through the use of immersive VR.




         Figure 16 Roleplaying the concept of pleasurable and active work environments.


      Impact pathway. Work environments are known for be stressful. Moreover, in work
      environments, jobs proliferate that involve sedentary behaviors such as computer-based work
      where workers have to remain seated most of the time. Although the promotion of physical
      activity to tackle stress and sendentarity is a worldwide concern, workplaces have not yet
      profited from physical activity during working hours, where adults spend an average of 7.9
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                  141


hours per day. Barriers to perform physical activity while in work include low access to
outdoor spaces, low access to specialized physical activity spaces, overload of work, poor
engaging alternatives such as “active breaks”. However, there are opportunities to support
more active work environments through the use of interactive technologies, while providing
opportunities for workers to express themselves and engage in fun activities. Particularly,
interactive technologies that encourage the pleasure from physical activity, such as the
pleasure from exertion and the pleasure from being recognized by others when doing physical
activity, present great potential for this. Therefore, there is a need to understand how to
design more active work environments using interactive technologies such as virtual and
augmented reality, what are the suitable physical activities that workers will consider more
engaging during working hours, and when to promote the development of these physical
activities.
To begin building this understanding, we propose a research through design methodology
involving workers and managers of a company’s office space. Through this design process
we aim to gain insights of the feasibility of interactive technologies to be adapted in a
working space and the perceptions of workers towards them. The final design should help
workers to reduce their stress through physical activity during working hours, influence their
productivity and their willingness to develop more physically intense breaks. Ultimately, this
proposal aims to impact the health of workers during their jobs, and inspire HCI researchers
to design interactive systems to encourage physical activity in workplaces.




   Figure 17 Impact pathway sketch for “pleasurable work environment”.




                                                                                                 23292
142   23292 – Sports HCI


      7.3    SportsHCI lens: Beauty in movement – Multi-equality spaces in
             sports
      Dennis Reidsma, Andrii Matviienko, Xipei Ren, Paolo Buono
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Dennis Reidsma, Andrii Matviienko, Xipei Ren, Paolo Buono


      First, we spent time reading 2.5 pages about the beauty lens from the paper. Second, we
      freely associated and reflected on the main aspects of beauty such as rhythm, expressed
      our opinions about them, and proposed possible extensions, such as a timely unfolding of a
      sports performance and the beauty of time in sports. Then, we did solitary ideation: keeping
      the lens and those extra associations in mind, what ideas come up to design for beauty?
      We spent five minutes writing down our ideas about how technology can possibly facilitate
      beauty in sport activities and ended up with six ideas. The descriptions of the lens and
      sub-facets and the concrete design suggestions in the paper provided an entry point to start
      thinking about design ideas once we identified a goal besides the “beauty”. In addition, the
      associative concepts that we came up with, made the design possibilities feel more nuanced
      and detailed. Once we had a number of concepts, we presented them to each other and
      shortly discussed and extended them. Afterward, we briefly discussed which of these ideas
      can be clearly presented via a pantomime or a bodily representation. In the end, we decided
      to pick an idea that would fit the best for bodily representation and would be easy for an
      audience to understand.
      Associative concepts. tension, development of tension in movement; expressive range of
      movement; internal appreciation of beauty and external appreciation of beauty; synchroniz-
      ation and harmony: alternating between making and breaking the harmony (especially in
      certain antagonistic sports, but also in dance or music); time speeding up and slowing down
      as expressive parameter; repetitive or patterned movement without sticking strictly to fixed
      beats; virtuosity and mastery; shared beauty in the interaction between people; buildup,
      tension, climax – unfolding time in the beauty of sports and movement.
      Ideas. Xipei Ren. (1) Outdoor running; Augmenting the outdoor experience of wind, birds,
      and other beautiful environmental factors through feedback technologies; using this to adjust
      pace of runner. Andrii Matviienko. (2) EMS system that amplifies your movements so you
      can consciously experience the space of dynamic tension in movement. Once you are familiar
      with the feeling you will be more able to use that yourself in expressive movement, thanks to
      the earlier EMS-enhanced experience. (3) Symbiosis between athlete and fan: sensors on
      athlete allow fans to co-experience the dynamic tension in the virtuoso movements of the
      athlete. Feedback of the audience’s appreciation to the athlete (embodied/haptic/tactile
      feedback?). (4) Appreciating the beauty of doing sports movements, for non-athletes: first-
      person enhanced multimodal replay of movements that were previously measured on an
      athlete. Dennis Reidsma. (5) Movement mapping for equal participation in sports. Given
      that some people struggle to express conventional beauty in movement (e.g., spasm, paralysis,
      etc.), measure the movements they can make within their own range/space of expressive
      movement; similarly measure the movement through the expressive range of other people;
      re-create the movement in a mapped audiovisual space that is the same for both people
      by having unique personal mappings; this allows co-equal participation in joint movement
      expressed in the mapped space. Both participants can together enjoy the unfolding, dynamic,
      joint movement while acting from within their own movement capacity. Paolo Buono. (6)
      Starting from the premise that without experience, it is hard to perceive (let alone appreciate)
      the beauty in certain sports (or music, or dance. . . ). Measure and detect the patterns in
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                 143


expressive activity; then use multimodal representation to reveal and augment / highlight the
patterns so it is easier for audience to see and appreciate the beauty of complex expressive
movement activities.
Role play. We picked the equal participation idea and titled it “multi-equality spaces”.
The role play was as follows: Two people (picture right) represent the “athletes” or human
interactors. They make the same movement, which could conceivably be part of a dance
or sports movement. One of the athletes has a much wider range of flexibility and control
of motion than the other, who has only a very limited range of hand and arm motion
due to e.g. spasm (bottom right). Two other people in the role-play (left in the picture)
represent the computer’s interpretation of these movements in an equality space in which the
movements of the two people become comparable. This is presumably done by calibrating
the space of movement of each, and then mapping these spaces to equivalent equal movement
expression. On that mapping, one could then conceivably build a sport or other movement
activity in which the two athletes could equally participate on their own movement terms
and characteristics while becoming comparable in “effectivities”.




   Figure 18 Roleplaying the concept of multi-equality spaces.


Impact pathway. Sport is good for maintaining health and other beneficial outcomes
but is not equally accessible for all. People do not have the same capabilities to move
expressively and competently in the same manner and amount. Existing solutions typically
involve people with different needs or capabilities being put apart in their own sports
category, e.g., paralympic games, gender-specific competition, age clusters in competition,
etc. Thus, athletes cannot meaningfully interact with all others in meaningful expressive
sports movement, on their own terms. This is the core of our Golden Product Opportunity:
making a system that allows people with different capabilities to compare/compete/interact
with each other in sports and expressive movement. The system normalizes the movement
space of people by measuring movement in a person’s range of motion, and mapping it
to a common multi-equality space, generating audiovisual and other multimodal output
in that multi-equality space, after which interaction between people’s movements happens
in that equality space. Although the idea would allow for equalized interaction between
differently-bodied people, this product cannot yet be delivered because (1) we don’t know
how to measure, map, and model a person’s movements in their unique movement space, (2)
we don’t know how to translate the mapped movements to a “target space” in audio and
visuals, and (3) we don’t know how to have (what kind of) meaningful interactions within
that target space.

                                                                                                23292
144   23292 – Sports HCI


         To address these challenges we work on four distinct science problems.
      Machine Learning to model personal movement: Before we can model and analyze per-
         sonalized movement spaces, we address the lack of datasets with different, personal
         and idiosyncratic ranges of sport movements. We collect and model different types
         of movements. This will yield a fair data set with a range of idiosyncratic expressive
         movements.
      Algorithms to map movement to a multi-equality space: Even when we can measure ex-
         pressive movement within a personalized range of capabilities, there is a lack of novel
         models and approaches to map these movements to a joint multi-equality space in which
         the movements of differently capable people become comparable. We will address this
         by developing models that provide mappings and weight coefficients of different types of
         sports movements, which will also yield new data analytics methods and approaches for
         normalizing multi-equality spaces in sports.
      Multimodal environment for expressing movement in the multi-equality space: Provided
         that, through the previous step, we can map users’ movements to a shared and equal
         space, we do not yet know well enough what kind of multimodal output form should be
         generated from the mapped movements, such that it generates a meaningful embodied
         experience of dynamic expression for all types of participants, and such that it allows
         for meaningful back-and-forth interaction between different users. We will address this
         through movement-based and participatory design methods. This will lead to a multi-
         person, multimodal expressive environment for meaningful interaction, as well as a new
         theory about expressive visualization of movement for interaction.
      Evaluation of the impact on embodied participatory sensemaking in sports: Once the
         platform is available, we must evaluate the effects of interacting in that environment on
         users’ physical, emotional, and social experiences. Building on insights from the earlier
         codesign stage, we will carry out empirical studies with our system. This leads not only
         to insights about the appreciation and feasibility of our system, but will also contribute
         to more generalizable insights about challenges and opportunities in movement-based
         interaction between differently capable people.

          The above-described work will have a scientific impact: The datasets, models, and
      algorithms can be used by other researchers to advance the state of the art in personalized
      movement modeling in various domains. The multimodal expressive output generation
      can be re-used and extended for a wide range of interaction domains including dance,
      music, sports, and social relationship building. Finally, the insights about movement-based
      interaction between differently capable people provide inspiration for new directions of
      inclusive movement-based design.
          The above described will also yield, through its output, societal impact. Given the output
      of measurements, algorithms, models, and interactive systems, the outcome of our work is
      that we will have built this new co-equal sports and movement experience, and shown that
      it leads to a sense of being jointly engaged in coordinated, equalized, and harmonic sports
      movement. Through our codesign, evaluation, and dissemination activities, <unspecified
      number> of users will have experienced the possibilities of our system, and <unspecified
      number> of organizations will have encountered our new technology through participating
      in the research and dissemination (or even already incorporated the new technology in their
      organizational environment). This will lead to a growing impact on differently capable people
      who will fundamentally be more able to experience sports together in meaningful interaction,
      on their own terms, in equal interaction with all others – no matter body capability, gender,
      sportiness, skill level, or possible disabilities.
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                      145




   Figure 19 Impact pathway sketch for “beautiful interaction in multi-equality spaces in sports”.


7.4    SportsHCI lens: Pain in sports
Michael Jones, Fabio Zambetta, Armağan Karahanoğlu, Don Samitha Elvitigala
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Michael Jones, Fabio Zambetta, Armağan Karahanoğlu, Don Samitha Elvitigala


The group first reviewed the section on “pain” as a lens in the Sports HCI Lenses paper. We
discussed the meaning of the word pain as constructed in that paper as well as in another
paper Mike is working on. We focused on the concept that pain is a voluntary experience in
sports.
   We reflected on our personal experiences in sport which included table tennis and running.
   We reflected on our experiences with parents and children in sport. This included some
    experiences with our own children and some experiences we’d seen involving other children.
   We generated several ideas about how to generate pain in several contexts.

Tug of war concept. We settled on “Tug of war” as the key inspiration, extending the
game, as such:
   Two teams pulling the rope (could be 1 v 1)
   Players know that there will be pain, but don’t know how we will distribute it.
   EMG sensors could be used to identify which muscle is working the most and direct a
   punch there.
   The pain is distributed equally across the groups.
   The order of pain stimuli is assigned randomly and is not known ahead of time. In
   addition, we envisage that the system implementing the gamified embodiment of pain
   will possess the following characteristics: (a) pain recalibration of pain (e.g., if after the
   first punch pain is 4/10, then the next may be stronger), (b) a recording system to relive
   the pain, as well as analysing where pain was inflicted more objectively.




                                                                                                     23292
146   23292 – Sports HCI




         Figure 20 Roleplaying the Tug of War concept related to the SportsHCI lens Pain.


          A key outcome of our system is triggering reflection on pain, what that pain means and
      whether one’s sports goals are worth achieving. While participants may feel and internalise
      their own pain, they would not know how do that for others. We believe our system is geared
      towards someone who is already engaged in sport. Interesting additional questions included
      “How do you metabolise the loss or the win?”.
      Impact pathway. Pain is likely to occur in sports training and competitions. Child-athletes
      often give up when they encounter pain in sports, especially if their parents and/or coaches
      are not able to manage the adverse effects of pain, and rather push them to their physical
      or psychological limits. A holistic view of pain that involves perspectives from psychology,
      sports and technology is needed to prevent the emergence of such negative behaviour. In
      this project, we set out to normalise pain in sport, by delivering a holistic experience for
      embracing and reflecting on pain via a gamified embodied experience. In this experience, pain
      is delivered in a game with two teams through an exogenous process so that the pain cannot
      be directly related to the game and the pain is delivered equally to both the winning and
      losing teams. Participants and their parents reflect on the experience after the game ends.
      We do not yet understand pain in this context because we do not know: (1) the minimal
      amount of pain to administer in order to trigger reflection, and (2) the impact of pain in this
      setting. We will conduct studies to calibrate pain “dosage” per individual participant and to
      understand the experience of playing the game from both the child-athlete and parent (or
      coaches) perspectives. These studies will result in quantitative data about the physiological
      perception of pain in this context and qualitative data about the experience of pain in sports,
      for children, coaches and parents.
          This project allows us to present pain in a balanced and constructive way to parents,
      child-athletes, and coaches. This presentation will help them better understand pain in a
      sports context. Our work may lead to improving environments for child-athletes so while
      they may experience pain in sports, this will not have an adverse effect on participation in
      sports. Furthermore, this work may contribute to insights into how to develop more healthy
      and less toxic coaching environments generally.



      7.5    SportsHCI lens: Humility in sports
      Florian Daiber, Floyd ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dees Postma, Robby van Delden
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Florian Daiber, Floyd ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dees Postma, Robby van Delden


      We discussed what the lens of humility was about and went through the three types, mostly
      directly in relation to some of the examples given in the paper. We reiterated that the big
      mountain in front of you brings a sense of humility, talked about the humility from competing
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                     147




   Figure 21 Impact pathway sketch for “pain in sports”.


against someone who is expert or better, only later more as a side note for completion we
briefly mentioned but not really discussed trying again. Instead, we did discuss trash talk
and bluffing in relation to humility. There is a difference of knowing your skills/cards (e.g.
in poker you might exactly know what you have in the last round), versus not yet knowing
your current capabilities of that day before going all out. The trash talks was also a picture
in one of the slides shown after it was mentioned in the discussion, we related this also to the
current sports event of the Tour de France. For instance, the coach sort of coaxing by saying
“you can do it!” to Pogačar who was already completely beat. We later mentioned exemplars
from media/every day use and own experiences. This led to the focus on experiencing actual
parts of being a pro, which interestingly enough is also in the paper but more as a almost
comparison rather than a more complete feeling of humility. Through the generation of
the design space we saw a variation in first person experiences of pro sports which might
make one humbled. After the discussion we wondered how other theoretical contributions or
theory would play a role, or could help to shape the design space. Here, Newell’s theory of
constraints, phenomenology, and remediation/ post-phenemonology were mentioned but not
discussed in too much depth.
    Reflecting on the process, we see a recall and sharing of exemplar 1st/2nd/3rd person
experiences, some focusing on the somaesthetic qualities (e.g., going a ridiculous speed in
real or virtual life). There is a back and forth of ideas that would be interesting to experience
humility, ideas that inspire a direct transformation of that idea into something related (e.g.,
from wavelight to seeing someone descend in the Tour de France), then talking these and
associated ideas through we see other examples that already exist (e.g. cycling at higher
speed due to wrong weight setting, experiencing downhill footage in connection to simulator)
which we can build on but require and instigate a transformation of the last proposed own
idea into something new (e.g., camera-based system currently not keeping up if you don’t
break downhill, rather than seeing the pace align the pace changing you with your “known”
speed). This thus naturally transitions between inspiration, associated idea generation, to
converging or actually taking steps sideways, see Figure below.




                                                                                                    23292
148   23292 – Sports HCI


      Concept. We identified that systems that allow you to compare your athletic performance
      to a professional athlete can facilitate humility. They are emerging (examples: wavelight,
      ...) and span a new design space. By allowing to compare yourself to a professional athlete,
      facilitating humility, we can help society appreciate the achievements, efforts and investments
      of professional athletes more, supporting a more empathetic culture.




         Figure 22 Humility in SportsHCI: compare your performance to a pro.


      Impact pathway. We mostly worked on furthering the design space. This also led to a
      remark about current Dutch grants on researching the value of elite sports for society/trickling
      down to amateur/grassroots sports. Building on the existing framework explained by Dennis,
      we see top right Sports is a human right and then counterclockwise:
         people are in bad shape (see papers on skills going down, lack of moving and interrelated
         issues, alternatively “not enough people experience the joy of moving often enough”)
         One powerful experience could be to see the pro athletes enjoyment/experience as a
         possible goal to work towards. It might be bringing a feeling of humility, triggering one
         to attempt it again and again.
         Technology is used to map or remediation between what the bodily experience/capabilities
         of the pro-athlete are versus what those bodily experiences/capabilities of the novice
         athlete are.
         These mappings are however initiated only sporadically for some sports and without a
         clear experiential framework and wider accessibility. So the scientific challenge becomes
         what can we remediate of the pro-athletes experiences, and how should we map these
         remediations?
         If we answer these in positive ways (where our related work/exemplars already show some
         opportunities) we offer a framework and set of experiences to more fully appreciate the
         pro athlete’s experience of pro-ness.
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven                    149


     This in turn we expect will lead to a wider uptake of such experiences, potentially
     instigating people’s interest in sports, and fulfilling our fundamental right to experience
     sports and moving (cf. IOC’s view and UN goals).




     Figure 23 Impact pathway sketch for “humility in sports”.




 8      Acknowledgements
We thank Dagstuhl for their extensive support and all the participants who contributed to
this report as part of a collective effort. A particular thank you to Maria Fernanda ’Mafe’
Montoya Vega for volunteering first to help and supporting the organizers in finalizing the
report.
    Dennis Reidsma: “As an organiser, I felt we could really focus on the content and
participate in the work, thanks to the smooth facilitation by the Dagstuhl team from the
start of the application all the way through the actual seminar.”
    Andrii Matviienko: “This is the best summer camp for nerds I’ve ever attended!”
    Carine Lallemand: “Dagstuhl seminars are a truly unique format in academia. Magic
happens when bringing together top researchers in a field and allowing them to truly focus
and network during 5 days.”
    Laia Turmo Vidal: “I truly enjoyed the format of focused work in such a pleasant and
nice environment! I will treasure the Dagstuhl experience and I am looking forward to great
things coming out of it.”
    Lars Elbæk: “The Dagstuhl seminar will bring my cross-field of technology and interaction
design in my primary field of sports science further in my future research. This was a highly
experienced expert group that brings in-depth and a wide variety of knowledge into sports
science will lightly influence future sports science. On the contrary, sports science will
probably also affect future SportsHCI, I believe.”
    Mike Jones: “A perfect combination of academic discussions and informal activities.
This was a great place to both imagine new research directions and build collaborative
relationships with colleagues. It became clear to me that while competition is a key part


                                                                                                   23292
150   23292 – Sports HCI


      of sports, other aspects of the sports experience such as enjoyment and discomfort are also
      a key part of the sports experience. By the end of the week, it was clear that experience
      and competition, enjoyment and discomfort have complicated relationships that need further
      study. It was valuable to wrestle with these concepts with a group of experts in sports and
      human-computer interaction.”
          Armağan Karahanoğlu: “Dagstuhl provided a fantastic natural sports opportunity to
      contemplate the future of SportsHCI. It was a great place to discuss the research opportunities
      to bridge sports science, HCI and human-centred design.”
          Vincent van Rheden: “Dagstuhl felt like a retreat for researchers, helping to deepen topics,
      connect with fellow researchers, create a feeling of community, being situated in a beautiful
      location away from the hectic of normal life. SportsHCI is where sports and interactive
      technology come together to create motivating, inspiring, and innovative work to help people
      move, grow, and enjoy sports and exertion activities.”
Carine Lallemand, Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Dennis Reidsma, and Elise van den Hoven               151


       Participants
 Regina Bernhaupt                  Michael Jones                   Xipei Ren
TU Eindhoven, NL                 Brigham Young Univ. –           Beijing Institute of
  Paolo Buono                    Provo, US                       Technology, CN
University of Bari, IT             Armagan Karahanoglu
                                 University of Twente, NL          Laia Turmo Vidal
  Lisa Anneke Burr                                               Carlos III University of
Paris Lodron Universität           Carine Lallemand
                                                                 Madrid, ES
Salzburg, AT                     University of Luxembourg, LU
  Florian Daiber                   Andrii Matviienko               Robby van Delden
DFKI – Saarbrücken, DE           KTH Royal Institute of          University of Twente –
                                 Technology – Stockholm, SE      Enschede, NL
  Lars Elbaek                      Maria Fernanda Montoya Vega
University of Southern Denmark – Monash University –               Elise van den Hoven
Odense, DK                       Clayton, AU                     University of Technology –
  Don Samitha Elvitigala           Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller       Sydney, AU
Monash University –              Monash University –
Clayton, AU                                                        Vincent van Rheden
                                 Clayton, AU
                                                                 Paris Lodron Universität
  Perttu Hämäläinen                Dees Postma                   Salzburg, AT
Aalto University, FI             University of Twente, NL
  Daniel Harrison                  Dennis Reidsma                 Fabio Zambetta
University of Northumbria –      University of Twente –          RMIT University –
Newcastle, GB                    Enschede, NL                    Melbourne, AU




                                                                                              23292
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 23301

Computational Proteomics
Rebekah Gundry∗1 , Lennart Martens∗2 , and Magnus Palmblad∗3
1       University of Nebraska – Omaha, US. rebekah.gundry@unmc.edu
2       Ghent University, BE. lennart.martens@ugent.be
3       Leiden University Medical Center, NL. n.m.palmblad@lumc.nl

        Abstract
This report documents the program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 23301 “Computational
Proteomics”. This seminar was built around three topics: the increasingly widespread use, and
continously increasing promise of advanced machine learning approaches in proteomics; the highly
exciting, yet fiendishly complicated, field of single cell proteomics, and the development of novel
computational methods to analyse the highly challenging data obtained from the glycoproteome.
These three topics fuelled three parallel breakout sessions, which ran in parallel at any given
time throughout the seminar. A fourth, cross-cutting breakout session was created during the
seminar as well, which dealt with the standardisation efforts in proteomics data, and explored the
possibilities to upgrade these standards to better cope with the increasing demands being put on
the relevant data storage and dissemination formats. This report comprises an Executive Summary
of the Dagstuhl Seminar, which describes the overall seminar structure together with the key
take-away messages for each of the three topics. This is followed by the abstracts, comprising three
introduction talks, one for each topic, which were intended to whet the participants’ appetite for
each topic, while also introducing an expert perspective on the current challenges and opportunities
in that topic. Along with the topic talks, two ad-hoc talks were presented during the seminar as
well, and their abstracts are provided next. Moreover, each breakout session also comes with its
own abstract, which provides insights into its discussions and relevant outcomes throughout the
seminar.
Seminar July 23–28, 2023 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/23301
2012 ACM Subject Classification Applied computing → Bioinformatics
Keywords and phrases bioinformatics, glycoproteomics, machine learning, mass spectrometry,
   proteomics, single cell proteomics
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.13.7.152



    1    Executive Summary
Lennart Martens (Ghent University, BE)
Rebekah Gundry (University of Nebraska – Omaha, US)
Magnus Palmblad (Leiden University Medical Center, NL)
        License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © Lennart Martens, Rebekah Gundry, and Magnus Palmblad


The Dagstuhl Seminar 23301 “Computational Proteomics” was based around three key topics
of rapid development in mass spectrometry-based proteomics, which were discussed in-depth
in light of their challenges and opportunities. These three topics were: (i) the expanding
and highly successful adoption of machine learning (ML) approaches in proteomics; (ii) the
varied computational challenges posed by the very recent, but very rapidly evolving field of
single cell proteomics; and (iii) the possible paths to adoption of advanced computational


∗
    Editor / Organizer

            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Computational Proteomics, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 13, Issue 7, pp. 152–165
Editors: Rebekah Gundry, Lennart Martens, and Magnus Palmblad
                   Dagstuhl Reports
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
Rebekah Gundry, Lennart Martens, and Magnus Palmblad                                                   153


approaches in the challenging field of glycoproteomics. Each of these topics was introduced
by a short lecture, delivered by an expert in the field, and focused on two main goals: (i)
to provide an informed opinion of the current state of the field, while highlighting its key
challenges; and (ii) to thus entice the participants to contribute their own views on this topic,
to help set the agenda for the discussions throughout the remainder of the seminar. Apart
from these three invited talks, two ad-hoc talks also emerged during the seminar, and these
concerned the specific topic of large scale spectral clustering, and the promise of using the
Rust programming language in proteomics applications.
    Based on the ideas collected after each of the introductory, topic-specific presentations,
a list of discussion points was collated for each topic, and three parallel breakout sessions
were then organised in the mornings and afternoons around these discussion points. A final,
joint session in the evening of each day served to bring all participants from the different
breakout groups together again, and summarized the key points of their respective discussions.
Moreover, these joint sessions were also used to update the lists of discussion points for the
three topics with any newly emerged points, and to reprioritise discussion points for the next
day’s breakout sessions.
    The Machine Learning Working Group had a lot of topics to explore, mostly focusing on
refining current approaches, by, for instance, introducing quality control and explainable AI,
as well as setting out new applications for ML in the field. The latter included the possibility
of a foundational model, the extended prediction of analyte behaviour in the instrumentation,
and the possibility to analyse the resulting models to gain a better understanding of the
physico-chemical properties at play in the analytics workflow. Finally, community-building
efforts were discussed, and suggestions for improvements of existing initiatives (notably
proteomicsML.org), as well for novel community engagements were made.
    The Single Cell Proteomics Working Group discussed the applicability of current tools in
the new discipline of single cell proteomics. Correspondingly, issues in capacity in current
tools also came up, in light of the fast-growing data sizes for singe cell experiments, which
are currently at hundreds of analytical runs, but likely soon expanding towards thousands
of runs; well beyond the capabilities of present-day algorithms. Standardisation of this
field, and its metadata, which is even more inportant given the sheer size and complexity of
typical single cell proteomics data sets, was also considered in some detail. This entailed
the standardisation of the workflows and algorithm parameters, which are currentl very
diverse and specific, as well as the standards for data and metadata representation and
dissemination.
    The Glycomics and Glycoproteomics Working Group saw plentiful opportunities for the
field to strenghten their bioinformatics, and put emphasis on adopting machine learning
techniques in their field. However, they also saw open challenges regarding the collection and
annotation of their data. Some time was also spent on identifying current weaknesses in their
field, notably the quantification of glycopeptides, and possible avenues for addressing these.
    At the end of the seminar, a critical assessment of the seminar was performed by all
participants, highlighting the strengths and improvement points of the overall Seminar
organisation, and a list of potential future Dagstuhl Seminar topics was drafted based on the
participant’s input. The assessment of the Seminar highlighted in particular the extremely
fruitful nature of the open and engaging discussions, the unique and highly valuable nature of
Schloss Dagstuhl and its unmatched seminars, and the ongoing gratitude of the computational
proteomics community for the opportunity to convene in this singular setting. Concerning
possible future topics, a plethora of enticing options were put forward, indicating that the
field of computational proteomics remains in full expansion and that it continues to brim
with both challenges and promise!



                                                                                                    23301
154   23301 – Computational Proteomics


       2      Table of Contents
      Executive Summary
        Lennart Martens, Rebekah Gundry, and Magnus Palmblad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152

      Overview of Talks
           Topic introduction: Machine learning in Proteomics: everything everywhere all at
           once
           Robbin Bouwmeester . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
           Topic introduction: Mass spectrometry-based single-cell proteomics: current chal-
           lenges
           Laurent Gatto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
           Topic introduction: Glycomics and glycoproteomics – Computational challenges
           and opportunities
           Sriram Neelamegham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
           Ad-hoc talk: Unsupervised clustering of spectra
           Lukas Käll . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
           Ad hoc talk: A community-driven project – Rusteomics
           Dirk Winkelhardt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157

      Working groups
           Working Group Report: Machine Learning in Proteomics
           Robbin Bouwmeester, Viktoria Dorfer, Laurent Gatto, Arzu Tugce Guler, Tiannan
           Guo, Michael Hoopmann, Lukas Käll, Ville Koskinen, Lennart Martens, Magnus
           Palmblad, Tobias Schmidt, Veit Schwämmle, Mathias Wilhelm, and Dirk Winkel-
           hardt     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
           Working Group Report: Single Cell Proteomics
           Laurent Gatto, Bernard Delanghe, Melanie Föll, Lukas Käll, Ville Koskinen, Len-
           nart Martens, Sriram Neelamegham, Tobias Schmidt, Veit Schwämmle, Mathias
           Wilhelm, and Gamze Nur Yapici . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160
           Working Group Report: Glycosylation and Glycoproteomics
           Rebekah Gundry, Kiyoko Aoki-Kinoshita, Robbin Bouwmeester, Robert Chalkley,
           Bernard Delanghe, Viktoria Dorfer, Melanie Föll, Arzu Tugce Guler, Catherine
           Hayes, Michael Hoopmann, Lukas Käll, Ville Koskinen, Karina Martinez, Sriram
           Neelamegham, Magnus Palmblad, Erdmann Rapp, Tobias Schmidt, Mathias Wilhelm,
           Bernd Wollscheid, and Gamze Nur Yapici . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161

      Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
Rebekah Gundry, Lennart Martens, and Magnus Palmblad                                                   155


 3     Overview of Talks
3.1    Topic introduction: Machine learning in Proteomics: everything
       everywhere all at once
Robbin Bouwmeester (Ghent University, BE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Robbin Bouwmeester


It can be clear that machine learning has integrated with many (if not outright most) of
proteomics data analysis, as it has been a key ingredient in today’s proteomics informatics
advances. At the same time, this widespread uptake of machine learning in the field can
correctly be labelled as only a beginning. Indeed, there are many different new models
available in the domain of machine learning, including large language models, tarnsfer
learning, and graph convulational networks, alongside many new applications in proteomics
itself, such as the prediction of chromatographic elution profiles, optimal experiment design
solutions, and the provision of confidence intervals on predictions, all to name but a few.
Moreover, the onset of machine learning models in the field has alos led to a need for
comparing and evaluating the impact of these models. Of course, the presence of machine
learning-interested researchers in proteomics has also led to calls for the establishment of a
machine learning in proteomics, community, which in turn also led to education efforts in
the form of ProteomicsML. As a result, there are several interesting opportunities regarding
the further advancement of machine learning in proteomics, which can be organised into
thee three subtopics: (i) new models and applications; (ii) comparing of models and their
downstream impact; and (iii) community-building and support around machine learning in
proteomics.



3.2    Topic introduction: Mass spectrometry-based single-cell proteomics:
       current challenges
Laurent Gatto (University of Louvain, BE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Laurent Gatto


Single cell proteomics is a relatively new field within proteomics, as the analysis of the truly
minute quantities of proteins from single cells had been regarded as well outside the range of
the mass spectrometers’ limits of detection. However, instrumentation and methodological
advances have allowed these limits to be breached, and have resulted in a rapidly growing
interest in, and uptake of, single cell proteomics. This is not to say that analysing the
proteome of a single cell is now by any means a routine endeavour. It remains a highly
challenging and work-intensive process, and requires dedicated instrumentation and extremely
careful sample preparation and handling. However, the challenges in single cell proteomics are
most certainly not only practical. Indeed, considerable computational challenges accompany
this young field, and these can be summarised in three categories as identification challenges,
quantification challenges, and statistical data analysis challenges. Indeed, at all levels of the
data processing workflow, single cell proteomics provides unique challenges for present-day
computational algorithms and approaches, and thus plentiful opportunities for research into
novel methods.




                                                                                                    23301
156   23301 – Computational Proteomics


      3.3    Topic introduction: Glycomics and glycoproteomics –
             Computational challenges and opportunities
      Sriram Neelamegham (University at Buffalo – SUNY, US)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Sriram Neelamegham


      The field of glycomics/glycoproteomics is a challenging one, due to the combined complexity
      of requiring analysis of both glycan structures as well as their carrier peptide sequences.
      Importantly, while a vast array of software tools are available for glycomics (the study of
      the glycans) on the one hand, and glycoproteomics (the study of the peptides carrying
      the glycans) on the other hand, many of these tools have been deprecated swiftly after
      publication, are not open source, or lack modularity. This unfortunately greatly limits the
      actual availability of computational solutions in the field. A classification of the various
      computational approaches can be made in four types: peptide-first, glycan-first, O-glycan
      specific, and glycan database focused algorithms. These approaches vary in their sensitivities,
      and limited overlap between the results of various tools is the rule rather than the exception,
      as also highlighted in a recent Human Proteome Organisation (HUPO) study on the topic.
      However, a very promising new avenue is provided by machine learning approaches, and it is
      very encouraging to see heightened interest from the field in supporting, and subsequently
      adopting, such approaches. However, some key challenges remain in the field, notably the lack
      of large, well-curated data sets. There are interesting opportunities available for exploration,
      however, especially if curated data sets of sufficient size were to become available, and these
      include the use of ion mobility information in the identification process, and the possibility
      to predict retention times from glycan (or even peptido-glycan) structures. In summary,
      some of the most pressing challenges in the field of glycomics/glycoproteomics are clearly
      computational in nature, and there is therefore ample opportunity for innovation in this field.



      3.4    Ad-hoc talk: Unsupervised clustering of spectra
      Lukas Käll (KTH Royal Institute of Technology – Solna, SE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Lukas Käll


      Tandem mass spectrometry experiments generate large amounts of spectra, generally with
      high redundancy between and within samples. An exciting way to process such data is
      to use unsupervised clustering to group spectra with similar appearance that tentatively
      were generated by the same analyte across samples. By associating the spectra to their
      corresponding MS1 abundances, the approach enables the quantification of analytes rep-
      resented by spectra before their identification. The approach also allows the merging of
      the spectra of the clusters into consensus spectra, potentially increasing the accuracy of
      further identification. This approach has successfully been applied to proteomics data
      (https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-17037-3), and we discussed if the approach could
      be further extended into the analysis of glycans and glycopeptides.
Rebekah Gundry, Lennart Martens, and Magnus Palmblad                                                              157


3.5    Ad hoc talk: A community-driven project – Rusteomics
Dirk Winkelhardt (Ruhr-Universität Bochum, DE & ELIXIR Germany – Jülich, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Dirk Winkelhardt


The Rust programming language has been making inroads in recent years, due, amongst
others, to its speed of execution, its use of centralised libraries (crates) coupled to an excellent
dependency manager (Cargo), and the ability to be cross-compliled to multiple platforms.
Moreover, Rust is conceived to be particularly safe, as the memory ownership model protects
from memory leaks at compile time. In proteomics as well, Rust has started to gain some
initial traction, and this talk documents a Rust in proteomics hackathon that took place at
the EuBIC Developers Meeting in early 2023. After a brief introduction to the programming
language, a simple exercise was completed by the participants in which the peak intensity of
the peak closest to a target mass-over-charge was determined. The hackathon participants
then engaged in testing the I/O speed of rust, which was deemed to be extraordinarily
high for reading text-formatted mass spectra (in MGF format) and sequence database files
(in FASTA format). In addition, efforts were spent on exploring the generation of API
documentation (via Sphinx), project structure, and the use of Github-Actions on Rust and
Python code. The participants also worked on bridging Microsoft .Net libraires with Rust
code, as most vendors write their proprietary libraries (which are essential when reading
their proprietary, binary data formats) in .Net. Finally, the participants drafted future plans
for Rust in proteomics, which involved setting up a host of core mass spectrometry libraries,
and integration of the Rust-written Sage open modification search engine in this overall
framework.



 4     Working groups
4.1    Working Group Report: Machine Learning in Proteomics
Robbin Bouwmeester (Ghent University, BE), Viktoria Dorfer (University of Applied Sciences
Upper Austria, AT), Laurent Gatto (University of Louvain, BE), Arzu Tugce Guler (Leiden,
NL), Tiannan Guo (Westlake University – Hangzhou, CN), Michael Hoopmann (Institute for
Systems Biology – Seattle, US), Lukas Käll (KTH Royal Institute of Technology – Solna, SE),
Ville Koskinen (Matrix Science Ltd. – London, GB), Lennart Martens (Ghent University,
BE), Magnus Palmblad (Leiden University Medical Center, NL), Tobias Schmidt (MSAID –
Garching, DE), Veit Schwämmle (University of Southern Denmark – Odense, DK), Mathias
Wilhelm (TU München – Freising, DE), and Dirk Winkelhardt (Ruhr-Universität Bochum,
DE & ELIXIR Germany – Jülich, DE)
      License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Robbin Bouwmeester, Viktoria Dorfer, Laurent Gatto, Arzu Tugce Guler, Tiannan Guo, Michael
                Hoopmann, Lukas Käll, Ville Koskinen, Lennart Martens, Magnus Palmblad, Tobias Schmidt, Veit
                Schwämmle, Mathias Wilhelm, and Dirk Winkelhardt


The Working Group on Machine Learning (ML) in Proteomics convened every day, and even
split off into two parallel groups for certain sessions to pursue multiple topics of discussion.
This abstract reflects these dicussions and their ouctomes in chronological order throughout
the Seminar.




                                                                                                               23301
158   23301 – Computational Proteomics


          On the first day, the Working Group began by looking at quality control (QC) and ML,
      and first of all, the ambiguity in the topic title was unpacked. Indeed, one could look at the
      use of ML in QC, or conversely, at the QC of ML. On the topic of using ML in quality control
      (QC), a presentation of data from several labs and instruments using paired features that
      may be suitable for ML and prediction of the source of experimental problems. Highlighting
      the discrepancy between observed and expected (ML predicted) features is key for successful
      QC, whether it’s done using internal standards or, for example, relative entropy. On the topic
      of the QC of ML, one of the key needs is for users to know when they are using a model (too
      far) out of context. We discussed some very simple ways on how this could be presented, such
      as a (box) plot of model performance on the current data set(s) in the context of a boxplot
      of the expected performance of that model. Tools that provide such feedback are much more
      likely to get used in practice, and should confer higher confidence in the applicability of the
      model to that data set. From this, a digression into explainable AI was made, where feature
      relevance could be assessed by looking at training gradients, or looking at discrimination
      power rather than correlation between predicted and measured features.
          The second day began with a discussion centered around the concept of Foundation
      Models, which are versatile models trained on broad data for various downstream tasks. The
      concept and its applications were introduced, which included for instance gene expression
      prediction. Participants questioned the potential for a proteomics-focused Foundation Model,
      given the challenges of data annotation. The group outlined a multi-step plan involving
      data collection, processing, and integration into a Foundation Model. Challenges, such as
      fragmentary and poorly annotated data, and variations between labs and instruments, were
      acknowledged. The group suggested that separate Foundation Models for sequences, spectra,
      and other data types could be linked together for a combined output. The conversation
      shifted to a proposed first spectra-only Foundation Model project. Several data repositories
      were suggested for sourcing spectral data, with the intent to cover as much sequence diversity
      as possible. Converting data to tensors for GPU computation was discussed, along with
      specific spectral encodings. The session resulted in a concrete plan to start by applying for
      GPU resources and a number of other action points for the coming months.
          On the afternoon of the second day, the Working Group focused on two distinct topics. The
      first of these centered on the machine-learning based prediction of the behaviour of peptide
      and small molecule analytes on the instruments. We aimed to identify explainable properties,
      the models to use, and any opportunities for deep learning. Trivial, or already ML-predicted
      properties like mass, isotopic distributions, peak shapes, diffusion rates, protein localization,
      and isoelectric point were mentioned, upon which the focus shifted to properties benefitting
      most from further investment of machine learning techniques, such as ion suppression,
      ion mobility/collision cross-section (CCS), pH, and chromatographic column temperature.
      Revisiting early work with molecular dynamics and the application of association mining were
      raised. The impact of post-translational modifications (PTMs) on retention times and collision
      energy optimization for improved fragmentation were considered. Applying AI methods for
      protein structural dynamics, and for exploring enzymatic digestion and protein fractionation
      were also discussed. Action items include a review manuscript focusing on successful deep
      learning models like pDeep, Prosit and DeepLC. Throughout, this discussion highlighted
      machine learning’s continuing potential for understanding and predicting physicochemical
      properties in MS-based proteomics.
          The second topic of the afternoon of the second day discussed a project that aims to
      develop an end-to-end model to predict protein quantities directly from raw data, potentially
      linking it to a phenotype or disease state. This is a deeply challenging endeavor, but there are
Rebekah Gundry, Lennart Martens, and Magnus Palmblad                                                  159


already some preliminary data available for reprocessing. One project, soon to be published,
offers around 20k DIA runs of serum samples with quantified proteins. Nevertheless, questions
remain regarding the amount of available data. The model architecture is also a crucial
consideration. While convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are one option, it is unclear
whether the local structure is sufficient to become informative hyper-features. An alternative
might involve using a transformer network that processes the output of a scan or window. The
model’s input is a tensor or matrix, possibly with mass-over-charge and intensity dimensions.
However, there are concerns that the matrix might be too high-dimensional for conventional
deep learning. The DIA tensor (DIAt) tool has been proposed to convert DIA (SWATH)
data into a tensor, effectively creating large “images”. Another possible concept to explore
involves graph convolutional neural networks. With this approach, peaks are nodes, and
correlations or co-occurrences between peaks form the edges. However, this approach could
be problematic as calculating correlations between features might go against the idea of an
end-to-end model and may complicate feature finding or peak picking. A possible starting
point for the project could be focusing on fourteen proteins in serum or blood, to begin with.
Incorporating ideas from the field of ion networks might also be beneficial, as this essentially
formes a network of ions that could be used as a starting point.
    The third day saw the Working Group first explore ways to interrogate deep learning
models for their knowledge about physicochemical rules through data-driven exploration.
Retention time and fragmentation spectrum prediction models seem to be most suitable to
extract rules that are “semi-orthogonal” to what they have been trained with. That could
include details about binding energies, structure and the impact of motifs. The approach
would be to generate simple hypotheses and then explore their potential impact on the
predictions. This approach can be automated into building a Great Hypothesis Tester built
on regular expressions for the peptide input.
    The afternoon of the third day considered the ProteomicsML.org resource, which was
first demonstrated, followed by general discussions on possible additions and modifications.
Suggestions include adding recommended reading for ML and proteomics beginners, linking to
existing tutorials, and covering relevant frameworks. Currently, the platform uses various ML
frameworks and mainly focuses on behavioral predictions. Considerations include simplifying
ML frameworks, introducing structural methods like AlphaFold, and clarifying the purpose
of ProteomicsML. Outreach should emphasize seeking contributors, offering lessons and
tutorials, and addressing platform maintenance.
    On the fourth day, finally, the discussions began by considering community aspects
of ML model reproducibility through better access to data and code. Platforms such as
ProteomicsML, DLOmix and Zenodo were suggested for sharing and comparing models.
Ongoing efforts are being coordinated with BioHackathon Europe, and their BioModelsML
project. Another point was that model evaluation requires better comparison metrics, possibly
focusing on relevant biological information such as coverage of relevant pathways, rather than
simply counting peptide-to-spectrum matches. Other topics covered variational autoencoders,
probabilistic modeling, and missing value imputation, with suggestions to use noise injection
and quantitative data, building on the histone-based “proteomic ruler”.




                                                                                                   23301
160   23301 – Computational Proteomics


      4.2    Working Group Report: Single Cell Proteomics
      Laurent Gatto (University of Louvain, BE), Bernard Delanghe (Thermo Fisher GmbH –
      Bremen, DE), Melanie Föll (Universitätsklinikum Freiburg, DE), Lukas Käll (KTH Royal
      Institute of Technology – Solna, SE), Ville Koskinen (Matrix Science Ltd. – London, GB),
      Lennart Martens (Ghent University, BE), Sriram Neelamegham (University at Buffalo –
      SUNY, US), Tobias Schmidt (MSAID – Garching, DE), Veit Schwämmle (University of
      Southern Denmark – Odense, DK), Mathias Wilhelm (TU München – Freising, DE), and
      Gamze Nur Yapici (Koc University – Istanbul, TR)
            License       Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Laurent Gatto, Bernard Delanghe, Melanie Föll, Lukas Käll, Ville Koskinen, Lennart Martens,
                      Sriram Neelamegham, Tobias Schmidt, Veit Schwämmle, Mathias Wilhelm, and Gamze Nur Yapici


      This abstract documents the discussions of the Working Group on Single Cell Proteomics,
      which took place throughout the Seminar, and whose subtopics are presented here in
      chronological order.
           On the first day, the Working Group discussed that, whenever a novel technology is
      proposed, or an existing one is pushed beyond what was considered possible, such as in mass
      spectrometry-based single-cell proteomics (SCP), one can wonder whether existing software
      are still applicable. A notable comparison between fragmentation mass spectrometry scans
      from bulk and single-cell data highlighted possible differences, and thus wondered if existing
      search engines can be used as they are. Our working hypothesis is that the differences
      between SCP and bulk fragmentation mass spectra are mainly due to the lower intensity of
      the precursors, leading to some fragments getting lost, and that current tools can in fact
      still be used. We plan to test our hypothesis using data readily available from the members
      of our Working Group, comparing identifications with and without re-scoring of features,
      exploration of these features, and incorporating precursor intensity into the identification
      models.
           On the second day, the discussion initially focused on SDRF metadata for proteomics.
      We first discussed which adaptations and challenges arise when using SDRF to annotate
      single cell proteomics experiments. We furthermore discussed how to generally improve the
      SDRF format e.g. more automatic collection of metadata and using it to facilitate writing
      materials & methods sections. Both would likely improve usage of SDRF by the community.
           In the afternoon of the second day, the Working Group concentrated on recommendations
      for single-cell DIA data analysis. Single-cell TMT techniques are already “solved”, because
      FDR control and batch effects are the same as non-single cell data. We further narrowed
      down to identification. With DIA, the two main tools are DIA-NN and Spectronaut. Users
      treat both as “black boxes”, and much more transparency is needed on configuration options
      as well as the rationale for enabling or disabling various processing steps. We recommend
      saving the log file and exporting the config options at minimum, and tool developers are
      strongly recommended to provide sensible defaults and hide less-commonly used advanced
      options. It is also common to analyse a bulk sample together with single-cell raw files and
      use options like match-between-runs (MBR) to boost peptide and protein IDs. We will test
      the validity of this procedure by acquiring human single-cell data and analysing it together
      with 1) a bulk human sample (say 100 cells) and 2) an E. coli sample. The expectation is
      that the latter has no effect on identification rates. The opposite outcome would demonstrate
      the procedure is not valid.
           The third day saw continued discussion on practical pipeline issues. Scaling of the data
      processing capability already is a current, and will be an especially important future challenge.
      Processing 100 raw files is still doable, but no tools currently handle thousands of samples.
Rebekah Gundry, Lennart Martens, and Magnus Palmblad                                                               161


Data size poses storage issues as well as data transfer problems, such as that one cannot
easily upload a terabyte of data to the cloud. Moreover, many institutions forbid cloud
processing of sensitive proteomics data, which differs from transcriptomics and genomics data
processing. File formats like mzML are space inefficient, so can a better standard format be
selected or developed? Or is it better to use just vendor raw files? The field also needs to
clarify the research question at the end of a single-cell study. It is infeasible to interpret a
spreadsheet with a thousand columns, so is it sufficient for software to only report protein
differences between cells? To answer these questions, we need a concrete example, such as
the 100 cell data set already discussed.
    On the fourth day, the discussion touched on several different angles on how and whether
transcriptomics of single cells could be combined with single-cell proteomics. Due to the
extremely low sample amounts, it is difficult to do both on the same cell. Mosaic integration
could allow some shared dimensions. Another discussion focused on the importance of
the different modalities, and that we should expect to see the same effect. This, and the
substantial differences in dimensions (a thousand for SCP, but ten thousand for scRNA-Seq)
would also make their integration difficult or even questionable. Even within a single modality,
focusing on proteomics, different features will provide different information. Carefully selected
surface markers used in flow cytometry, for instance, will not necessarily be recapitulated, at
least not as clearly, by hundreds or thousands of proteins; the same large, well differentiated
clusters/types are expected to be recovered, but with much more variability. We finally
discussed the notion of stable and unstable balance – protein abundances won’t change easily
if many copies are present in the cell, whereas proteins with only few copies can much more
easily suffer changes in intensity. Moreover, (post-translational) modifications could also
easily trigger quantification or cellular balances.



4.3    Working Group Report: Glycosylation and Glycoproteomics
Rebekah Gundry (University of Nebraska – Omaha, US), Kiyoko Aoki-Kinoshita (Soka
University – Tokyo, JP), Robbin Bouwmeester (Ghent University, BE), Robert Chalkley
(University of California – San Francisco, US), Bernard Delanghe (Thermo Fisher GmbH –
Bremen, DE), Viktoria Dorfer (University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria, AT), Melanie
Föll (Universitätsklinikum Freiburg, DE), Arzu Tugce Guler (Leiden, NL), Catherine Hayes
(Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics – Geneva, CH), Michael Hoopmann (Institute for Systems
Biology – Seattle, US), Lukas Käll (KTH Royal Institute of Technology – Solna, SE), Ville
Koskinen (Matrix Science Ltd. – London, GB), Karina Martinez (George Washington
University – Washington, DC, US), Sriram Neelamegham (University at Buffalo – SUNY,
US), Magnus Palmblad (Leiden University Medical Center, NL), Erdmann Rapp (MPI –
Magdeburg, DE), Tobias Schmidt (MSAID – Garching, DE), Mathias Wilhelm (TU München
– Freising, DE), Bernd Wollscheid (ETH Zürich, CH), and Gamze Nur Yapici (Koc University
– Istanbul, TR)
      License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Rebekah Gundry, Kiyoko Aoki-Kinoshita, Robbin Bouwmeester, Robert Chalkley, Bernard
                Delanghe, Viktoria Dorfer, Melanie Föll, Arzu Tugce Guler, Catherine Hayes, Michael Hoopmann,
                Lukas Käll, Ville Koskinen, Karina Martinez, Sriram Neelamegham, Magnus Palmblad, Erdmann
                Rapp, Tobias Schmidt, Mathias Wilhelm, Bernd Wollscheid, and Gamze Nur Yapici


The Glycosylation and Glycoproteomics Working Group convened in several sessions through-
out the Seminar, and discussed a variety of topics, which are listed in chronological order in
this abstract.



                                                                                                                23301
162   23301 – Computational Proteomics


          On the first day of the seminar, the Working Group discussed the idea that we do not yet
      know how or if the presence of glycosylation affects fragmentation of the peptide backbone
      when acquiring MS/MS data on intact glycopeptides. Does the glycan affect observation
      and/or intensities of fragment ions? The question is important to answer as, if the presence
      of glycosylation does affect fragmentation, it stands to reason that fragmentation prediction
      algorithms and fragmentation interpretation algorithms would need to consider this to ensure
      accurate interpretation of the data. Major questions to be anwsered include: 1) Does the
      presence of a glycan (site occupied vs site not occupied) affect fragmentation? 2) Does the
      fragmentation of the peptide differ if the glycan composition on the site is varied? 3) Does
      the fragmentation of the peptide differ if the glycan structure on the site is varied? 4) Does
      the fragmentation of the glycopeptide differ if the glycan is attached to a glycopeptide that
      is the result of full tryptic digestion vs. one with ragged (non-tryptic) terminus? 5) Does the
      presence of N-linked glycosylation have the same or different effect on peptide fragmentation
      as the presence of O-linked glycosylation?
          The second day saw the Working Group discussing current challenges with glycopeptide
      and released glycan analyses as it relates to best practices for interpreting and reporting data.
      Major concepts included discussion of ambiguity in glycopeptide and glycan assignments,
      the use and misuse of oxonium ions in glycopeptide spectra interpretation, the impact of
      search space on false discovery rate (FDR) calculations and accuracy of assignments, and the
      call to action for software developers to incorporate strategies to highlight assignments that
      may be ambiguous and to include GlyTouCan accession numbers, the reference annotation
      language for glycan compositions, topologies, and structures. Our discussion led to the
      development of an outline for a perspective or white paper focused on best practices in data
      analysis and reporting, which will serve as a catalyst to promote scientists to follow MIRAGE
      guidelines. It will include real-world examples to promote scientists at any level of experience
      in glycoproteomics or glycomics to become aware of key issues which may otherwise not be
      obvious to those with limited experience in this discipline.
          In the afternoon of the second day, the discussion turned to a variety of topics related
      to how we can make more and better use of the glycopeptide and glycomic data that we
      generate. We discussed available tools for interpretation and integration of data, including
      a tour of tools on GlyConnect website. On the subject of glycopeptide quantification, the
      opinion of the group was that this has so far remained an unmet goal, depsite any claims
      to the contrary. We decided to add this as point #5 in the best practices manuscript
      outlined in the morning session of the second day – to outline best practices for anyone
      publishing in a journal that is not Nature. Several studies have been published that compare
      “quantitative” comparisons of glycoforms of glycopeptides to suggest that some glycan classes
      are “more abundant” on a site than another. Given the inherent differences in ionization
      potential for glycans which have different compositions, this is problematic. We reviewed
      published data that demonstrates the difference in peak abundance for different glycoforms.
      We will use these data as examples in our best practices manuscript. We need to get more
      funding to support glycoproteomics and glycomics. While we have a lot of success stories
      regarding analytical capabilities, applications are less known. There are certainly success
      stories to demonstrate how our approaches have impacted physiology and disease, including
      fundamentals of physiological processes and clinical examples. However, not all examples are
      highly visible. We discussed ideas for creating resources as a community to help educate
      others of our value. This could be videos, documents, websites that summarize success stories
      that would resonate with institutional leaders, administrators, benefactors, funding agencies.
Rebekah Gundry, Lennart Martens, and Magnus Palmblad                                                   163


    The third day focused initially on interactions between proteomics and glycomics, with a
team of experts in glycomics and proteomics discussing ideas on how to transfer knowledge
from the proteomics field for application in glycomics workflows. The first part of the
discussion focussed on current challenges in the analysis of glycopeptides and released
glycans, particularly with respect to: 1. Structure assignment, i.e. the challenges in the
identification of glycan composition in glycoproteomics studies, and also with respect to
topology and structure determination that are common to both the fields of glycomics
and glycoproteomics. These challenges stem from, amongst others, the isomeric nature of
glycans. 2. Variable experimental workflows: current best practices in glycomics studies
and glycoproteomics wetlab studies were discussed with respect to different experimental
workflows used by multiple groups. The use of multiple experimental methods, such as
derivatization strategies and fragmentation modes results in lack of consensus in the field. 3.
Limitations of current software solutions: It was highlighted that glycosciences is a niche area,
with relatively few researchers deeply involved. Knowledge was shared about observations
on how MS intensity (or relative intensity) may be used for glycan topology assignments.
The conclusion of the first part was that the glycan search space is not so large and it may
be possible to develop spectral libraries or clustering approaches to find reliable topology
solutions. Additionally, already established proteomics tools may be adopted using transfer
learning approaches to aid developments in glycoproteomics. Among the methodologies
discussed were i) MaRaCluster as it is agnostic to MS/MS spectra and may be used to
develop consensus spectra. While there is no perfect method to develop consensus spectra
for glycomics, a variety of approaches were also discussed ii) GLEAMS as reference spectra
may be populated in this framework, perhaps using Siamese/pairwise inputs so that the
system may be trained to find commonalities and distinctions among glycan classes. While
there were many advantages to this approach, concerns were raised regarding the ability of
proteomics trained datasets to learn glycomics experimental results, and the fact that the
reference spectra may vary with collision energy and that the actual experimental results
would have to be tightly clustered to a reference dataset. iii) Application of transfer learning,
possibly using graph convoluted neutral networks, to predict MS/MS intensity. Challenges
were discussed here with respect to the representation of branched glycan structures as
graphs in such modeling. The final portion discussed the need to either write an independent
perspective article related to this subject, or simply to use this discussion as discussion
material in the paper that is ‘forthcoming’ from the first day’s session. This will be important
to raise awareness and obtain additional funding to support the project.
    The afternoon of the thid day brought a discussion on the common concepts we consider
when trying to connect our glycomics and glycoproteomics data to biology, including a
review of available resources to support these efforts. We also reviewed a public repository of
bioinformatic tools. We discussed the state of the art of tools for glycopeptide and glycomic
analysis, including limitations and what would be important to consider for future versions.
Overall, challenges to selecting which tools make sense to focus on include that there is high
heterogeneity in the field regarding which approaches to use, so not immediately clear that
there is a single solution to focus on as it would risk putting effort into a tool that would not
be broadly used in the field.
    The fourth day, finally, continued the discussion of available tools and their limitations.
We had new discussion of how we can better make use of machine learning and neural network
tools to advance the field. An example emerged that centered around how we could use
machine learning to help the interpretation of glycosidase reactions. Briefly, we often treat
samples with glycosidases to help determine structural details. These reactions cause mass




                                                                                                    23301
164   23301 – Computational Proteomics


      and RT shifts in the glycans/glycopeptides. This is probably something where ML could
      help us to automate and interpret the results. We ended by planning details regarding the
      two manuscripts we anticipate submitting by end of 2023. The first will be a research article
      that uses existing data to answer the question of whether the glycan/peptide affects peptide
      fragmentation. The other is a guidelines/tutorial type paper likely to be submitted to MCP.
Rebekah Gundry, Lennart Martens, and Magnus Palmblad                                                       165


        Participants
  Kiyoko Aoki-Kinoshita            Rebekah Gundry                      Sriram Neelamegham
Soka University – Tokyo, JP      University of Nebraska –            University at Buffalo –
                                 Omaha, US                           SUNY, US
 Robbin Bouwmeester
Ghent University, BE               Tiannan Guo                         Magnus Palmblad
                                 Westlake University –               Leiden University Medical
  Robert Chalkley                Hangzhou, CN                        Center, NL
University of California –         Catherine Hayes                     Erdmann Rapp
San Francisco, US                Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics – MPI – Magdeburg, DE
                                 Geneva, CH
  Bernard Delanghe                                                     Tobias Schmidt
Thermo Fisher GmbH –               Michael Hoopmann                  MSAID – Garching, DE
Bremen, DE                       Institute for Systems Biology –
                                 Seattle, US                           Veit Schwämmle
 Viktoria Dorfer                                                     University of Southern Denmark –
                                   Lukas Käll                        Odense, DK
University of Applied Sciences   KTH Royal Institute of
Upper Austria, AT                Technology – Solna, SE                Mathias Wilhelm
                                                                     TU München – Freising, DE
  Melanie Föll                     Ville Koskinen
Universitätsklinikum             Matrix Science Ltd. –                 Dirk Winkelhardt
Freiburg, DE                     London, GB                          Ruhr-Universität Bochum, DE &
                                   Lennart Martens                   ELIXIR Germany – Jülich, DE
 Laurent Gatto                   Ghent University, BE                  Bernd Wollscheid
University of Louvain, BE                                            ETH Zürich, CH
                                   Karina Martinez
  Arzu Tugce Guler               George Washington University –        Gamze Nur Yapici
Leiden, NL                       Washington, DC, US                  Koc University – Istanbul, TR




                                                                                                        23301
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 23302

Software Architecture and Machine Learning
Grace A. Lewis∗1 , Henry Muccini∗2 , Ipek Ozkaya3 ,
Karthik Vaidhyanathan†4 , Roland Weiss∗5 , and Liming Zhu∗6
1       Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering Institute – Pittsburgh, US.
        glewis@sei.cmu.edu
2       University of L’Aquila, IT. henry.muccini@univaq.it
3       Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering Institute – Pittsburgh, US.
        ozkaya@sei.cmu.edu
4       IIIT Hyderabad, IN. karthik.vaidhyanathan@iiit.ac.in
5       ABB – Mannheim, DE. roland.weiss@gmail.com
6       Data61, CSIRO – Sydney, AU. liming.zhu@data61.csiro.au

        Abstract
This report documents the program and outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 23302, “Software Ar-
chitecture and Machine Learning”. We summarize the goals and format of the seminar, results
from the breakout groups, key definitions relevant to machine learning-enabled systems that were
discussed, and the research roadmap that emerged from the discussions during the seminar. The
report also includes the abstracts of the talks presented at the seminar and summaries of open
discussions.
Seminar July 23–28, 2023 – https://www.dagstuhl.de/23302
2012 ACM Subject Classification Software and its engineering → Software architectures; Com-
   puting methodologies → Machine learning; Software and its engineering → Extra-functional
   properties; Computing methodologies → Artificial intelligence; Software and its engineering
Keywords and phrases Architecting ML-enabled Systems, ML for Software Architecture, Software
   Architecture for ML, Machine Learning, Software Architecture, Software Engineering
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagRep.13.7.166



    1    Executive Summary
Grace A. Lewis (Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering Institute – Pittsburgh, US)
Henry Muccini (University of L’Aquila, IT)
Ipek Ozkaya (Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering Institute – Pittsburgh, US)
Karthik Vaidhyanathan (IIIT – Hyderabad, IN)
Roland Weiss (ABB – Mannheim, DE)
Liming Zhu (Data61, CSIRO – Sydney, AU)
        License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                  © Grace A. Lewis, Henry Muccini, Ipek Ozkaya, Karthik Vaidhyanathan, Roland Weiss, and Liming
                  Zhu


The pervasive and distributed nature of many of today’s software systems requires making
complex design decisions to guarantee important system qualities such as performance,
reliability, safety and security. The practices within the field of software architecture guide
the design and development of software systems from its high-level blueprint down to their
implementation and operations. While the fundamentals of software architecture practices


∗
    Editor / Organizer
†
    Editorial Assistant / Collector


            Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
            under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
Software Architecture and Machine Learning, Dagstuhl Reports, Vol. 13, Issue 7, pp. 166–188
Editors: Grace A. Lewis, Henry Muccini, Ipek Ozkaya, Karthik Vaidhyanathan, Roland Weiss, and Liming Zhu
                    Dagstuhl Reports
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
G. A. Lewis, H. Muccini, I. Ozkaya, K. Vaidhyanathan, R. Weiss, and L. Zhu                           167


do not change, their execution evolves to address architecting with, and for, new system
paradigms and emerging technologies. Incorporating machine learning (ML) elements into
systems is advancing rapidly with the availability of more compute power, specialized
infrastructure, and better and more efficient algorithms to process increasing amounts of data.
This evolution has led many domains to leverage ML for automation, data analytics, decision
support, and advanced user interfaces, among others. Experience published and shared by
both software engineering research and practitioner communities shows that organizations
struggle to move ML models and pilot projects into production. Reported software engineering
challenges fall mostly outside data science expertise, which is focused on the development
of ML models and not necessarily their production-readiness, and include areas such as
testing, requirements management, software architecture, and configuration management.
Among these, software architecture has a special role as it serves as an abstraction between
requirements and implementation and drives the structure and behavior of systems.
    Some of the reported challenges in developing ML-enabled systems, such as interface
stability, data storage and access, and data transformation, are already addressed by existing
software architecture techniques and practices. However, traditional software development
and deployment practices are faced with and pose significant challenges when developing
ML-enabled systems, which are systems that integrate ML components. These ML com-
ponents include model training and updating components; model serving and inference
components; infrastructure components to support data collection, processing, and servicing;
and operations infrastructure, such as MLOps pipelines to support automated build and
deployment. As these new ML-related components are introduced into systems, different
architectural concerns and architecting challenges take higher priority, which include working
with non-determinism, understanding and designing for new classes of dependencies, and
co-architecting the system as well as the ML model development pipelines, among others. In
addition, integration of ML components into software systems places greater emphasis on
qualities that are not as common in non-ML systems, such as monitorability as a first-class
citizen, designing for extensibility, and data-centricity.
    This Dagstuhl Seminar culminated as a response to recognizing that software architecture
research and practitioner communities have an opportunity, if not an obligation, to fill
key software architecture principles and practices gaps that are particularly critical when
incorporating ML components into software systems. The seminar focused on two key themes:
1. software architecture principles and practices for ML-enabled systems (SA4ML) and
2. application of ML techniques for improved architecting of software systems (ML4SA).

    A key goal of the seminar was to enable technical exchange among otherwise scattered
research and practitioner communities, such as software engineering, software architecture,
self-adaptive systems, and machine learning around software architecture and ML (SA&ML).
This Dagstuhl Seminar presented an opportunity to get these communities together to
develop a common vocabulary and a coherent research agenda with a better understanding
of problems faced in the industry. The goals of this seminar were to establish a common
understanding of key concepts that are central to architecting ML-enabled systems, elicit
challenges of meeting key quality attributes of ML-enabled systems, and build a research
roadmap for future work to address these challenges. As such, this seminar marks an
important milestone in accelerating research in SA4ML and ML4SA work by fostering better
communication around key concepts and between diverse stakeholders. Hereafter, we will
use the term SA&ML to include both SA4ML and ML4SA research directions.




                                                                                                  23302
168   23302 – Software Architecture and Machine Learning


      Seminar Format
      The seminar on software architecture and machine learning was structured to foster an
      interactive and productive idea exchange environment for all participants. Participants
      were initially asked to prepare a single-slide introduction about themselves and their work
      in software architecture and machine learning, which helped to establish a foundational
      understanding among attendees. Prior to the workshop, organizers developed an initial
      version of a key concepts map and a research challenges map using a grounded theory
      approach, which was represented visually on miro boards. During the seminar, participants
      delivered 10-minute lightning talks about their SA&ML work, which were instrumental in
      refining the research and concept maps with keywords and challenges mentioned by the
      speakers. At the end of the first day, organizers summarized the discussions and identified key
      emerging topics and research areas, leading to an initial set of key quality attributes critical to
      ML-enabled system development. The second day continued with discussions and a working
      group formation session, where participants prioritized five critical quality attributes for
      ML-enabled systems: Evolvability, Uncertainty and Observability, Trust and Trustworthiness,
      and Data Centricity. Four working groups were formed around these quality attributes,
      with appointed editors documenting the discussions. Each group was provided with a draft
      template to guide their discussions for consistency, and organizers rotated among groups to
      offer diverse insights. Plenary meetings on the second and third days allowed groups to share
      progress and discuss challenges, complemented by end-of-day meetings among organizers to
      consolidate learning and monitor progress. The seminar concluded on the fourth day with
      presentations from each group, open for feedback from other participants. This collaborative
      review process led to the integration of feedback into the final discussions, resulting in
      a well-defined set of challenges and research directions, marking the seminar’s successful
      completion. In addition, this format ensured a thorough exploration of the seminar’s themes
      and fostered active participation and collaborative learning among attendees.
G. A. Lewis, H. Muccini, I. Ozkaya, K. Vaidhyanathan, R. Weiss, and L. Zhu                                169


 2      Table of Contents
Executive Summary
  Grace A. Lewis, Henry Muccini, Ipek Ozkaya, Karthik Vaidhyanathan, Roland Weiss,
  and Liming Zhu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166

Overview of Talks
     Fifty Shades of Uncertainty
     Nelly Bencomo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
     Software Architecture Modeling of Machine Learning Systems: Unsolved Challenge
     or Old Wine in New Bottles?
     Justus Bogner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
     AI: From Offline & Centralized to Online & Federated
     Jan Bosch and Helena Holmström Olsson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
     Predicting Software Performance with Divide-and-Learn
     Tao Chen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
     Analyzing Greenability of Software Architectures for AI Systems: The GAISSA
     project
     Xavier Franch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
     Why Organizations Fail to Implement AI
     Benjamin Klöpper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
     SPIRA Challenges and Lessons Learned on Architecting an Intelligent System for
     Respiratory Insufficiency Detection – Notes on Hands-on Education on SA4AI
     Fabio Kon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
     Software Architecture for Machine Learning Systems: Challenges, Practices, and
     Opportunities
     Grace A. Lewis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
     BeT (Behavior-enabled IoT)
     Henry Muccini . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 176
     Software Architecting in the Era of AI and AI-Augmented Development Tools
     Ipek Ozkaya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 176
     Architecting Systems to Integrate Machine Learning
     Lena Pons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177
     Machine Learning and Self-adaptation
     Bradley Schmerl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177
     A Vision and Challenges about Intelligent and Trustworthy IoT Systems
     Romina Spalazzese . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177
     SA, ML and Patterns
     Anastas Stoyanovsky . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
     Software Architecture Meets Machine Learning: A Tale of Convergence
     Karthik Vaidhyanathan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178




                                                                                                       23302
170   23302 – Software Architecture and Machine Learning


         Generative AI at Fraunhofer and Research Roadmaps from the Software Architecture
         Community
         Ingo Weber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
         Building, Engineering & Operating Systems for Critical Infrastructure
         Roland Weiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
         Challenges of Integrating ML Models in Safety-Relevant Architectures
         Marc Zeller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 180
         Software Architecture for Foundation Model-Based Systems
         Liming Zhu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 180

      Working groups
         WG1: Architecting for Data Centricity
         Jan Bosch, Benjamin Klöpper, Ipek Ozkaya, Lena Pons, and Christoph Schröer . . 181
         WG2: Evolvability
         Justus Bogner, Jan Bosch, Helena Holmström Olsson, Henry Muccini, Raghu Reddy,
         Anastas Stoyanovsky, Ingo Weber, and Liming Zhu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182
         WG3: Observability and Uncertainty
         Nelly Bencomo, Xavier Franch, Fabio Kon, Ipek Ozkaya, Marie Platenius-Mohr,
         Bradley Schmerl, Roland Weiss, and Karthik Vaidhyanathan . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182
         WG4: Architecting for Trust and Trustworthiness
         Tao Chen, Thomas Kropf, Grace A. Lewis, Henry Muccini, Alex Serban, Romina
         Spalazzese, and Marc Zeller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183

      Open problems
         Data Centricity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 184
         Uncertainty and Observability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 185
         Evolvability (and Adaptability) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 185
         Trust and Trustworthiness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 186
         High Priority Research Areas to Advance SA&ML . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 186
         Follow-up Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 187

      Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 188
G. A. Lewis, H. Muccini, I. Ozkaya, K. Vaidhyanathan, R. Weiss, and L. Zhu                             171


 3     Overview of Talks
The talks presented during the seminar included two industry keynotes. Alex Serban from
Siemens Healthineers talked about Software Engineering for Machine Learning: Past, Present
and Future Conjectures. The keynote explored the intricacies of machine learning, with a
focus on the critical need for emphasizing robustness and trustworthiness in ML systems.
It highlighted the challenges associated with integrating machine learning components into
broader software architectures and underscored the importance of addressing uncertainty
within these systems. The presentation delved into the development of engineering practices
tailored to machine learning, emphasizing the need for adopting these practices to enhance
agility, software quality, and team effectiveness. The keynote concluded by reflecting on
the current and future trends in machine learning, particularly the role of language as a
universal interface and the growing complexity of models, stressing the responsibility of
software architects in crafting trustworthy and robust systems amidst emerging regulatory
challenges.
    Thomas Kropf from Robert Bosch in his keynote titled Industrial AI – Real-World
Applications, Challenges and Solution Approaches, focused on the application and challenges
of Industrial AI at Bosch, highlighting the journey from the establishment of the Bosch
Center for AI to integrating AI across various products. It emphasized the distinct nature
of Industrial AI, where quality, scaling, and algorithmic robustness are crucial, particularly
in safety-critical applications, illustrated by examples such as Manufacturing Analytics and
Automated Optical Inspection (AOI) systems. The keynote also covered significant challenges
such as enterprise-level scalability, quality assurance amidst model drift, rapid AI evolution,
computational constraints in embedded systems, and the necessity for extensive tool support
for data management. The potential disruptive impact of Foundational Models on AI practices
was also acknowledged. The keynote further described how these challenges influence software
architectural choices, differentiating between cloud and low-power embedded AI solutions,
and provided insights into Bosch’s concrete strategies and architectures to address these
issues, demonstrating the critical role of AI in industrial innovation and software architecture.
    The examples of the state of the practice presented through these keynotes helped frame
the remaining talks and discussions. What follows are the abstracts from the attendee talks.



3.1    Fifty Shades of Uncertainty
Nelly Bencomo (Durham University, GB)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Nelly Bencomo


There is growing uncertainty about the environment of software systems. Therefore, how
the system should behave under different contexts cannot be fully predicted at design time.
It is considerations such as these that have led to the development of self-adaptive systems
(SAS), which can dynamically and autonomously reconfigure their behavior to respond to
changing external conditions.
    The scope of the talk is in the area of Requirements Engineering (RE) and the development
of techniques to quantify uncertainty to improve decision-making. The explicit treatment of
uncertainty by the running system improves its judgment to make decisions supported by




                                                                                                    23302
172   23302 – Software Architecture and Machine Learning


      evaluating evidence found during runtime, possibly including the human-in-the-loop. I will
      also discuss how quantification of uncertainty can be used to improve requirements elicitation
      (using simulations, for example).
          The talk will cover different approaches to quantifying uncertainty and its role in Human-
      Machine Teaming.



      3.2    Software Architecture Modeling of Machine Learning Systems:
             Unsolved Challenge or Old Wine in New Bottles?
      Justus Bogner (Universität Stuttgart, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Justus Bogner


      More and more software systems incorporate techniques from machine learning (ML) to
      support decision-making or automate information processing. Such ML systems still incor-
      porate many traditional components but nonetheless require specialized practices in certain
      areas. From a software architecture perspective, one question is if existing practices and
      frameworks are suitable for the effective modeling and documentation of ML systems. While
      there are many methods for architecture documentation based on concepts like viewpoints,
      views, and modeling notations, it is still unclear how ML professionals can best apply these
      practices to model the architecture of ML systems. The data dependency and uncertainty of
      ML components, ML stakeholder diversity, plus new quality concerns like explainability or
      model observability might require new types of views and diagrams. While a few specialized
      approaches have been proposed, other software architecture publications use vastly different
      notations and diagrams to model ML systems.
          In this short talk, I want to lay the foundation for a discussion about this topic. I will
      briefly talk about challenges in this space and present a few existing approaches. My goal is to
      discuss if these challenges are different from architecture modeling for traditional systems and
      if new approaches are needed. Ideally, the discussion might lead to research collaborations in
      this space to a) better understand challenges and b) create or adapt methods to overcome
      them.



      3.3    AI: From Offline & Centralized to Online & Federated
      Jan Bosch (Chalmers University of Technology – Göteborg, SE) and Helena Holmström
      Olsson (Malmö University, SE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Jan Bosch and Helena Holmström Olsson


      Digitalization is concerned with software, data, and AI as enabling technologies. It changes
      the company and business ecosystem in which it operates from transactional to continuous,
      i.e., XOps. This requires fundamental changes in how we work with technology from
      offline and centralized to online and federated. The talk includes examples from Software
      Center (www.software-center.se) companies, including automated experimentation, federated
      learning, reinforcement learning, semi-supervised learning, and related topics.
G. A. Lewis, H. Muccini, I. Ozkaya, K. Vaidhyanathan, R. Weiss, and L. Zhu                                           173


3.4     Predicting Software Performance with Divide-and-Learn
Tao Chen (University of Birmingham, GB)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
               © Tao Chen
 Joint work of Tao Chen, Jingzhi Gong
Main reference Jingzhi Gong, Tao Chen: “Predicting Software Performance with Divide-and-Learn”, in Proc. of the
               31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of
               Software Engineering, ESEC/FSE 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA, December 3-9, 2023, pp. 858–870,
               ACM, 2023.
          URL https://doi.org//10.1145/3611643.3616334


Predicting the performance of highly configurable software systems is the foundation for
performance testing and quality assurance. To that end, recent work has been relying on
machine/deep learning to model software performance. However, a crucial yet unaddressed
challenge is how to cater for the sparsity inherited from the configuration landscape: the
influence of configuration options (features) and the distribution of data samples are highly
sparse. This talk is based on the paper in which we propose an approach based on the
concept of “divide-and-learn”, dubbed DaL. The basic idea is that to handle sample sparsity,
we divide the samples from the configuration landscape into distant divisions, for each of
which we build a regularized Deep Neural Network as the local model to deal with the feature
sparsity. A newly given configuration would then be assigned to the right model of division
for the final prediction.
    Experiment results show that using strong domain knowledge to specialize AI performs
significantly better in configuration performance learning.



3.5     Analyzing Greenability of Software Architectures for AI Systems:
        The GAISSA project
Xavier Franch (UPC Barcelona Tech, ES)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Xavier Franch


This presentation introduces the Spanish GAISSA project ("Towards Green AI-based Software
Systems: An Architecture-centric Approach") run by the GESSI research group at UPC. The
main hypothesis of GAISSA is that the impact of architectural decisions on environmental
sustainability shall be understood, defined, reported, and managed in order to model,
develop, and deploy green(er) AI-based systems. After presenting the objectives and vision,
the presentation details the work done so far, which is basically a series of empirical studies
on the effect of model and system architectures on environmental sustainability, exploring
trade-offs with other attributes such as accuracy. Emerging challenges are the consolidation of
the results of such studies, and how to boost the attention on sustainability in the community.
In this respect, a result of the project is the so-called Energy Label, which categorizes the
efficiency level (from A to E) of a trained model, defined in terms of several attributes. The
concept has been proven using the HuggingFace repository. As future work, the talk mentions
the link between requirements and architectures.




                                                                                                                  23302
174   23302 – Software Architecture and Machine Learning


      3.6    Why Organizations Fail to Implement AI
      Benjamin Klöpper (Capgemini – Stuttgart, DE)
            License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Benjamin Klöpper


      Many organizations, especially enterprises, use a data-lake-based infrastructure to prepare
      their data for machine learning modeling. Data-lake-based systems ingest raw data from
      a wide variety of data sources such as databases, legacy information systems, automation
      systems, and more. The processed data is intended to serve the needs of different users and
      use cases. A data-lake-based system consists of a complex technology stack that implements
      distributed data processing and data storage. Typical transformation steps include ingestion,
      cleansing, enrichment, transformation, and finally, serving.
          Typically, a centralized team of data experts runs the infrastructure and implements the
      data processing. The thinking is centered around different data pipelines.
          The monolithic architecture of the data lake and the centralized organization result in
      a siloed way of working that puts the data team in a difficult position, often leading to
      unsatisfactory machine learning results and limiting the data culture of the data team. The
      data team suffers from
          Operational data that is not fit for analytics, and the team lacks a deep understanding of
          the data
          Frequent and unexpected downstream changes that require the team to patch data
          pipelines in response
          Time spent searching for and identifying the right data for use cases
          Lack of understanding of business requirements

          The resulting monolithic architecture and centralized team setup ignore common software
      engineering best practices, such as reasonably sized teams of 5-8 people with clear ownership,
      lack of mechanisms to offload cognitive load, minimizing hand-offs through loose coupling,
      and clear interfaces between components and teams.
          One architectural approach that tries to facilitate the software engineering best practices
      are data products introduced by Dehgani. They ingest data only from a few source systems
      or other data products, encapsulate the data transformation and data storage, provide an
      easy-to-use business-oriented API, and contain a human-readable description and code for
      observability. Data products group elements of data transformation so that they can be
      owned by a software team and consumed as a service by other teams.
          Essential to the adoption of a data product is a data platform that makes it easy for data
      product developers to follow the governance policies of the surrounding organization. A key
      goal of the data platform is developer experience (DevEx). There are several points to learn
      from a data-product-centric architecture:
          Design software and organizational architecture for ML-enabled systems together.
          Defined components or products should be independently deployable and a team of 5-8
          developers should be sufficient to develop them.
         There needs to be some kind of platform to reduce the cognitive load.
         The platform should be built in an evolutionary fashion starting from the thinnest viable
          platform (TVP).
G. A. Lewis, H. Muccini, I. Ozkaya, K. Vaidhyanathan, R. Weiss, and L. Zhu                             175


3.7    SPIRA Challenges and Lessons Learned on Architecting an
       Intelligent System for Respiratory Insufficiency Detection – Notes
       on Hands-on Education on SA4AI
Fabio Kon (University of Sao Paulo, BR)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Fabio Kon


Our group at the University of São Paulo has 23 years of experience teaching an advanced
software development course called “Agile Software Development Lab.” It is extremely popular
with students and has been very successful in teaching advanced software development
concepts with a ’learn by doing’, project-based approach with real external customers.
However, many recent projects have dealt with machine learning and AI-based systems,
which sometimes significantly increase the complexity of projects. We are then currently
remodeling the course to incorporate pedagogical aspects related to AI-based systems
development.
    In this short talk, I provide an experience report about the development of a complex
system for respiratory insufficiency detection that has been developed at the University of
São Paulo in a collaboration between data scientists, physicians, linguists, and computer
science professors and students. We discuss the challenges and lessons learned in architecting
and building the system.



3.8    Software Architecture for Machine Learning Systems: Challenges,
       Practices, and Opportunities
Grace A. Lewis (Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering Institute – Pittsburgh, US)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Grace A. Lewis


Developing software systems that contain machine learning (ML) components requires an
end-to-end perspective that considers the unique life cycle of these components – from
data acquisition to model training to model deployment and evolution. While there is an
understanding that ML components, in the end, are software components, there are some
characteristics of ML components that bring challenges to software architecture and design
activities, such as data-dependent behavior, the need to detect and respond to drift over time,
and timely capture of logs, metrics, user input and labeled data to inform retraining. In this
presentation, I talk about some of these challenges and propose a set of practices to address
these challenges, such as co-architecting, the recognition of monitorability as a driving quality
attribute, and system-level architecture patterns and tactics. The presentation concludes
with a list of opportunities to make progress in software architecture for ML systems, which
includes adapting and growing the software architecture body of knowledge for application
to ML systems, bringing the software architecture body of knowledge and discipline to model
development activities, and positioning software architecture as a unifying activity for system
stakeholders (model developers, software engineers, and operations).




                                                                                                    23302
176   23302 – Software Architecture and Machine Learning


      3.9     BeT (Behavior-enabled IoT)
      Henry Muccini (University of L’Aquila, IT)
             License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Henry Muccini
      Main reference Henry Muccini, Barbara Russo, Eugenio Zimeo: “The BET project: Behavior-enabled IoT”, CoRR,
                     Vol. abs/2307.13186, 2023.
                URL https://doi.org//10.48550/ARXIV.2307.13186


      BeT (Behavior-enabled IoT)[1] is a project that aims to provide a reference architecture,
      conceptual framework, and related techniques to design behavior-enabled IoT systems and
      applications. The presentation introduces the concept of the Internet of Behaviors (IoB)
      and analyzes the human-system bi-causal quality connection effects. BeT analyzes the
      emerging problem of understanding the mutual influence between QoS (Quality of Service)
      and QoE (Quality of Experience) in IoB systems, where dynamic changes in the system and
      surroundings can give rise to nontrivial unforeseen cause-effect mutual relations between
      system and human behaviors.



      3.10      Software Architecting in the Era of AI and AI-Augmented
                Development Tools
      Ipek Ozkaya (Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering Institute – Pittsburgh, US)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Ipek Ozkaya


      The boundary between SA4ML and ML4SA is diffusing as more general-purpose AI models
      are incorporated into systems. As more capable development tools enter the developer’s
      ecosystem the role and responsibilities of the architect will shift [1]. As generative AI and
      foundation models increase in capabilities, they will help reveal the criticality of architecture
      knowledge and how it must guide development. As capabilities of large language models
      (LLM) evolve, however, there is a potential increasing gap between what tools supported by
      LLM can accomplish realizing narrowly scoped implementation tasks versus how they can do
      so while being cognizant of software architectural concerns [2]. This talk will emphasize some
      of the open questions and challenges that software architecture researchers need to address
      as LLM-supported development tools evolve rapidly. These include, but are not limited to,
      the following:
          What are the specific design and architectural concerns that need to be addressed when
          using generative AI?
          Can generative AI tools be used to improve the design and architecture of systems?
          Can these tools provide new features and capabilities that can be used to support the
          architectural design process?
          Could generative AI tools be used to generate design patterns and tactics, which could
          then be used to guide the development process?
          Can these tools accelerate the generation of alternative designs and their comparison?
          Can they be used to provide feedback on designs, such as identifying potential risks and
          issues?

      References
      1    Ipek Ozkaya: Application of Large Language Models to Software Engineering Tasks:
           Opportunities, Risks, and Implications. IEEE Softw. 40(3): 4-8 (2023)
      2    Ipek Ozkaya. Can Architecture Knowledge Guide Software Development With Generative
           AI? IEEE Softw. 40(5): 4-8 (2023)
G. A. Lewis, H. Muccini, I. Ozkaya, K. Vaidhyanathan, R. Weiss, and L. Zhu                            177


3.11      Architecting Systems to Integrate Machine Learning
Lena Pons (Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering Institute – Pittsburgh, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Lena Pons


ML-enabled systems introduce additional concerns to systems, which introduce new com-
plexity into the software architecture of such systems. Design considerations for integrating
an ML component into a larger software system may be unfamiliar to software architects.
Software engineers and data scientists need to communicate information that crosses domains,
which may result in some considerations not being exposed during architecture and design
conversations. We present a set of driving quality attributes for machine learning systems
and how they align with conventional software engineering practice versus attributes where
the integration of an ML component requires new patterns and tactics. We present some
questions to assist architects in eliciting better information about design concerns.



3.12      Machine Learning and Self-adaptation
Bradley Schmerl (Carnegie Mellon University – Pittsburgh, US)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Bradley Schmerl


Architecture-based self-adaptation is a method for adding a control loop on top of systems
to make changes and repairs at run time, with the software architecture as the basis for
making decisions. But does this work for systems that have machine learning components
in the architecture? We report on work that we are doing to investigate how to apply
self-adaptation concepts to manage machine learning components. We report on the set of
challenges related to the timeliness of observations, the propagation of uncertainty, and the
lack of understood costs, benefits, and impacts of adaptation tactics, but also that the current
concepts seem to apply. One of the key concepts in ML is explainability. We report on two
aspects of explainability: 1) how we use planning models to support contrastive explanations,
and 2) how standard techniques in ML, like principal component analysis, clustering, and
decision tree learning, can be used to help explain choices that need to be made by architects,
designers, etc. by focusing them on critical qualities/concerns and interactions among them.



3.13      A Vision and Challenges about Intelligent and Trustworthy IoT
          Systems
Romina Spalazzese (Malmö University, SE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Romina Spalazzese


Today’s systems are more and more software/hardware intensive, very large, heterogeneous,
data-driven, dynamic, evolving, intelligent, and involve humans. These characteristics make
their engineering and architecture challenging tasks. Additionally, different applications have
different desired quality characteristics concerning, e.g., response time, power consumption,
interoperability, privacy, and trust, which influence their design. Examples of such modern
complex systems are ML-enabled Internet of Things (IoT) systems that have to deal with
many challenges at the same time, both from a human and technical perspective.


                                                                                                   23302
178   23302 – Software Architecture and Machine Learning


      An overarching question in our ongoing research project is “How should Intelligent and
      Trustworthy IoT systems be designed?” and some of the more specific questions are “How
      and when should AI (in particular ML) be used to realize such systems?” as well as “How
      could and when should edge computing (including hybrid edge-cloud processing) be used to
      realize such systems?”. Towards identifying architectural approaches, patterns, and styles,
      as well as analysis models, metrics, and techniques for ML-enabled systems, I will discuss
      a vision and identify challenges related to an ML-enabled collaboration paradigm called
      IoT-Together.



      3.14      SA, ML and Patterns
      Anastas Stoyanovsky (Amazon – Pittsburgh, US)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Anastas Stoyanovsky


      The introduction of machine learning has not changed anything fundamental about architec-
      tural thinking or methods. What is new is the confluence of particular quality attributes,
      which effectively reduces the discussion to a matter of practical execution. Several high-level
      patterns, both architectural and organizational, are discussed as foundations for further
      inquiry. Industry experience points to challenges common to both industry and academia,
      leading to a call to action around education.



      3.15      Software Architecture Meets Machine Learning: A Tale of
                Convergence
      Karthik Vaidhyanathan (IIIT – Hyderabad, IN)
             License    Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                     © Karthik Vaidhyanathan
      Main reference Henry Muccini, Karthik Vaidhyanathan: “Software Architecture for ML-based Systems: What Exists
                     and What Lies Ahead”, in Proc. of the 1st IEEE/ACM Workshop on AI Engineering – Software
                     Engineering for AI, WAIN@ICSE 2021, Madrid, Spain, May 30-31, 2021, pp. 121–128, IEEE, 2021.
                URL https://doi.org//10.1109/WAIN52551.2021.00026


      Over the years, software systems have become increasingly complex due to their ever-
      increasing pervasive nature, resulting in various architecting challenges to ensure better
      performance, reliability, etc. On the other hand, machine learning (ML) has advanced rapidly
      with advancements in infrastructure, data availability, etc. However, the growing adoption of
      ML has given rise to challenges associated with development practices, deployments, ensuring
      data quality, etc., in addition to the challenges of a traditional software system. These
      challenges have resulted in the convergence of SA and ML, resulting in two broad research
      areas: i) ML4SA and ii) SA4ML.
          This talk presents an overview of this convergence. The presentation then elaborates
      on the two research lines and the challenges the community must address going forward.
      The first part (ML4SA) focuses on using ML techniques to enable software systems to
      autonomously adapt and improve their architecture at run time to guarantee a better quality
      of service at run time and then using generative AI for architectural knowledge management
      for design-time aid for architects. The second part (SA4ML) elaborates on the challenges
      in architecting ML-enabled systems and further provides some insights on our recent work
      related to an agile methodology for ML-enabled systems [1] and self-adaptive architecture
      for ML-enabled systems [2].
G. A. Lewis, H. Muccini, I. Ozkaya, K. Vaidhyanathan, R. Weiss, and L. Zhu                             179


References
1    K. Vaidhyanathan, A. Chandran, H. Muccini and R. Roy, "Agile4MLS—Leveraging Agile
     Practices for Developing Machine Learning-Enabled Systems: An Industrial Experience," in
     IEEE Software, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 43-50, Nov.-Dec. 2022, doi: 10.1109/MS.2022.3195432.
2    K.Vaidhyanathan “Data-Driven Self-Adaptive Architecting Using Machine Learn-
     ing,” Ph.D. dissertation, Gran Sasso Science Institute, Italy, 2021, online at:
     http://hdl.handle.net/20.500.12571/15976



3.16      Generative AI at Fraunhofer and Research Roadmaps from the
          Software Architecture Community
Ingo Weber (TU München – Garching, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Ingo Weber


Fraunhofer is the world’s largest organization focused on application-oriented research. Several
of its institutes are at the forefront of research in generative AI, but the recent advances make
it a topic relevant for all industry sectors and hence potentially all Fraunhofer customers
and institutes. Accordingly, Fraunhofer is broadening and deepening its AI endeavours.
One early step was the introduction of fhGPT, an AI chatbot based on Azure OpenAI
GPT models. Furthermore, from the ICSA-lite conference 2022, a book of high relevance
for this Dagstuhl seminar emerged, which is currently in print: Patrizio Pelliccione, Rick
Kazman, Ingo Weber, Anna Liu, editors. Software Architecture – Research Roadmaps from
the Community. Springer, 2023.



3.17      Building, Engineering & Operating Systems for Critical
          Infrastructure
Roland Weiss (ABB – Mannheim, DE)
       License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                 © Roland Weiss


Control systems for process automation plants run business and mission critical infrastructure.
They span various verticals, from chemical to power plants, from hydrogen generation to
waste incineration. These applications require flawless execution 24 by 7, as malfunctions in
the system can endanger people, the environment, or business targets. On the other hand,
engineering such systems as well as operating them could benefit tremendously from the
introduction of machine learning and artificial intelligence in general. In my talk, I explore
the application of ML and AI in such systems.
    In the engineering phase, generative AI has proven very promising in generating auto-
mation code (in IEC 61131 structured text). Based on a specification entered via a prompt
interface, the code inside function blocks could be generated. Likewise, process graphics
were translated into rules from older systems. Then, trained models validated the results
and highlighted areas that deviated from the expected outcome. When running a process
plant, operators have to monitor the system and, in the case of deviations or emergencies,
interact with the system to either bring it to a safe state or to the desired stable state.
Today, this requires very detailed domain know-how and extensive training. We are now




                                                                                                    23302
180   23302 – Software Architecture and Machine Learning


      exploring supporting the operators with ML/AI-based assistance systems. For example, in
      case of deteriorating product quality in a chemical facility, the operator can pull up similar
      occurrences from the past and get recommendations from the assistance systems on how to
      handle the situation.
          The key challenges we are facing when introducing AI/ML components into control
      systems are the following:
          The behavior of the system must be explainable. In regulated and safety-critical en-
          vironments, the system providers need to be able to provide detailed RCAs in case of
          incidents.
          Training data is hard to get for various reasons. The collection of the data can’t interfere
          with the process itself. Also, the incidents are typically rare, and operators aim to avoid
          them in the first place.
          Last but not least, these systems have extremely long lifetimes, thus, introducing ML
          means bringing them into legacy systems with traditional development processes.
      We are looking forward to tackling these research challenges with Academia to contribute
      to the collection of best practices for building systems for critical infrastructure in order to
      make the world a safer and more sustainable place.



      3.18      Challenges of Integrating ML Models in Safety-Relevant
                Architectures
      Marc Zeller (Siemens – München, DE)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Marc Zeller


      Traditional automation technologies alone are not sufficient to enable the fully automated
      operation of trains. However, Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) offer
      great potential to realize the mandatory novel functions to replace the tasks of a human
      train driver, such as obstacle detection on the tracks. The problem, which still remains
      unresolved, is to find a practical way to link AI/ML techniques with the requirements
      and approval processes that are applied in the railway domain. The safe.trAIn project
      aims to lay the foundation for the safe use of AI/ML to achieve the driverless operation
      of rail vehicles and thus addresses this key technological challenge hindering the adoption
      of unmanned rail transport. The project goals are to develop guidelines and methods for
      the reliable engineering and safety assurance of ML in the railway domain. Therefore, the
      project investigates methods to reliably design ML models and to prove the trustworthiness
      of AI-based architectures, taking robustness, uncertainty, and transparency aspects of the
      AI/ML model into account.



      3.19      Software Architecture for Foundation Model-Based Systems
      Liming Zhu (Data61, CSIRO – Sydney, AU)
             License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                       © Liming Zhu


      With the successful implementation of Large Language Models (LLMs) in chatbots like
      ChatGPT, there is growing attention on foundation models (FMs), which are anticipated
      to serve as core components in the development of future AI systems. Yet, systematic
G. A. Lewis, H. Muccini, I. Ozkaya, K. Vaidhyanathan, R. Weiss, and L. Zhu                              181


exploration into the design of foundation model-based systems, particularly concerning
risk management, trust, and trustworthiness, remains limited. In this talk, I propose the
challenges and initial approaches in both architecting FM-based systems and how FMs have
an impact on software engineering. I point to some initial directions, such as architecting as
a process of understanding (rather than designing/building), designing guardrails (rather
than quality attributes), and radical observability.



 4     Working groups
The seminar provided an extensive and insightful exploration into the four key quality
attributes that were prioritized by the attendees as critically important while architecting
ML-enabled systems: Data Centricity, Evolvability, Observability and Uncertainty, Trust
and Trustworthiness. The four working group (WG) discussions focusing on each quality
attribute concern provided input for formulating the research agenda and key challenges to
address. In this section, we describe the scope of each working group, and in the Seminar
Overall Results section, we summarize the initial research roadmap and open challenges.



4.1    WG1: Architecting for Data Centricity
Jan Bosch (Chalmers University of Technology – Göteborg, SE), Benjamin Klöpper (Cap-
gemini – Stuttgart, DE), Ipek Ozkaya (Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering Institute –
Pittsburgh, US), Lena Pons (Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering Institute – Pittsburgh,
US), and Christoph Schröer (Universität Oldenburg, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Jan Bosch, Benjamin Klöpper, Ipek Ozkaya, Lena Pons, and Christoph Schröer


The main purpose of the WG1 group on “Data Centricity” was to explore and address the
pivotal role of architectural elements that extract, transform, load, store, and share data
in the architectures of ML and analytics systems. The group focused on examining the
entire data life cycle – from acquisition to transformation to runtime consumption – and
understanding how data is integrated and managed by an ML-enabled system throughout
this data life cycle.
    The discussions emphasized that effective data management throughout the data life cycle
is crucial for the success of ML-enabled systems. This includes recognizing the challenges
associated with the complexities of data architectures. The WG1 group also identified the need
for a distinct architectural view that focuses specifically on data, given its critical importance
in ML-enabled systems. They acknowledged that while current software architecture practices
and architectures of non-ML systems address data processing and storage, there is a need for
a more focused approach to identify strategies for addressing data-centricity to cater to the
unique requirements and challenges posed by ML systems.
    In summary, the WG1 group’s discussions emphasize the centrality of data in ML systems
and the need for specialized and clearly communicated architectural approaches to manage
and utilize data in these systems effectively.




                                                                                                     23302
182   23302 – Software Architecture and Machine Learning


      4.2    WG2: Evolvability
      Justus Bogner (Universität Stuttgart, DE), Jan Bosch (Chalmers University of Technology –
      Göteborg, SE), Helena Holmström Olsson (Malmö University, SE), Henry Muccini (University
      of L’Aquila, IT), Raghu Reddy (IIIT – Hyderabad, IN), Anastas Stoyanovsky (Amazon –
      Pittsburgh, US), Ingo Weber (TU München – Garching, DE), and Liming Zhu (Data61,
      CSIRO – Sydney, AU)
            License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Justus Bogner, Jan Bosch, Helena Holmström Olsson, Henry Muccini, Raghu Reddy, Anastas
                      Stoyanovsky, Ingo Weber, and Liming Zhu


      The primary objective of the WG2 group on "Evolvability" was to address the unique
      challenges in developing ML-enabled systems that can evolve efficiently in response to
      changing requirements and environmental factors. The group’s primary focus was on
      understanding the dynamics of ML components within these systems, particularly how they
      interact with non-ML components and Machine Learning Operations (MLOps) infrastructures
      and practices.
          A key finding of WG2 was the critical role of MLOps in ensuring the evolvability of ML
      components within ML-enabled systems. MLOps, supporting the entire life cycle of ML
      components from development to deployment and maintenance, emerged as a pivotal factor
      in managing and automating the continuous evolution of these systems. The group identified
      that the integration of MLOps within existing DevOps practices is not only essential but
      also challenging, given the unique characteristics of ML components.
          Another significant aspect highlighted by WG2 was the concept of technical debt in ML
      systems. ML-enabled systems bring forth new classes of design and architectural challenges
      related to degradation in data or models as technical debt, which can impede the maintenance
      and evolution of ML-enabled systems. Addressing these forms of technical debt is crucial for
      sustaining the long-term viability and evolvability of these systems.
          WG2 also emphasized the importance of the skill sets and roles of architects designing and
      maintaining ML-enabled systems. Architects need to possess a comprehensive understanding
      of aspects such as data engineering, model engineering, and ethical considerations to effectively
      manage the evolution of these complex systems.
          In essence, the WG2 group underscores the complexities involved in creating evolvable
      ML-enabled systems and highlights the importance of MLOps, technical debt management,
      and specialized architectural knowledge in addressing these challenges.



      4.3    WG3: Observability and Uncertainty
      Nelly Bencomo (Durham University, GB), Xavier Franch (UPC Barcelona Tech, ES), Fabio
      Kon (University of Sao Paulo, BR), Ipek Ozkaya (Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering
      Institute – Pittsburgh, US), Marie Platenius-Mohr (ABB – Ladenburg, DE), Bradley Schmerl
      (Carnegie Mellon University – Pittsburgh, US), Roland Weiss (ABB – Mannheim, DE), and
      Karthik Vaidhyanathan (IIIT – Hyderabad, IN)
            License      Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                      © Nelly Bencomo, Xavier Franch, Fabio Kon, Ipek Ozkaya, Marie Platenius-Mohr, Bradley Schmerl,
                      Roland Weiss, and Karthik Vaidhyanathan


      The working group on “Observability and Uncertainty” primarily focused on how uncertainty
      and observability were intertwined and how they impact the design, implementation, and
      operation of ML-enabled systems.
G. A. Lewis, H. Muccini, I. Ozkaya, K. Vaidhyanathan, R. Weiss, and L. Zhu                                        183


    A key finding of the group was the often inherent non-deterministic and statistical
nature of ML techniques, which introduces a fundamental level of uncertainty in these
systems. This uncertainty is not just a challenge but a necessary aspect to consider in
the architecture of ML-enabled systems. The group discussed two main ways to handle
uncertainty: (1) reducing or eliminating uncertainty through strategies similar to using
redundancy in reliability engineering and (2) managing uncertainty, which includes strategies
for dealing with incomplete information and uncertain components.
    The group’s discussions underscored the close relationship between uncertainty and
observability. Observability – the ability to infer the internal state of a system based on its
output – is crucial for understanding and managing uncertainty in ML systems. The degree
of uncertainty dictates the requirements for observability, impacting various other aspects of
software development, including trustworthiness and evolvability.
    In summary, WG3’s outcomes emphasize the importance of treating uncertainty as a
primary concern in the design and implementation of ML-enabled systems. In addition, the
discussions highlight the need for effective observability mechanisms to identify and manage
the inherent uncertainties of ML-enabled systems to ensure their reliability and effectiveness.



4.4    WG4: Architecting for Trust and Trustworthiness
Tao Chen (University of Birmingham, GB), Thomas Kropf (Robert Bosch GmbH – Renningen,
DE), Grace A. Lewis (Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering Institute – Pittsburgh, US),
Henry Muccini (University of L’Aquila, IT), Alex Serban (Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen,
DE & University Transilvania of Brasov, RO), Romina Spalazzese (Malmö University, SE),
and Marc Zeller (Siemens – München, DE)
      License     Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license
                © Tao Chen, Thomas Kropf, Grace A. Lewis, Henry Muccini, Alex Serban, Romina Spalazzese, and
                Marc Zeller


The main purpose of WG4 was to explore the key aspects and challenges in designing
trustworthy ML systems, such as in safety-critical and autonomous contexts.
    The outputs of the discussions in this group emphasize the distinction between trust
and trustworthiness and various aspects of these concepts in ML-enabled systems, including
state-of-the-art trustworthy AI, the role of trust as an element of overall responsible AI
practices and their relevance to ML-enabled system development, and the engineering of
trustworthy ML-enabled systems. It also examines the importance of providing evidence
of trustworthiness tailored to different stakeholders for calibrated trust, such as through
certification labels and empirical studies, and discusses enabling the design of trustworthy
ML-enabled systems through architectural models and toolkits.
    A significant portion of the discussions were dedicated to addressing the challenges
in evaluating the trustworthiness of ML-enabled systems and the role of human-in-the-
loop in ensuring trustworthiness. The discussions in this group focused on the trust and
trustworthiness of ML-enabled systems and had a close relationship with considerations
that apply to AI systems in general, such as responsible AI practices. The discussions, in
particular, emphasized the need for explainable AI as a key component in building trust in
ML-enabled systems.
    In summary, WG4’s observations emphasize the critical need for defining trust and
trustworthiness clearly in ML-enabled systems, exploring the complexities of achieving the
several qualities essential in building trust and trustworthiness and developing and extending
frameworks and strategies to guide the development of trustworthy applications with ML
components.

                                                                                                               23302
184   23302 – Software Architecture and Machine Learning


       5      Open problems
      The SA&ML research roadmap, which is one of the key outcomes of this Dagstuhl Seminar,
      is heavily influenced by the high-priority quality attributes that were discussed in depth in
      the working groups and their relationships. Figure 1 provides an overview of the relationships
      between the quality attributes and the interplay that exists between them, with Data Centri-
      city being a cross-cutting quality attribute. It also shows Explainability and Adaptability as
      two additional key quality attributes that contribute to these relationships. The following
      subsections provide a summary of how each attribute was scoped by the working groups,
      open problems in each area, and a list of high-priority research areas that need to be explored
      in the near term to advance the practice of SA&ML.




           Figure 1 Relationships between the different quality attributes.




      5.1     Data Centricity
      Data-centricity emphasizes the significance of data quality and management for ML-enabled
      systems. High-quality, well-managed data is crucial for the development of reliable ML
      models and for maintaining the trustworthiness of the system.
         Data-centricity also impacts evolvability and adaptability, as systems that can adapt to
      changes in data or requirements are more sustainable over time.

      5.1.1     Challenges and Open Problems
      The seminar looked beyond basic data integrity and security issues, delving into more
      complex and ML-relevant issues such as ensuring data relevance over time, managing large
      and diverse datasets, and maintaining compliance with evolving data privacy laws and
      standards. The future directions suggested include developing data views that reflect
      architecturally-significant concerns, understanding architectural implications of online vs
      offline learning, and data decoupling strategies.
G. A. Lewis, H. Muccini, I. Ozkaya, K. Vaidhyanathan, R. Weiss, and L. Zhu                          185


5.2     Uncertainty and Observability
Uncertainty is a fundamental aspect of ML-enabled systems due to the often non-deter-
ministic and statistical nature of ML models. Uncertainty can arise from the quality of
training data, the model design, interactions between ML and other components, and the
environment in which the system operates.
Observability involves the ability to monitor the internal states and outputs of the system
to enable understanding and make informed decisions about its functioning, especially in the
face of uncertainty. Observability helps system developers and operators understand and
manage uncertainty.
    Observability can also contribute to enhancing explainability, as more observable systems
provide more information that can be used to explain inference results to users and for
engineers to diagnose systems. Observability also contributes to evolvability as runtime data
can be used to determine, for example, when a model needs to be retrained in response to
drift.

5.2.1   Challenges and Open Problems
The major challenge identified by the working group participants lies in quantifying and
managing uncertainty, which is inherent in ML-enabled systems due to their often non-
deterministic nature. Another challenge is developing methods for effective observability that
can aid in explaining the behavior of ML systems. Future research is required to enhance
methods for quantifying uncertainty, properly propagating uncertainty throughout the life
cycle and system, developing advanced observability techniques, and exploring the impact
of uncertainty on trustworthiness and evolvability. There is also an emphasis on creating
strategies for adaptive actions in response to observed properties, including uncertainties.



5.3     Evolvability (and Adaptability)
Evolvability was defined by the seminar participants as a system’s ability to adapt to
changes in expectations (i.e., requirements), while adaptability refers to the ability of the
system to handle (or be modified to deal with) changes in its environment.. Evolvability,
therefore, is mostly a design-time concern, whereas adaptability is both a design-time
and runtime concern. These attributes are essential for designing ML-enabled systems, as
these systems must continuously evolve and adapt to remain effective. Evolvability and
adaptability are influenced by observability and uncertainty, and together, they contribute
towards maintainability; by addressing these attributes proactively and intentionally, systems
can be designed to evolve and adapt more effectively. Evolvability and adaptability are also
closely linked to data centricity, as the system’s ability to evolve and adapt is dependent
on the quality and relevance of the data it uses and how its evolution and adaptation are
influenced by changes in data.

5.3.1   Challenges and Open Problems
Participants unanimously agreed that the main challenge in evolvability and adaptability lies
in integrating continuous development and deployment practices for ML components, such
as MLOps, with software development and deployment of non-ML components. Addressing




                                                                                                 23302
186   23302 – Software Architecture and Machine Learning


      the accruing technical debt and managing quality attributes of ML components are also high-
      lighted as significant challenges. Further, participants suggest exploring effective integration
      of MLOps practices, identifying new evolvability and adaptability-specific technical debt
      items in ML-enabled systems, and conceptualizing and realizing architectural designs that
      support continuous change. Developing guidelines for managing the interaction between ML
      and non-ML components is also seen as a key future direction where more case studies and
      research need to be developed.



      5.4     Trust and Trustworthiness
      Trust is the subjective confidence stakeholders place in a system’s quality. It is influenced
      by the system’s trustworthiness.

      Trustworthiness involves the system’s objective ability to consistently perform according to
      quality expectations and ethical standards. It is bolstered by explainability, as stakeholders
      are more likely to trust a system they can understand. Trust and trustworthiness are
      impacted by data centricity, as the quality and management of data underpin the reliability
      and robustness of ML-enabled systems. Related, if the system provides better explainability,
      it fosters trust in the system. A system that is trustworthy (through evidence of achieving
      quality attributes such as security, reliability, and fairness) merits the trust placed in it by
      users.

      5.4.1   Challenges and Open Problems
      The participants elaborated on the challenges of balancing system transparency and explain-
      ability while complying with ethical standards and legal regulations in different domains.
      Proposed future research directions included the development of comprehensive frameworks
      for building trustworthy AI systems, tailoring trustworthiness evidence to different stake-
      holders for calibrated trust, exploring human-in-the-loop approaches to balance automation
      and human oversight, and creating dynamic processes for evolving trust and trustworthiness
      in line with technological and societal shifts.



      5.5     High Priority Research Areas to Advance SA&ML
      Several open research areas in SA&ML were identified as a result of the seminar discussions.
      High-priority research areas requiring near-term focus for advancing the state of the practice
      include the following:
          Architectural Design for Data-Centricity: Identifying and developing architectural ap-
          proaches that effectively address the central role of data in ML-enabled systems, including
          data acquisition, processing, and management, as well as designing systems that can adapt
          to changes in data characteristics, need attention from researchers as well as practitioners
          in documenting their lessons learned. Existing architecture patterns, tactics, and quality
          attributes related to data architecting need to also be shared more consistently, and gaps
          need to be filled where applicable.
          Evolvability and adaptability of MLOps Architectures: Creating architectural designs that
          support the evolvability and adaptability of ML-enabled systems, particularly focusing
          on leveraging MLOps infrastructure, is not common practice. Challenge areas include
          addressing the lifecycle management of ML models and ensuring systems can evolve and
          adapt to new and changing requirements and environments.
G. A. Lewis, H. Muccini, I. Ozkaya, K. Vaidhyanathan, R. Weiss, and L. Zhu                          187


   Uncertainty as a First-Class Concern: Integrating the management of uncertainty into the
   architectural design process for ML-enabled systems first requires identifying sources of
   uncertainty which can effectively be managed with architectural approaches. This involves
   developing methods for quantifying and mitigating uncertainty that can be leveraged by
   architecture practices and constructs.
   Observability in ML-enabled Systems: Existing approaches in system observability need
   to be enhanced to better observe and manage the behavior of ML components. This
   includes developing metrics and tools for monitoring and understanding ML components
   and ML-enabled system states.
   Trust, Trustworthiness, and Ethical Considerations: Building trustworthiness into the
   architecture of ML-enabled systems, including designing for ethical considerations, com-
   pliance with regulations, and ensuring transparency and explainability of AI decisions, is
   a growing need. Identifying what aspects of trustworthiness and ethical considerations
   can be handled architecturally and clearly communicating the remaining gaps is critical
   as research in this area progresses.
   Human-in-the-Loop AI Decision Making: Architecting systems that effectively incorporate
   human oversight and interaction, particularly in critical decision-making processes to
   ensure balanced autonomy and control in AI systems, will be an area of research that
   influences many quality attribute concerns, as well as how responsibilities are allocated
   to architectural elements, potentially resulting in new architecture patterns and tactics.



5.6    Follow-up Work
At the seminar, participants recognized that there is a lack of understanding and common
definitions for many concepts related to ML-enabled systems and existing architecture
practices and fundamentals. Furthermore, in addition to the set of key quality attributes
discussed in detail and shared in this report, other quality attributes that require attention
from the software architecture community were identified. Hence, a more detailed description
of the concepts identified, extended discussions around the quality attributes discussed,
as well as a more comprehensive explanation of the research roadmap, are planned for
publication in appropriate venues.




                                                                                                 23302
188   23302 – Software Architecture and Machine Learning


             Participants
        Nelly Bencomo                   Grace A. Lewis                Alex Serban
      Durham University, GB          Carnegie Mellon University –   Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen,
        Justus Bogner                Pittsburgh, US                 DE & University Transilvania of
      Universität Stuttgart, DE         Henry Muccini               Brasov, RO
        Jan Bosch                    University of L’Aquila, IT      Romina Spalazzese
      Chalmers University of            Ipek Ozkaya                 Malmö University, SE
      Technology – Göteborg, SE      Carnegie Mellon University –
                                     Pittsburgh, US                  Anastas Stoyanovsky
        Tao Chen                                                    Amazon – Pittsburgh, US
      University of Birmingham, GB      Marie Platenius-Mohr
        Xavier Franch                ABB – Ladenburg, DE               Karthik Vaidhyanathan
      UPC Barcelona Tech, ES            Lena Pons                   IIIT – Hyderabad, IN
        Helena Holmström Olsson      Carnegie Mellon University –    Ingo Weber
      Malmö University, SE           Pittsburgh, US                 TU München – Garching, DE
        Benjamin Klöpper                Raghu Reddy                  Roland Weiss
      Capgemini – Stuttgart, DE      IIIT – Hyderabad, IN           ABB – Mannheim, DE
        Fabio Kon                       Bradley Schmerl
      University of Sao Paulo, BR    Carnegie Mellon University –     Marc Zeller
                                     Pittsburgh, US                 Siemens – München, DE
        Thomas Kropf
      Robert Bosch GmbH –               Christoph Schröer             Liming Zhu
      Renningen, DE                  Universität Oldenburg, DE      Data61, CSIRO – Sydney, AU
